Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. 4: Fathers of the Third Century: Tertullian, Part Fourth; Minucius Felix; Commodian; Origen, Parts First and Second
Alexander Roberts & James Donaldson (eds.), various translators (1885)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/antenicenefather04robeuoft
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

Digitized by the Internet Archive

in 2007 with funding from

IVIicrosoft Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/antenicenefather04robeuoft


THE


ANTE-NICENE FATHERS

TRANSLATIONS OF

The Writings of the Fathers dow7t to A.D. J2^.

THE REV. ALEXANDER ROBERTS, D.D.,

AND

JAMES DONALDSON, LL.D.,

EDITORS.

AMERICAN REPRINT OF THE EDINBURGH EDITION.

REVISED AND CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF PREFACES AND
OCCASIONAL NOTES,

BY

A. CLEVELAND COXE, D.D.

VOLUME IV.

TERTULLIAN, PART FOURTH; MINUCIUS FELIX; COMMODIAN; ORIGEN, PARTS FIRST AND SECOND.


AUTHORIZED EDITION. .

BUFFALO: X^V^ ^

THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE PUBLISHING COMPANY.

1S85.


Copyright, 1885, by
THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE PUBLISHING COMPANY.


ELECTROTYPED AND PRINTED

BY RAND, AVERY, AND COMPANY,

BOSTON.


FATHERS OF THE THIRD CENTURY:


TERTULLIAN, PART FOURTH; MINUCIUS FELIX; COMMODIAN ; ORIGEN,
PARTS FIRST AND SECOND.


AMERICAN EDITION,

CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF NOTES AND PREFACES,

BY
A. CLEVELAND COXE, D.D.


Ta o-pyaia. Wr\ KpaTUTo).

The Nicene Counciu


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.


[a.d. 200-250.] This fourth volume of our series is an exceptional one. It presents, under
one cover, specimens of two of the noblest of the Christian Fathers ; both of them exceptionally
great in their influence upon the ages ; both of them justly censurable for pitiable faults ; each
of them, in spite of such failings, endeared to the heart of Christendom by their great services
to the Church ; both of them geographically of Africa, but the one essentially Greek and the
other a Latin ; the one a builder upon the great Clementine foundations, the other himself a
founder, the brilliant pioneer of Latin Christianity. The contrasts and the concurrences of such
minds, and in them of the Alexandrian and Carthaginian schools, are most suggestive, and should
be edifying.

The works of both, as here given, are fractional. Tertullian overflows into this volume, after
filling one before ; the vast proportions of Origen's labours forced the Edinburgh publishers to
give specimens only.

Minucius Felix and Commodian are thrown in as a sort of appendix to Tertullian, and
illustrate the school and the Church of the same country. The Italian type does not yet appear.
Latin Christianity is essentially North-African, and is destined to continue such, conspicuously, till
it has culminated in the genius of Augustine. From the first, the Orientals speculate concerning
God ; the Westerns deal with man. Both schools " contend earnestly for the faith once delivered
to the saints." And, once for all, it may be said, that if their language necessarily lacks the pre-
cision of technical theology, and enables those who have little sympathy with them to set them
one against another on some points, and so to impair their value as witnesses, it is quite as easy,
and far more just, to show the harmony of their ideas, even when they differ in their forms of
speech. This has been triumphantly done by Bull, just as the same writer harmonizes St. James
and St. Paul, working down to their common base in the Rock of Ages. The test of Ante-Nicene
unity is the Nicene Symbol, in which the primitive writings find their ultimate expression. That
Clement and Tertullian alike would have recognised as the faith ; for the earlier Fathers were, in
fact, its authors. The Nicene Fathers were compilers only, and professed only to embody in the
Symbol what their predecessors had established and maintained.

Let it be borne in mind that there is only one CEcumenical Symbol. The Creed called the
Apostles' is unknown to the East save as an orthodox confession of their Western brethren. The
"Athanasian Creed" is only a Western hymn, like the Te Dcum, and has no oecumenical warrant
as a symbol, though it embodies the common doctrine. The Filioque, wherever it appears, is
apocryphal, and has no oecumenical force ; while it is heretical (in Catholic theology) if it be
held in a sense which destroys the One Source of divinity in the Father, its fons et origo. Surely,
it is a noble exercise of mind and heart to see, in the splendid result of the Ante-Nicene conflicts
with error, and in the enduring truth and perennial freshness of the Nicene Creed, the fulfilment
of the promise of the Great Head of the Church, that the Spirit should abide with them for ever,
and guide them into all truth.


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.


The editor-in-chief, who has been forced to labour unassisted in the preceding volume has
been so happy as to find a valued collaborator in editing the works of Origen, who has also
relieved him of the task of proof-reading almost entirely throughou this volume, excepting on his
own pages of prefaces or annotations. In spite of the fact that -lecessity for despatch requires
the printing to be done from single proofs, it is believed that th volume excels its predecessors
in typographical accuracy, — a merit largely due to the eminent skill of the Boston press from
which it proceeds, but primarily to the pains of the Rev. Dr. Spencer, an expert in such opera-
tions.

For the favour and generous spirit with which his Christian brethren have welcomed and
encouraged this undertaking, the editor is grateful to them, and to the common Lord and Master
of us all.


October, 1885.


Contents of Volume IV.


PAGE

I. TERTULLIAN. On the Pallium 5

On the Apparel of Women 14

On the Veiling of Virgins 27

To his Wife 39

On Exhortation to Chastity 50

On Monogamy 59

On Modesty 74

On Fasting 102

De Fuga in Persecutione 116

Appendix 127

II. MINUCIUS FELIX 167

III. COMMODIANUS 199

IV. ORIGEN. Introductory Note 221

Prologue of Rufinus 237

Origen De Principiis 239

Africanus to Origen 385

Origen to Africanus 386

Origen to Gregory 393

Origen Against Celsus 395


TERTULLIAN.


PART FOURTH.


ON THE PALLIUM.'


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL/


CHAP. I. — TIME CHANGES NATIONS DRESSES —
AND FORTUNES.

Men of Carthage, ever princes of Africa, en-
nobled by ancient memories, blest with modern
felicities, I rejoice that times are so prosperous
with you that you have leisure to spend and
pleasure to find in criticising dress. These are
the " piping times of peace " and plenty. Bless-
ings rain from the empire and from the sky.
Still, you too of old time wore your garments —
your tunics — of another shape ; and indeed they
were in repute for the skill of the weft, and the
harmony of the hue, and the due proportion of
the size, in that they were neither prodigally long
across the shins, nor immodestly scanty between
the knees, nor niggardly to the arms, nor tight
to the hands, but, without being shadowed by
even a girdle arranged to divide the folds, they
stood on men's backs with quadrate symmetry.
The garment of the mantle extrinsically — itself
too quadrangular — thrown back on either shoul-
der, and meeting closely round the neck in the
gripe of the buckle, used to repose on the shoul-
ders.2 Its counterpart is now the priestly dress,
sacred to ^sculapius, whom you now call your
own. So, too, in your immediate vicinity, the
sister State ^ used to clothe (her ci~tizens) ; and
wherever else in Africa Tyre (has settled).* But
when the urn of worldly s lots varied, and God
favoured the Romans, the sister State, indeed,
of her own choice hastened to effect a change ;
in order that when Scipio put in at her ports she
might already beforehand have greeted him in
the way of dress, precocious in her Romanizing.
To you, however, after the benefit in which your
injury resulted, as exempting you from the in-
firmity of age, not (deposing you) from your


t, ing I
See Elucidation I.J
Itica (Oehler).
* i.e., in Adrumetum (Oehler).
^ Sxcularium.


height of eminence, — after Gracchus and his
foul omens, after Lepidus and his rough jests,
after Pompeius and his triple altars, and Caesar
and his long delays, when Statilius Taurus reared
your ramparts, and Sentius Saturninus pronounced
the solemn form of your inauguration, — while
concord lends her aid, the gown is offered.
Well ! what a circuit has it taken ! from Pelas-
gians to Lydians ; ^ from Lydians to Romans :
in order that from the shoulders of the sublimer
people it should descend to embrace Cartha-
ginians ! Henceforth, finding your tunic too
long, you suspend it on a dividing cincture ; and
the redundancy of your now smooth foga ? you
support by gathering it together fold upon fold ;
and, with whatever other garment social condi-
tion or dignity or season clothes you, f/ie mantle,
at any rate, which used to be worn by all ranks
and conditions among you, you not only are
unmindful of, but even deride. For my own
part, I wonder not (thereat), in the face of a
more ancient evidence (of your forgetfulness).
For the ram withal — not that which Laberius ^
(calls)

" Back-tvvisted-horned, wool-skinned, stones-dragging,"
but a beam-like engine it is, which does military
service in battering walls — never before poised
by any, the redoubted Carthage,

"Keenest in pursuits of war,"'
is said to have been the first of all to have
equipped for the oscillatory work of pendulous
impetus ; ■" modelling the power of her engine
after the choleric fury of the head-avenging
beast." When, however, their country's fortunes
are at the last gasp, and the ram, now turned


* i e., Etruscans, who were supposed to be of Lydian origin.
' i.e., your cown.

8 A Roman knight and mime-writer.

9 Virg., Ain., i. 14.
'° Or,"" attack."

" CapK< vindicantis. But some read cap;'/i'.' " wliioh avenges
itself with its head."


ON THE PALLIUM.


Roman, is doing his deeds of daring against the
ramparts which erst were his own, forthwith
the Carthaginians stood dumbfounded as at a
" novel " and " strange " ingenuity :

" So much doth Time's long age avail to change ! " '
Thus, in short, it is that the mantle, too, is not
recognised.

CHAP. II. — THE LAW OF CHANGE, OR MUTATION,
UNIVERSAL.

Draw we now our material from some other
source, lest Punichood either blush or else grieve
in the midst of Romans. To change her habit
is, at all events, the stated function of entire
nature. The very world- itself (this which we
inhabit) meantime discharges it. See to it An-
aximander, if he thinks there are more (worlds) :
see to it, whoever else (thinks there exists an-
other) anywhere at the region of the Meropes,
as Silenus prates in the ears of Midas,^ apt (as
those ears arc*), it must be admitted, for even
huger fables. Nay, even if Plato thinks there
exists one of which this of ours is the image,
that likewise must necessarily have similarly
to undergo mutation ; inasmuch as, if it is a
"world," 5 it will consist of diverse substances
and offices, answerable to the form of that which
is here the "world: "s for "world" it will not
be if it be not just as the " world " is. Things
which, in diversity, tend to unity, are diverse by
demutation. In short, it is their vicissitudes
which federate the discord of their diversity.
Thus it will be by muiation that every "world " 5
will exist whose corporate structure is the result
of diversities, and whose attemperation is the
result of vicissitudes. At all events, this hostelry
of ours ^ is versiform, — a fact which is patent
to eyes that are closed, or utterly Homeric.7
Day and night revolve in turn. The sun varies
by annual stations, the moon by monthly phases.
The stars — distinct in their confusion — some-
times drop, sometimes resuscitate, somewhat.
The circuit of the heaven is now resplendent
with serenity, now dismal with cloud ; or else
rain-showers come rushing down, and whatever
missiles (mingle) with them : thereafter (follows)
a slight sprinkling, and then again brilliance.
So, too, the sea has an ill repute for honesty ;
while at one time, the breezes equably swaying
it, tranquillity gives it the semblance of probity,
calm gives it the ^semblance of even temper ;
and then all of a sudden it heaves restlessly with
mountain-waves. Thus, too, if you survey the


I See Virg., Mn., iii. 415 (Oehler).

* Mundus.

3 See adv. Herni., c. xxv. ad fin. (Oehler).

* As being " the ears of an ass.

5 Mundus. Oehler's pointing is disregarded.

6 Metatio nostra, i.e., the world.

/ i.e., blind. Cf. Milton, P. L., iii. 35, with the preceding and
subsequent context.


earth, loving to clothe herself seasonably, you
would nearly be ready to deny her identity, when,
remembering her green, you behold her yellow,
and will ere long see her hoary too. Of the rest
of her adornment also, what is there which is not
subject to interchanging mutation — the higher
ridges of her mountains by decursion, the veins
of her fountains by disappearance, and the path-
ways of her streams by alluvial formation ? There
was a time when her whole orb, withal, under-
went mutation, overrun by all waters. To this
day marine conchs and tritons' horns sojourn as
foreigners on the mountains, eager to prove to
Plato that even the heights have undulated. But
withal, by ebbing out, her orb again underwent
a formal mutation ; another, but the same. Even
now her shape undergoes local mutations, when
(some particular) spot is damaged ; when among
her islands Delos is now no more, Samos a heap
of sand, and the Sibyl (is thus proved) no liar ; ^
when in the Atlantic (the isle) that was equal
in size to Libya or Asia is sought in vain ; 9 when
formerly a side of Italy, severed to the centre
by the shivering shock of the Adriatic and the
Tyrrhenian seas, leaves Sicily as its relics ; when
that total swoop of discission, whirling back-
wards the contentious encounters of the mains,
invested the sea with a novel vice, the vice not
of spuing out wrecks, but of devouring them !
The continent as well suffers from heavenly or
else from inherent forces. Glance at Palestine.
Where Jordan's river is the arbiter of boundaries,
(behold) a vast waste, and a bereaved region,
and bootless land ! And once (there were there)
cities, and flourishing peoples, and the soil
yielded its fruits.'° Afterwards, since God is a
Judge, impiety earned showers of fire : Sodom's
day is over, and Gomorrah is no more ; and all
is ashes ; and the neighbour sea no less than the
soil experiences a living death ! Such a cloud
overcast Etruria, burning down her ancient Vol-
sinii, to teach Campania (all the more by the
ereption of her Pompeii) to look expectantly
upon her own mountains. But far be (the repe-
tition of such catastrophes) ! Would that Asia,
withal, were by this time without cause for anx-
iety about the soil's voracity ! Would, too, that
Africa had once for all quailed before the de-
vouring chasm, expiated by the treacherous ab-
sorption of one single camp ! " Many other such
detriments besides have made innovations upon


8 Alluding to the Sibylline oracles, in which we read (1. iii.), Kai
2a|U.os aixfj-oi ea-j), Kai A^Aos aSrjAos • and again (1. iv.), A^Aos oiiK
6Ti 5^Ao5, aSrjAa Je navTa ToO A^Aov (Oehler).

9 See Apolog., c. xi. med. ; ad Nat., 1. i. c. ix. med. ; Plato,
Ti7ntEus, pp. 24, 25 (Oehler).

1° Oehler's apt conjecture, " et solum sua dabat," is substituted for
the unintelligible " et solus audiebat " of the MSS., which Rig. skil-
fully but ineffectually tries to explain.

" The "camp" of Cambyses, said by Herod, (iii. 26) to have
been swallowed up in the Libyan Syrtes (Salm. in Oehler). It was
one detachment of his army. Milton tells similar tales of the " Ser-
bonian bog." P. L., ii. 591-594.


ON THE PALLIUM.


the fashion of our orb, and moved (particular)
spots (in it). Very great also has been the
licence of wars. But it is no less irksome to
recount sad details than (to recount) the vicis-
situdes of kingdoms, (and to show) how fre-
quent have been their mutations, from Ninus,
the progeny of Belus, onwards ; if indeed Ninus
was the first to have a kingdom, as the ancient
profane authorities assert. Beyond his time the
pen is not wont (to travel), in general, among
you (heathens). From the Assyrians, it maybe,
the histories of " recorded time " ' begin to open.
We, however, who are habitual readers of divine
histories, are masters of the subject from the
nativity of the universe ^ itself. But I prefer, at
the present time, joyous details, inasmuch as
things joyous withal are subject to mutation. In
short, whatever the sea has washed away, the
heaven burned down, the earth undermined, the
sword shorn down, reappears at some other time
by the turn of compensation.^ For in primitive
days not only was the earth, for the greater part
of her circuit, empty and uninhabited ; but if
any particular race had seized upon any part, it
existed for itself alone. And so, understanding
at last that all things worshipped themselves, (the
earth) consulted to weed and scrape her copi-
ousness (of inhabitants), in one place densely
packed, in another abandoning their posts ; in
order that thence (as it were from grafts and
settings) peoples from peoples, cities from cities,
might be planted throughout every region of her
orb.4 Transmigrations were made by the swarms
of redundant races. The exuberance of the Scy-
thians fertilizes the Persians ; the Phoenicians
gush out into Africa ; the Phrygians give birth to
the Romans ; the seed of the Chaldeans is led
out into Egypt ; subsequently, when transferred
thence, it becomes the Jewish race. 5 So, too,
the posterity of Hercules, in like wise, proceed
to occupy the Peloponnesus for the behoof of
Temenus. So, again, the Ionian comrades of
Neleus furnish Asia with new cities : so, again,
the Corinthians, with Archias, fortify Syracuse.
But antiquity is by this time a vain thing (to
refer to), when our own careers are before our
eyes. How large a portion of our orb has the
present age ^ re-formed ! how many cities has
the triple power of our existing empire either


1 yEvi.

2 Mundi.

3^ " Alias versura compensati t^dit ;" unless we may read " rerf-
dz't," and take "versura " as a nominative: " the turn of compensa-
tion at some other time


This rendering, which makes the earth the subject, appears to
give at least an intelligible sense to this hopelessly corrupt passage.
Oehler's pointing is disregarded : aqd his rendering not strictly ad-
hered to, as being too forced. If for Oehler's conjectural " sc demum
intellegens "we might read " se debere demum intellegens," or simply
" se debere intellegens," a good sense might be made, thus: " under-
standing at last" (or, simply, "understanding") "that it was her
duty to cultivate all (parts of her surface)."

5 Comp. Gen. xi. 26-xii. 5 with Acts vii. 2-4, 15, 43, and xiii.
17-19.

0 Sa;culum.


produced, or else augmeijted, or else restored !
While God favours so many Augusti unitedly, how
many populations have been transferred to other
localities ! how many peoples reduced ! how
many orders restored to their ancient splendour !
how many barbarians baffled ! In truth, our orb
is the admirably cultivated estate of this empire ;
every aconite of hostility eradicated ; and the
cactus and' bramble of clandestinely crafty famil-
iarity 7 wholly uptorn ; and (the orb itself) de-
lightsome beyond the orchard of Alcinous and
the rosary of Midas. Praising, therefore, our
07-b in its mutations, why do you point the finger
of scorn at a mati ?

CHAP. III. BEASTS SIMILARLY SUBJECT TO THE

LAW OF MUTATION.

Beasts, too, instead of a garmeiit, change their
form. And yet the peacock withal has plu-
mage for a garment, and a garment indeed of the
choicest ; nay, in the bloom of his neck richer
than any purple, and in the effulgence of his
back more gilded than any edging, and in the
sweep of his tail more flowing than any train ;
many- coloured, diverse-coloured, and versi-
coloured ; never itself, ever another, albeit ever
itself when other ; in a word, mutable as oft as
moveable. The serpent, too, deserves to be
mentioned, albeit not in the same breath as the
peacock ; for he too wholly changes what has
been allotted him — his hide and his age : if it
is true, (as it is,) that when he has felt the
creeping of old age tjjroughout him, he squeezes
himself into confinement ; crawls into a cave
and out of his skin simultaneously ; and, clean
shorn on the spot, immediately on crossing the
' threshold leaves his slough behind him then and
j there, and uncoils himself in a new youth : with
I his scales his years, too, are repudiated. The
hyena, if you observe, is of an annual sex, alter-
1 nately masculine and feminine. I say nothii:(g
of the stag, because himself withal, tlie witness
of his own age, feeding on the serpent, lan-
guishes— from the effect of the poison — into
youth. There is, withal,

"A tardigrade field-haunting quadruped,
Humble and rough."'

The tortoise of Pacuvius, you think? No.
There is another beastling which the versicle
fits ; in size, one of the moderate exceedingly,
but a grand name. If, without previously know-
ing him, you hear tell of a chameleon, yoirwill
at once apprehend something yet more huge
j united with a lion. But when you stumble upon
him, generally in a vineyard, his whole bulk
! sheltered beneath a vine leaf, you will forthwith
i laugh at the egregious audacity of the name, in-

I ^ Oehlcr understand.^ this of Clodiiis Albinits, and the Augttsti
I mentioned above to be Severus and his two sons Antoninus and Geta.
I But see Kaye, pp. 36-39 (ed. 3, 1843)


ON THE PALLIUM.


asmuch as there is no moisture even in his body,
though in far more minute creatures the body
is Hquefied. The chameleon is a Hving pellicle.
His headkin begins straight from his spine, for
neck he has none : and thus reflection ' is hard
for him ; but, in circumspection, his eyes are
outdarting, nay, they are revolving points of
light. Dull and weary, he scarce raises from the
ground, but drags, his footstep amazedly, and
moves forward, — he rather demonstrates, than
takes, a step : ever fasting, to boot, yet never
fainting ; agape he feeds ; heaving, bellowslike,
he ruminates ; his food wind. Yet withal the
chameleon is able to effect a total self-mutation,
and that is all. For, whereas his colour is
properly one, yet, whenever anything has ap-
proached him, then he blushes. To the chame-
leon alone has been granted — as our common
saying has it — to sport with his own hide.

Much had to be said in order that, after due
preparation, we might arrive at ??iafi. From
whatever beginning you admit him as springing,
naked at all events and ungarmented he came
from his fashioner's hand : afterwards, at length,
without waiting for permission, he possesses him-
self, by a premature grasp, of wisdom. Then
and there hastening to forecover what, in his
newly made body, it was not yet due to modesty
(to forecover), he surrounds himself meantime
with fig-leaves : subsequently, on being driven
from the confines of his birthplace because he
had sinned, he went, skinclad, to' the world ^ as
to a mine.3

But these are secrets, nor does their knowl-
edge appertain to all. Come, let us hear from
your own store — (a store) which the Egyptians
narrate, and Alexander * digests, and his mother
reads — touching the time of Osiris, 5 when Am-
mon, rich in sheep, comes to him out of Libya.
In short, they tell us that Mercury, when among
them, delighted with the softness of a ram which
he had chanced to stroke, flayed a little ewe ;
and, while he persistently tries and (as the
pliancy of the material invited him) thins out
the thread by assiduous traction, wove it into the
shape of the pristine net which he had joined
with strips of linen. But you have preferred to
assign all the management of wool-work and
structure of the loom to Minerva ; whereas a
more diligent workshop was presided over by
Arachne. Thenceforth material (was abundant).
Nor do I speak of the sheep of Miletus, and
Selg'e, and Altinum, or of those for which Taren-


• Reflect! : perhaps a play upon the word = to turn back, or
(mentally) to reflect.

2 Orbi.

3 i.e., a place which he was to work, as condemned criminals
worked mines. Comp. de Pu., c. xxii. sub init. ; and see Gen. ii.
25 (in LXX. iii. i), iii. 7, 21-24.

* Alexander Polyhistor, who dedicated his hooks on the affairs of
the Phrygians and Egj^ptia-.is to his mother ( Rig. in DehlcrV

S The Egyptian Liber, or Pjacchiis. See de Cor., c. vii. (Rig.
in Oehler).


turn or Baetica is famous, with nature for their
dyer: but (I speak of the fact) that shrubs
afford you clothing, and the grassy parts of flax,
losing their greenness, turn white by washing.
Nor was it enough \.o plant and sow your tunic,
unless it had likewise fallen to your lot \.o fish
for raiment. For the sea withal yields fleeces,
inasmuch as the more brilliant shells of a mossy
wooliness furnish a hairy stuff. Further : it is no
secret that the silkworm — a species of worm-
ling it is — presently reproduces safe and sound
(the fleecy threads) which, by drawing them
through the air, she distends more skilfully than
the dial-like webs of spiders, and then devours.
In like manner, if you kill it, the threads which
you coil are forthwith instinct with vivid colour.
The ingenuities, therefore, of the tailoring art,
superadded to, and following up, so abundant a
store of materials — first with a view to covering
humanity, where Necessity led the way ; and
subsequently with a view to adorning withal, ay,
and inflating it, where Ambition followed in the
wake — have promulgated the various forms of
garments. Of which forms, part are worn by
particular nations, without being common to the
rest ; part, on the other hand, universally, as
being useful to all : as, for instance, this Mantle,
albeit it is more Greek (than Latin), has yet by
this time found, in speech, a home in Latium.
With the word the garment entered. And ac-
cordingly the very man who used to sentence
Greeks to extrusion from the city, but learned
(when he was now advanced in years) their
alphabet and speech — the self-same Cato, by
baring his shoulder at the time of his prsetor-
ship, showed no less favour to the Greeks by his
mantle-like garb.

CHAP. IV. CHANGE NOT ALWAYS IMPROVEMENT.

Why, now, if the Roman fashion is (social)
salvation to every one, are you nevertheless
Greek to a degree, even in points not honour-
able? Or else, if it is not so, whence in the
world is it that provinces which have had a
better training, provinces which nature adapted
rather for surmounting by hard struggling the
difficulties of the soil, derive the pursuits of the
wrestling-ground — pursuits which fall into a sad
old age ^ and labour in vain — and the unction
with mud,7 and the rolling in sand, and the dry
dietary? Whence comes it that some of our
Numidians, with their long locks made longer
by horsetail plumes, learn to bid the barber
shave their skin close, and to exempt their crown
alone from the knife? Whence comes it that


6 Male senescentia. Rig. (as quoted by Oehler) seems to mter-
pret, " which entail a feeble old age." Oehler himself seems to
take it to mean "pursuits which are growing very old, and toiling
to no purpose "

^ Or, as same take it, with -wax (Oehler).


ON THE PALLIUM.


men shaggy and hirsute learn to teach the resin '
to feed on their arms with such rapacity, the
tweezers to weed their chin so thievishly? A
prodigy it is, that all this should be done with-
out the Mantle ! To the Mantle appertains this
whole Asiatic practice ! What hast thou, Libya,
and thou, Europe, to do with athletic refine-
ments, which thou knowest not how to dress?
For, in sooth, what kind of thing is it to prac-
tise Greekish depilation more than Greekish
attire ?

The transfer of dress approximates to culpa-
bility just in so far as it is not custom, but na-
ture, which suffers the change. There is a wide
enough difference between the honour due to
time, and religion. Let Custom show fidelity
to Time, Nature to God. To Nature, accord-
ingly, the Larissaean hero ^ gave a shock by turn-
ing into a virgin ; he who had been reared on
the marrows of wild beasts (whence, too, was
derived the composition of his name, because
he had been a stranger with his lips to the ma-
ternal breast 3) ; he who had been reared by a
rocky and wood-haunting and monstrous trainer ^
in a stony school. You would bear patiently, if
it were in a doy's case, his mother's solicitude ;
but he at all events was already be-haired, he at
all events had already secretly given proof of his
manhood to some one,s when he consents to
wear the flowing stole,^ to dress his hair, to cul-
tivate his skin, to consult the mirror, to bedizen
his neck ; effeminated even as to his ear by boring,
whereof his bust at Sigeum still retains the trace.
Plainly afterwards he turned soldier : for necessity
restored him his sex. The clarion had sounded
of battle : nor were arms far to seek. " The
steel's self," says (Homer), "attracteth the
hero." 7 Else if, after that incentive as well as
before, he had persevered in his maidenhood,
he might withal have been married ! Behold,
accordingly, mutation ! A monster, I call him,
— a double monster : from man to woman ; by
and by from woman to man : whereas neither
ought the truth to have been belied, nor the de-
ception confessed. Each fashion of changing
was evil : the one opposed to nature, the other
contrary to safety.

Still more disgraceful was the case when lust
transfigured a man in his dress, than when some
maternal dread did so : and yet adoration is
offered by you to me, whom you ought to
blush at, — that Clubshaftandhidebearer, who
exchanged for womanly attire the whole proud
heritage of his name ! Such licence was granted


' Used as a depilatory.

2 Achilles.

3 '.\;^iAAeu;: from a privative, and xeiXo';, the lip. See Oehler.
* The Centaur Chiron, namely.

S Deianira, of whom he had begotten Pyrrhus (Oehler).
<> See the note on this word in t/e Idol., c. xviii.
7 Hom , Od., xvi. 294 (Oehler).


to the secret haunts of Lydia,*^ that Hercules
was prostituted in the person of Omphale, and
Omphale in that of Hercules. Where were
Diomed and his gory mangers? where Busiris
and his funereal altars? where Geryon, triply
one ? The club preferred still to reek with their
brains when it was being pestered with unguents !
The now veteran (stain of the) Hydra's and of
the Centaurs' blood upon the shafts was gradually
eradicated by the pumice-stone, familiar to the
hair-pin ! while voluptuousness insulted over the ■
fact that, after transfixing monsters, they should
perchance sew a coronet ! No sober woman
even, or heroine ^ of any note, would have ad-
ventured her shoulders beneath the hide of such
a beast, unless after long softening and smooth-
ening down and deodorization (which in Om-
phale's house, I hope, was effected by balsam
and fenugreek-salve : I suppose the mane, too,
submitted to the comb) for fear of getting her
tender neck imbued with lionly toughness. The
yawning mouth stuffed with hair, the jaw-teeth
overshadowed amid the forelocks, the whole out-
raged visage, would have roared had it been
able. Nemea, at all events (if the spot has any
presiding genius), groaned : for then she looked
around, and saw that she had lost her lion.
What sort of being the said Hercules was in
Omphale's silk, the description of Omphale in
Hercules' hide has inferentially depicted.

But, again, he who had formerly rivalled the
Tirynthian '^ — the pugilist Cleomachus — subse-
quently, at Olympia, after losing by efflux his
masculine sex by an incredible mutation —
bruised within his skin and without, worthy to be
wreathed among the " Fullers " even of Novius,"
and deservedly commemorated by the mimog-
rapher Lentulus in his Catinensians — did, of
course, not only cover with bracelets the traces
left by (the bands of) the cestus, but likewise
supplanted the coarse ruggedness of his athlete's
cloak with some superfinely wrought tissue.

Of Physco and Sardanapalus I must be silent,
whom, but for their eminence in lusts, no one
would recognise as kings. But I must be silent,
for fear lest even tliey set up a muttering con-
cerning some of your Caesars, equally lost to
shame ; for fear lest a mandate have been given
to canine "= constancy to point to a C?esar impurer
than Physco, softer than Sardanapalus, and in-
deed a second Nero.'^

Nor less warmly does the force of vainglory


8 Jos. Mercer, q^uoted by Oehler, appears to take the meaning to
be, " to his clandestine Lydian concubme; " but that rendering does
not seem necessary.

9 Viraginis; but perhaps = virginis. See the Vulg. in Gen. ii. 23.
•° i.e., Hercules.

" Or, "which are now attributed to Novius." Novius was a
writer of that kind of farce called " Atellana: fabulse; " and one of
his farces — or one attributed to him in Tertullian's d.iy — was called
"The Fullers."

'■2 i.e., cynical: comp. de Pa., c. ii. ad init.

'3 i.e., Domitian, called by Juv calvum Ncroiuni, Sat. iv. 38.


TO


ON THE PALLIUM.


also work for the mutation of clothing, even
while fiianhood is preserved. Every affection is
a heat : when, however, it is blown to (the flame
of) affectation, forthwith, by the blaze of glory,
it is an ardour. From this fuel, therefore, you
see a great king ' — inferior only to his glory —
seething. He had conquered the Median race,
and was conquered by Median garb. Doffing
the triumphal mail, he degraded himself into the
captive trousers ! The breast dissculptured with
scaly bosses, by covering it with a transparent
texture he bared ; panting still after the work of
• war, and (as it were) softening, he extinguished
it with the ventilating silk ! Not sufficiendy
swelling of spirit was the Macedonian, unless he
had likewise found delight in a highly inflated
garb : only that philosophers withal (I vbelieve)
themselves affect somewhat of that kind ; for I
hear that there has been (such a thing as) phil-
osophizing in purple. If a philosopher (ap-
pears) in purple, why not in gilded slippers^
too ? For a Tyrian 3 to be shod in anything but
gold, is by no means consonant with Greek
habits. Some one will say, "Well, but there
was another "^ who wore silk indeed, and shod
himself in brazen sandals." Worthily, indeed,
in order that at the bottom of his Bacchantian
raiment he might make some tinkling sound, did
he walk in cymbals ! But if, at that moment,
Diogenes had been barking from his tub, he would
not (have trodden on him 5) with muddy feet —
as the Platonic couches testify — but would have
carried Empedocles down bodily to the secret
recesses of the Cloacin^e ; •" in order that he who
had madly thought himself a celestial being
might, as a god, salute first his sisters,^ and
afterwards men. Such garments, therefore, as
alienate from nature and modesty, let it be
allowed to be just to eye fixedly* and point at
with the finger and expose to ridicule by a nod.
Just so, if a man were to wear a dainty robe
trailing on the ground with Menander-like ef-
feminacy, he would hear applied to himself that
which the comedian says, " What sort of a cloak
is that maniac wastmg?" For, now that the
contracted brow of censorial vigilance is long
since smoothed down, so far as reprehension is
concerned, promiscuous usage offers to our gaze
freedmen in equestrian garb, branded slaves in
that of gentlemen, the notoriously infamous in
that of the freeborn, clowns in that of city-folk,
buffoons in that of lawyers, rustics in regimentals ;


* Alexander.

2 Comp. de Idol., c. viii. ftted.

3 i.e., one who affects Tyrian dress — dresses in Tyrian purple.

* Empedocles (Salm. in Oehler).

5 I have adopted Oehler's suggestion, and inserted these words.

^ i e., of CloacinaorCluacina (=i" the Purifier," a name of Venus;
comp. White and Riddle), -which Tertullian either purposely connects
with " cloaca," a sewer (with which, indeed, it may be really con-
nected, as coming derivatively from the same root), and takes to
mean " the nymphs of the sewers " apparently.

' The nymphs above named (Oehler).


the corpse-bearer, the pimp, the gladiator trainer,
clothe themselves as you do. Turn, again, to
women. You have to behold what Csecina Seve-
rus pressed upon the grave attention of the
senate — matrons stoleless in public. In fact,
the penalty inflicted by the decrees of the augur
Lentulus upon any matron who had thus cash-
iered herself was the same as for fornication ;
inasmuch as certain matrons had sedulously pro-
moted the disuse of garments which were the
evidences and guardians of dignity, as being
impediments to the practising of prostitution.
But now, in their self-prostitution, in order that
they may the more readily be approached, they
have abjured stole, and chemise, and bonnet,
and cap ; yes, and -even the very litters and
sedans in which they used to be kept in privacy
and secrecy even in public. But while one ex-
tinguishes her proper adornments, another blazes
forth such as are not hers. Look at the street-
walkers, the shambles of popular lusts ; also at'
the female self-abusers with their sex ; and, if it
is better to withdraw your eyes from such shame-
ful spectacles of publicly slaughtered chastity,
yet do but look with eyes askance, (and) you
will at once see (them to be) matrons ! And,
while the overseer of brothels airs her swelling
silk, and consoles her neck — more impure than
her haunt — with necklaces, and inserts in the
armlets (which even matrons themselves would,
of the guerdons bestowed upon brave men,
without hesitation have appropriated) hands
privy to all that is shameful, (while) she fits on
her impure leg the pure white or pink shoe ; _
why do you not stare at such garbs? or, again,
at those which falsely plead religion as the sup-
porter of their novelty? while for the sake of
an all-white dress, and the distinction of a fillet,
and the privilege of a helmet, some are initiated
into (the mysteries of) Ceres ; while, on account
of an opposite hankering after sombre raiment,
and a gloomy woollen covering upon the head,
others run mad in Bellona's temple ; while the
attraction of surrounding themselves with a tunic
more broadly striped with purple, and casting
over their shoulders a cloak of Galatian scarlet,
commends Saturn (to'the affections of others).
When this Mantle itself, arranged with more
rigorous care, and sandals after the Greek model,
serve to flatter ^sculapius,^ how much more
should you then accuse and assail it with your
eyes, as being guilty of superstition — albeit
superstition simple and unaffected? Certainly,
when first it clothes this wisdom ^ which re-
nounces superstitions with all their vanities, then
most assuredly is the Mantle, above all the gar-
ments in which you array your gods and god-
desses, an august robe ; and, aJ;)ove all the caps


i.e., are worn by his votaries.

i.e., Christianity. Cf. i Cor. ii. 6, 7.


ON THE PALLIUM.


II


and tufts of your Salii and Flamines, a sacerdotal
attire. Lower your eyes, I advise you, (and)
reverence the garb, on the one ground, mean-
time, (without waiting for others,) of being a
renouncer of your error.

CHAP. V. VIRTUES OF THE MANTLE. IT PLEADS

IN ITS OWN DEFENCE.

• " Still," say you, " must we thus change from
gown ' to Mantle ? " Why, what if from diadem
and sceptre ? Did Anacharsis change otherwise,
when to the royalty of Scythia he preferred phil-
osophy? Grant that there be no (miraculous)
signs in proof of your transformation for the
better : there is somewhat which this your garb
can do. For, to begin with the simplicity of
its uptaking : it needs no tedious arrangement.
Accordingly, there is no necessity for any artist
formally to dispose its wrinkled folds from the
beginning a day beforehand, and then to reduce
them to a more finished elegance, and to assign
to the guardianship of the stretchers ^ the whole
figment of the massed boss ; subsequently, at
daybreak, first gathering up by the aid of a gir-
dle the tunic which it were better to have woven
of more moderate length (in the first instance),
and, again scrutinizing the boss, and rearranging
any disarrangement, to make one part prominent
on the left, but (making now an end of the
folds) to draw backwards from the shoulders the
circuit of it whence the hollow is formed, and,
leaving the right shoulder free, heap it still upon
the left, with another similar set of folds reserved
for the back, and thus clothe the man with a
burden ! In short, I will persistently ask your
own conscience. What is your first sensation in
wearing your gown ? Do you feel yourself clad,
or laded ? wearing a garment, or carrying it ? If
you shall answer negatively, I will follow you
home ; I will see what you hasten to do imme-
diately after crossing your threshold. There is
really no garment the doffing whereof congratu-
lates a man more than the gown's does.^ Of
shoes we say nothing — implements as they are
of torture proper to the gown, most uncleanly
protection to the feet, yes, and false too. For
who would not find it expedient, in cold and
heat, to stiffen with feet bare rather than in a
shoe with feet bound? A mighty munition for
the tread have the Venetian shoe-factories pro-
vided in the shape of effeminate boots ! Well,
but, than the Mande nothing is more expedite,
even if it be double, like that of Crates.'* No-
where is there a compulsory waste of time in


dressing yourself (in it), seeing that its whole
art consists in loosely covering. That can be
effected by a single circumjection, and one in no
case inelegant : 5 thus it wholly covers every part
of the man at once. The shoulder it either ex-
poses or encloses : ^ in other respects it adheres
to the shoulder ; it has no surrounding support ;
it has no surrounding tie ; it has no anxiety as
to the fidelity with which its folds keep their
place; easily it manages, easily readjusts itself:
even in the doffing it is consigned to no cross
until the morrow. If any shirt is w^orn beneath
it, the torment of a girdle is superfluous : if any-
thing in the way of shoeing is worn, it is a most
cleanly work ; ^ or else the feet are rather bare,
— more manly, at all events, (if bare,) than in
shoes. These (pleas I advance) for the Mantle
in the meantime, in so far as you have defamed
it by name. Now, however, it challenges you
on the score of its function withal. " I," it
says, " owe no duty to the forum, the election-
ground, or the senate-house ; I keep no obse-
quious vigil, preoccupy no platforms, hover about
no praetorian residences ; I am not odorant of
the canals, am not adorant of the lattices, am
no constant wearer out of benches, no wholesale
router of laws, no barking pleader, no judge, no
soldier, no king : I have withdrawn from the
populace. My only business is with myself:
except that other care I have none, save not
to care. The better life you would more enjoy
in seclusion than in publicity. But you will de-
cry me as indolent. Forsooth, ' we are to live
for our country, and empire, and estate.' Such
used,** of old, to be the sentiment. None is
born for another, being destined to die for him-
self. At all events, when we come to the Epi-
curi and Zenones, you give the epithet of 'sages'
to the whole teacherhood of Quietude, who
have consecrated that Quietude with the name
of ' supreme ' and ' unique ' pleasure. Still, to
some extent it will be allowed, even to me, to
confer benefit on the public. From any and
every boundary-stone or altar it is my wont to
prescribe medicines to morals — medicines which
will be more felicitous in conferring good health
upon public affairs, and states, and empires, than
your works are. Indeed, if I proceed to en-
counter you with naked foils, gowns have done
the commonwealth more hurt than cuirasses.
Moreover, I flatter no vices ; I give quarter to
no lethargy, no slothful encrustation. I apply


1 Toga.

2 Or, " forcipes."

3 Of course the meaning is, " on the doffing of which a man con-
gratulates himself more," etc. ; but TertuUian as it were personifies
the act of doffing, and represents it as congratulating the doffer; and
I have scrupulously retained all his extravagances, believing them (in
the present treatise at least) to be intentional.

■* A Cynic philosopher.


S ' Inhumano;" or, perhaps, " involving superhiiman effort."
* Oehler attempts to defend the common reading, " hiimerum
7'elans e.xponit vel includit;" but the correction of Salmasius and
Lud. de la Cerda which he quotes, " vel ex^onix.," is followed in pref-
erence. If Oehler's reading be retained, we may render: "a cover-
ing for the shoulder, it exposes or encloses it at will."

7 i.e., the "shoeing" appropriate to the )itantlf -f/'M consist at
most of sandals; "shoes" ijeing (as has been said) suited to the
gown.

8 " Erat." — Oehler, who refers to"errat"as the general read-
ing, and (if adopted) renders: " This sentiment errs (or wanders) in
all directions;" making otim = passim.


ON THE PALLIUM.


the cauterizing iron to the ambition which led
M. Tullius to buy a circular table of citron-wood
for more than ^^4000/ and Asinius Gallus to pay
twice as much for an ordinary table of the same
Moorish wood (Hem ! at what fortunes did they
value woody dapplings !), or, again, Sulla to
frame dishes of an hundred pounds' weight. I
fear lest that balance be small, when a Drusilla-
nus (and he withal a slave of Claudius !) con-
structs a tray^ of the weight of 500 lbs. ! — a
tray indispensable, perchance, to the aforesaid
tables, for which, if a workshop was erected,^
there ought to have been erected a dining-room
too. Equally do I plunge the scalpel into the
inhumanity which led Vedius PoUio to expose
slaves to fill the bellies of sea-eels. Delighted,
forsooth, with his novel savagery, he kept land-
monsters, toothless, clawless, hornless : it was his
pleasure to turn perforce into wild beasts his fish,
which (of course) were to be forthwith cooked,
that in their entrails he himself withal might
taste some savour of the bodies of his own
slaves. I will forelop the gluttony which led
Hortensius the orator to be the first to have the
heart to slay a peacock for the sake of food ;
which led x^ufidius Lurco to be the first to vitiate
meat with stuffing, and by the aid of forcemeats
to raise them to an adulterous ^ flavour ; which
led Asinius Celer to purchase the viand of a sin-
gle mullet at nearly _;^5o; 5 which led ^sopus
the actor to preserve in his pantry a dish of the
value of nearly ;^8oo, made up of birds of the
selfsame costliness (as the mullet aforesaid),
consisting of all the songsters and talkers ; which
led his son, after such a titbit, to have the hardi-
hood to hunger after somewhat yet more sump-
tuous : for he swallowed down pearls — cosdy
even on the ground of their name — I suppose
for fear he should have supped more beggarly
than his father, I am silent as to the Neros and

1 Reckoning the looo sesterces at their pre-Augustan value, £8,
17s. id.

2 " Promulsis" — a tray on which the first course (" promulsis"
or "antecoena") was served, otherwise called " promulsidare."

3 As Pliny (quoted by Oehler) tells us was the case.
* Or, " adulterated."

5 Reckoning the 1000 sesterces at the post-Augustan value, ^^7,
i6s. 3d.


Apicii and Rufi. I will give a cathartic to the
impurity of a Scaurus, and the gambling of a
Curius, and the intemperance of an Antony.
And remember that these, out of the many
(whom I have named), were men of the toga —
such as among the men of the pallium you would
not easily find. These purulencies of a state
who will eliminate and exsuppurate, save a be-
mantled speech?

CHAP. VI. — FURTHER DISTINCTIONS, AND CROWN-
ING GLORY, OF THE PALLIUM.

"'With speech,' says (my antagonist), 'you
have tried to persuade me, — a most sage medi-
cament.' But, albeit utterance be mute — im-
peded by infancy or else checked by bashfulness,
for life is content with an even tongueless phil-
osophy — my very cut is eloquent. A philoso-
pher, in fact, is heard so long as he is seen. My
very sight puts vices to the blush. Who suffers
not, when he sees his own rival ? Who can bear
to gaze ocularly at him at whom mentally he
cannot? Grand is the benefit conferred by
the Mantle, at the thought whereof moral im-
probity absolutely blushes. Let philosophy now
see to the question of her own profitableness ;
for she is not the only associate whom I boast.
Other scientific arts of public utility I boast.
From my store are clothed the first teacher of
the forms of letters, the first explainer of their
sounds, the first trainer in the rudiments of
arithmetic, the grammarian, the rhetorician, the
sophist, the medical man, the poet, the musical
timebeater, the astrologer, and the birdgazer.
All that is liberal in studies is covered by my
four angles. ' True ; but all these rank lower
than Roman knights.' Well ; but your gladia-
torial trainers, and all their ignominious follow-
ing, are conducted into the arena in togas.
This, no doubt, will be the indignity implied in
' From gown to Mantle ! ' " Well, so speaks
the Mantle. But I confer on it likewise a fellow-
ship with a divine sect and discipline. Joy,
Mande, and exult ! A better philosophy has
now deigned to honour thee, ever since thou
hast begun to be a Christian's vesture !


ELUCIDATIONS. 13


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(The garment . . . too quadrangular, p. 5.)

Speaking of the Greek priests of Korfou, the erudite Bishop of Lincoln, lately deceased, has
remarked, " There is something very picturesque in the appearance of these persons, with their
black caps resembling the modius seen on the heads of the ancient statues of Serapis and Osiris,
their long beards and pale complexions, and their black flowing cloak, — a rehc, no doubt, of the
old ecclesiastical garment of which Tertullian wrote." These remarks ' are illustrated by an
engraving on the same page.

He thus identifies the pallium with the gown of Justin Martyr ; ^ nor can there be any reason-
able doubt that the palliutn of the West was the counterpart of the Greek <^eA.dvtov and of the
<f>ai.X6v7], which St. Paul left at Troas. Endearing associations have clung to it from the mention
of this apostolic cloak in Holy Scripture. It doubtless influenced Justin in giving his philoso-
pher's gown a new significance, and the modern Greeks insist that such was the apparel of the
apostles. The seamless robe of Christ Himself belongs to Him only.

Tertullian rarely acknowledges his obligations to other Doctors ; but Justin's example and St.
Paul's cloak must have been in his thoughts when he rejected the loga, and claimed the pallium,
as a Christian's attire. Our Edinburgh translator has assumed that it was the "ascetics' mantle,"
and perhaps it was.3 Our author wished to make all Christians ascetics, like himself, and hence
his enthusiasm for a distinctive costume. Anyhow, " the Doctor's gown " of the English universi-
ties, which is also used among the Galileans and in Savoy, is one of the most ancient as well as
dignified vestments in ecclesiastical use ; and for the prophetic or preaching function of the
clergy it is singularly appropriate. ■♦

"The pallium,'' says a learned author,5 the late Wharton B. Marriott of Oxford, "is the
Greek i/xartov, the outer garment or wrapper worn occasionally hy persons of all conditions of life.
It corresponded in general use to the Roman toga, but in the earlier Roman language, that of
republican times, was as distinctively suggestive of a Greek costutne as the toga of that of Rome."
To Tertullian, therefore, his preference for the pallium was doubtless commended by all these
considerations ; and the distinctively Greek character of Christian theology was indicated also by
his choice. He loved the learning of Alexandria, and reflected the spirit of the East.


11.

(Superstition, p. 10, near note 9.)

The pall afterwards imposed upon Anglican and other primates by the Court of Rome was
at first a mere complimentary present from the patriarchal see of the West. It became a badge
of dependence and of bondage {obsta principiis). Only the ornamental bordering was sent,
"made of lamb's-wool and superstition," says old Fuller, for whose amusing remarks see his
Church Hist., vol. i. p. 179, ed. 1845. Rome gives primitive names to middle-age corruptions:
needless to say the "pall" of her court is nothing like \k\t pallium of our author.

* Wordsworth's Greece, p. 263. London, 1839. ^ See vol. i. p. 160, this series.

3 But it was .assuming a questionable point (See Kaye, p. 49) to give it this name in the title, and I have retained it untranslated.
*• See note on p. 160 of vol. i., this series.

S See his valuable and exhaustive treatise, the Vestiariiim Christianum, especially pp. 73, 125, 233, 490. Also, for the Gallicanum,
p. 204 and Appendix E., with pp. 210, 424. For the Gracuin, pp. xii. (note), xv. 73, 127, 233.


II.


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.^


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]

BOOK I.


CHAP. I. INTRODUCTION. MODESTY IN APPAREL

BECOMING TO WOMEN, IN MEMORY OF THE IN-
TRODUCTION OF SIN INTO THE WORLD THROUGH
A WOMAN.

If there dwelt upon earth a faith as great as
is the reward of faith which is expected in the
heavens, no one of you at all, best beloved sis-
ters, from the time that she had first " known
the Lord," ^ and learned (the truth) concerning
her own (that is, woman's) condition, would
have desired too gladsome (not to say too os-
tentatious) a style of dress ; so as not rather to
go about in humble garb, and rather to affect
meanness of appearance, walking about as Eve
mourning and repentant, in order that by every
garb of penitence 3 she might the more fully
expiate that which she derives from Eve, — the
ignominy, I mean, of the first sin, and the odium
(attaching to her as the cause) of human perdi-
tion. " In pains and in anxieties dost thou bear
(children), woman; and toward thine husband
(is) thy inclination, and he lords it over thee." ^
And do you not know that you are (each) an
Eve ? The sentence of God on this sex of yours
lives in this age : s the guilt must of necessity
live too. You are the devil's gateway : you are
the unsealer^ of that (forbidden) tree: you
are the first deserter of the divine law : you are
/she who persuaded 7 him whom the devil was not
valiant enough to attack. You destroyed so
easily God's image, man. On account of your


34),


p.Vritten^about A.D. 202. See Kaye, p. 56 ]
3 Satisfactionis.


Comp. Heb. viii. 11; Jer. xxxi. 34 (in the LXX.


Comp. Gen. iii, 16, in Eng. ver. and in LXX.

5 Saeculo.

*> Resignatrix. Comp. the phrase " afountain sealed" in Cant
IV. 12.

^ " Suasisti " is the reading of the mss. ; " persuasisti," a conjec-
tural emendation adopted by Rig.

14


desert — that is, death — even the Son of God
had to die. And do you think about adorning
yourself over and above your tunics of skins ? ^
Come, now ; if from the beginning of the worlds
the Milesians sheared sheep, and the Serians '°
spun trees, and the Tyrians dyed, and the Phry-
gians embroidered with the needle, and the
Babylonians with the loom, and pearls gleamed,
and onyx-stones flashed ; if gold itself also had
already issued, with the cupidity (which accom-
panies it), from the ground; if the mirror, too,
already had licence to lie so largely. Eve, ex-
pelled from paradise, (Eve) already dead, would
also have coveted these things, I imagine ! No
more, then, ought she fww to crave, or be ac-
quainted with (if she desires to live again), what,
when she was living, she had neither had nor
known. Accordingly these things are all the
baggage of woman in her condemned and dead
state, instituted as if to swell the pomp of her
funeral.

CHAP. 11. THE ORIGIN OF FEMALE ORNAMENTA-
TION, TRACED BACK TO THE ANGELS WHO HAD
FALLEN."

For they, withal, who instituted them are as-
signed, under condemnation, to the penalty of
death, — those angels, to wit, who rushed from
heaven on the daughters of men ; so that this
ignominy also attaches to woman. For when to
an age ''' much more ignorant (than ours) they
had disclosed certain well-concealed material
substances, and several not well-revealed scien-
tific arts — if it is true that they had laid bare


8 See Gen. iii. 21.

9 Rerum.

•° i.e., Chinese.

" Comp. with this chapter, de Idol., c. ix.; de Or., c. xxii.; de
Cult. Fein., 1. ii. c. x. ; de Virg. VeL, c. vii.
'2 Sa;culo.


Chap. III.]


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


15


the operations of metallurgy, and had divulged
the natural properties of herbs, and had promul-
gated the powers of enchantments, and had
traced out every curious art,' even to the inter-
pretation of the stars — they conferred properly
and as it were peculiarly upon women that in-
strumental mean of womanly ostentation, the
radiances of jewels wherewith necklaces are
variegated, and the circlets of gold wherewith
the arms are compressed, and the medicaments
of orchil with which wools are coloured, and
that black powder itself wherewith the eyelids
and eyelashes are made prominent.^ What is
the quality of these things may be declared
meantime, even at this point,^ from the quality
and condition of their teachers ; in that sinners
could never have either shown or supplied any-
thing conducive to "integrity, unlawful lovers
anything conducive to chastity, renegade spirits
anything conducive to the fear of God. If
(these things) are to be called teachings, ill
masters must of necessity have taught ill ; if as
wages of lust, there is nothing base of which
the wages are honourable. But why was it of so
much importance to show these things as well
as •♦ to confer them ? Was it that women, with-
out material causes of splendour, and without
ingenious contrivances of grace, could not please
men, who, while still unadorned, and uncouth,
and — so to say — crude and rude, had moved
(the mind of) angels ? or was it that the lovers 5
would appear sordid and — through gratuitous
use — contumeHous, if they had conferred no
(compensating) gift on the women who had
been enticed into connubial connection with
them ? But these questions admit of no calcu-
lation. Women who possessed angels (as hus-
bands) could desire nothing more ; they had,
forsooth, made a grand match ! Assuredly they
who, of course, did sometimes think whence
they had fallen,^ and, after the heated impulses
of their lusts, looked up toward heaven, thus
requited that very excellence of women, natural
beauty, as (having proved) a cause of evil, in
order that their good fortune might profit them
nothing ; but that, being turned from simplicity
and sincerity, they, together with (the angels)
themselves, might become offensive to God.
Sure they were that all ostentation, and ambi-
tion, and love of pleasing by carnal means, was
rZ/j-pleasing to God. And these are the angels
whom we are destined to judge : ^ these are the
angels whom in baptism we renounce : '^ these,
of course, are the reasons why they have de-


' Curiositatem. Comp. de Idol., c. ix., and Acts xix. 19.

" Quo oculorum exordia producuntur. Comp. ii. 5.

^ "Jam," i.e., without going any farther. Comp. c. iv. et seqq.

* Sicut. But Pam. and Rig. read " sive."

5 i.e., the angelic lovers.

6 Comp. Rev. ii. 5.
' See I Cor. vi. 3.

* Comp. de Idol., c. vi.


served to be judged by man. What business,
then, have their things with \ht\x judges ? What
commerce have they who are to condemn with
them who are to be condemned ? The same, I
take it, as Christ has with Belial.9 With what
consistency do we mount that (future) judg-
ment-seat to pronounce sentence against those
whose gifts we (now) seek after? For you too,
(women as you are,) have the self-same angelic
nature promised '° as your reward, the self-same
sex as men : the self-same advancement to the
dignity of judging, does (the Lord) promise
you. Unless, then, we begin even here io pre-
judge, by pre-condemning their things, which we
are hereafter to condemn in themselves, they will
rather judge and condemn us.

CHAP. III. CONCERNING THE GENUINENESS OF

" THE PROPHECY OF ENOCH." "

I am aware that the Scripture of Enoch,'^ which
has assigned this order (of action) to angels, is
not received by some, because it is not admitted
into the Jewish canon either. I suppose they
did not think that, having been published before
the deluge, it could have safely survived that
world-wide calamity, the abolisher of all things.
If that is the reason (for rejecting it), let them
recall to their memory that Noah, the survivor
of the deluge, was the great-grandson of Enoch
himself; '^ and he, of course, had heard and re-
membered, from domestic renown '•* and heredi-
tary tradition, concerning his own great-grand-
father's "grace in the sight of God," 's and
concerning all his preachings ; '^ since Enoch had
given no other charge to Methuselah than that
he should hand on the knowledge of them to
his posterity. Noah therefore, no doubt, might
have succeeded in the trusteeship of (his) preach-
ing ; or, had the case been otherwise, he would
not have been silent alike concerning the dispo-
sition (of things) made by God, his Preserver,
and concerning the particular glory of his own
house.

If (Noah) had not had this (conser\'ative
power) by so short a route, there would (still)
be this (consideration) to warrant '7 our assertion
of (the genuineness of) this Scripture : he could
equally have renezved it, under the Spirit's inspi-
ration,'^ after it had been destroyed by the vio-
lence of the deluge, as, after the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Babylonian storming of it.


^cUo


9 Comp. 2 Cor. vi. 14-16.

'° See Matt. xxii. 30; Mark xii. 25; Luke xx. 35, 36; and comp.
il. iii. 28.
" [Elucidation.]
'- Comp de Idol., c. iv.
" See Gen. v 21, 25, 28, 29.
'•t " Nomine; " perhaps = " account."
'5 Comp. Gen. vi. 8.
"■ Praidicatis.
■" Tueretur.
'^ la spiritu.


i6


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


[Book I.


every document ' of the Jewish hterature is gen-
erally agreed to liave been restored through
Ezra.

But since Enoch in the same Scripture has
preached likewise concerning the Lord, nothing
at all must be rejected by us which pertains to us ;
and we read that " every Scripture suitable for
edification is divinely inspired."^ By the yews
it may now seem to have been rejected for that
(very) reason, just like all the other (portions)
nearly which tell of Christ. Nor, of course, is
this fact wonderful, that they did not receive
some Scriptures which spake of Him whom even
in person, speaking in their presence, they were
not to receive. To these considerations is added
the fact that Enoch possesses a testimony in the
Aposde Jude.3

CHAP. IV. WAIVING THE QUESTION OF THE AU-
THORS, TERTULLIAN PROPOSES TO CONSIDER THE
THINGS ON THEIR OWN MERITS.

Grant now that no mark of pre-condemnation
has been branded on womanly pomp by the (fact
of the) fate •♦ of its authors ; let nothing be im-
puted to those angels besides their repudiation of
heaven and (their) carnal marriage : 5 let us ex-
amine the qualities of the things themselves, in
order that we may detect the purposes also for
which they are eagerly desired.

Female habit carries with it a twofold idea —
dress and ornament. By " dress " we mean what
they call "womanly gracing ; " ^ by "ornament,"
what it is suitable should be called "womanly
disgxz-cmgr ^ The former is accounted (to con-
sist) in gold, and silver, and gems, and garments ;
the latter in care of the hair, and of the skin,
and of those parts of the body which attract the
eye. Against the one we lay the charge of am-
bition, against the other of prostitution ; so that
even from this early stage ^ (of our discussion)
you may look forward and see what, out of (all)
these, is suitable, handmaid of God, to yo2ir dis-
cipline, inasmuch as you are assessed on different
principles (from other women), — those, namely,
of humility and chastity.

CHAP. V. GOLD AND SILVER NOT SUPERIOR IN

ORIGIN OR IN UTILITY TO OTHER METALS.

Gold and silver, the principal material causes
of worldly 9 splendour, must necessarily be iden-
tical (in nature) with that out of which they
have their being : (they must be) earth, that is \
(which earth itself is) plainly more glorious (than


' Instrumentum.

2 See 2 Tim. iii. i6.

3 See Jude 14, 15.
< Exitu.

s Matrimonium camis.

* Mundum muliebrem. Comp Liv. xxxiv. 7.

' Immundum muliebrem.

8 Jamhinc; comp.arf. i/.r., i. i a^/ ?•«;/, anda(//f«., and 8 a^/?«.

9 Ssecularis.


they), inasmuch as it is only after it has been
tearfully wrought by penal labour in the deadly
laboratories of accursed mines, and there left its
name of "earth" in the fire behind it, that^ as a
fugitive from the mine, it passes from torments
to ornaments, from punishments to embellish-
ments, from ignominies to honours. But iron,
and brass, and other the vilest material sub-
stances, enjoy a parity of condition (with silver
and gold), both as to earthly origin and metal-
lurgic operation ; in order that, in the estimation
of nature, the substance of gold and of silver
may be judged not a whit more noble (than
theirs). But if it is from the quality of utility
that gold and silver derive their glory, why, iron
and brass excel them ; whose usefulness is so
disposed (by the Creator), that they not only dis-
charge functions of theif own more numerous
and more necessary to human affairs, but do also
none the less serve the turn of gold and silver,
by dint of their own powers, '° in the service of
juster causes. For not only are rings made of
iron, but the memory of antiquity still preserves
(the fame of) certain vessels for eating and
drinking made out of brass. Let the insane
plenteousness of gold and silver look to it, if it
serves to make utensils even for foul purposes.
At all events, neither is the field tilled by means
of gold, nor the ship fastened together by the
strength of silver. No mattock plunges a golden
edge into the ground ; no nail drives a silver
point into planks. I leave unnoticed the fact
that the needs of our whole life are dependent
upon iron and brass : whereas those rich materials
themselves, requiring both to be dug up out of
mines, and needing a forging process in every
use (to which they are put), are helpless without
the laborious vigour of iron and brass. Already,
therefore, we must judge whence it is that so
high dignity accrues to gold and silver, since they
get precedence over material substances which
are not only cousin-german to them in point of
origin, but more powerful in point of usefulness.

CHAP. VI. — OF PRECIOUS STONES AND PEARLS.

But, in the next place, what am I to interpret
those jewels to be which vie with gold in haughti-
ness, except little pebbles and stones and paltry
particles of the self-same earth ; but yet not
necessary either for laying down foundations, or
rearing party-walls, or supporting pediments, or
giving density to roofs ? The only edifice which
they know how to rear is this silly pride of
women : because they require slow rubbing that
they may shine, and artful underlaying that they
may show to advantage, and careful piercing that
they may hang ; and (because they) render to
gold a mutual assistance in meretricious allure-


■° De suo. Comp. de Bapt., c. xvii. subfin.


Chap. IX.]


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


17


ment. But whatever it is that ambition ftshes up
from the British or the Indian sea, it is a kind of
conch not more pleasing in savour than — I do
not say the oyster and the sea-snail, but — even
the giant muscle.' For let me add that I know I
conchs (which are) sweet fruits of the sea. But
if that (foreign) conch suffers from some inter-
nal pustule, that ought to be regarded rather as
its defect than as its glory ; and although it be
called " pearl," still something else must be un-
derstood than some hard, round excrescence of
the fish. Some say, too, that gems are culled
from the foreheads of dragons, just as in the
brains of fishes there is a certain stony substance.
This also was wanting to the Christian woman,
that she may add a grace to herself from the
serpent ! Is it thus that she will set her heel on
the devil's head," ^ while she heaps ornaments
(taken) from his head on her own neck, or on
her very head ?

CHAP. VII. — RARITY THE ONLY CAUSE WHICH
MAKES SUCH THINGS VALUABLE.

It is only from their rarity and outlandishness
that all these things possess their grace ; in short,
within their own native limits they are not held
of so high worth. Abundance is always contu-
melious toward itself. There are some barbarians
with whom, because gold is indigenous and plen-
tiful, it is customary to keep (the criminals) in
their convict establishments chained with gold,
and to lade the wicked with riches — the more
guilty, the more wealthy. At last there has
really been found a way to prevent even gold
from being loved ! We have also seen at Rome
the nobility of gems blushing in the presence of
our matrons at the contemptuous usage of the
Parthians and Medes, and the rest of their own
fellow-countrymen, only that {their gems) are
not generally worn with a view to ostentation.
Emeralds ^ lurk in their belts ; and the sword
(that hangs) below their bosom alone is witness
to the cylindrical stones that decorate its hilt ;
and the massive single pearls on their boots are
fain to get lifted out of the mud ! In short,
they carry nothing so richly gemmed as that
which ought not to be gemmed if it is (either)
not conspicuous, or else is conspicuous only that
it may be shown to be also neglected.

CHAP. VIII. THE S.\ME RULE HOLDS WITH REGARD

TO COLOURS, god's CREATURES GENERALLY NOT
TO BE USED, EXCEPT FOR THE PURPOSES TO
WHICH HE HAS APPOINTED THEM.

Similarly, too, do even the servants * of those
barbarians cause the glory to fade from the col-
ours of our garments (by wearing the like) ; nay,


even their party-walls use slightingly, to supply
the place of painting, the Tyrian and the violet-
coloured and the grand royal hangings, which
you laboriously undo and metamorphose. Pur-
ple with them is more paltry than red ochre ;
(and justly,) for what legitimate honour can gar-
ments derive from adulteration with illegitimate
colours? That which He Himself has not pro-
duced is not pleasing to God, unless He was un-
able to order sheep to be born with purple and
sky-blue fleeces ! If He was able, then plainly
He was unwilling: what God willed not, of
course ought not to be fashioned. Those things,
then, are not the best by nature which are not
from God, the Author of nature. Thus they are
understood to be from the devil, from the cor-
rupter of nature : for there is no other whose
they can be, if they are not God's ; because
what are not God's must necessarily be His ri-
val's.s But, beside the devil and his angels,
other rival of God there is none. Again, if the
material substances are of God, it does not im-
mediately follow that such ways of enjoying them
among men (are so too). It is matter for in-
quiry not only whence come conchs,^ but what
sphere of embellishment is assigned them, and
where it is that they exhibit their beauty. For
all those profane pleasures of worldly ^ shows —
as we have already published a volume of their
own about them^ — (ay, and) even idolatry it-
self, derive their material causes from the crea-
tures ^ of God. Yet a Christian ought not to
attach himself '° to the frenzies of the racecourse,
or the atrocities of the arena, or the turpitudes
of the stage, simply because God has given to
man the horse, and the panther, and the power
of speech : just as a Christian cannot commit
idolatry with impunity either, because the in-
cense, and the wine, and the fire which feeds"
(thereon), and the animals which are made the
victims, are God's workmanship ; '^ since even
the material thing which is adored is God's
(creature). Thus then, too, with regard to their
active use, does the origin of the material sub-
stances, which descends from God, excuse (that
use) as foreign to God, as guilty forsooth of
worldly '^ glory !

CHAP. IX. god's distribution MUST REGULATE

OUR DESIRES, OTHERWISE WE BECOME THE
PREY OF AMBITION AND ITS ATTENDANT EVILS.

For, as some particular things distributed by
God over certain individual lands, and some one


* Peloris. Comp. Hor , 5., ii. 4, 32, and Macleane's note there.

* See Gen. iii. 15.

3 Smaragdi. Comp. Rev. iv. 3.

* Or, " slaves."


5 Comp. de Pcen., c. v. vied.

6 Comp. c. vi. above.

7 Saecularium.

8 i.e , the treatise de Spectaciilis.

9 Rebus. J , /-■
>° " Affici " — a rare use rather of " afficere, but found In Cic.
" Or perhaps" is fed" thereby: for the word is " vescitur."

'- '• Conditio" — a rare use again.
» Saecularis.


i8


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


[Book I,


particular tract of sea, are mutually foreign one
to the other, they are reciprocally either neg-
lected or desired: (desired) among foreigners,
as being rarities; neglected (rightly), if any-
where, among their own compatriots, because in
them there is no such fervid longing for a glory
which, among its own home-folk, is frigid. But,
however, the rareness and outlandishness which
arise out of that distribution of possessions which
God has ordered as He willed, ever finding fa-
vour in the eyes of strangers, excites, from the
simple fact of not having what God has made
native to other places, the concupiscence of hav-
ing it. Hence is educed another vice — that of
immoderate having ; because although, perhaps,
having may be permissible, still a limit ' is bound
(to be observed). This (second vice) will be
ambition ; and hence, too, its name is to be in-
terpreted, in that from concupiscence ambient in
the mind it is born, with a view to the desire of


' Or, " moderation."


glory, — a grand desire, forsooth, which (as we
have said) is recommended neither by nature
nor by truth, but by a vicious passion of the
mind, — (namely,) concupiscence. And there
are other vices connected with ambition and
glory. Thus they have withal enhanced the cost
of things, in order that (thereby) they might add
fuel to themselves also ; for concupiscence be-
comes proportionably greater as it has set a
higher value upon the thing which it has eagerly
desired. From the smallest caskets is produced
an ample patrimony. On a single thread is sus-
pended a million of sesterces. One delicate
neck carries about it forests and islands.^ The
slender lobes of the ears exhaust a fortune ; and
the left hand, with its every finger, sports with a
several'money-bag. Such is the strength of am-
bition— (equal) to bearing on one small body,
and that a woman's, the product of so copious
wealth.


' Saltus et insulae," i.e., as much as would purchase them.


BOOK II.


CHAP. I. INTRODUCTION. MODESTY TO BE OB-
SERVED NOT ONLY IN ITS ESSENCE, BUT IN ITS
ACCESSORIES.

Handmaids of the living God, my fellow-ser-
vants and sisters, the right which I enjoy with
you — I, the most meanest ' in that right of fel-
low-servantship and brotherhood — emboldens
me to address to you a discourse, not, of course,
of affection, but paving the way for affection in
the cause of your salvation. That salvation —
and not (the salvation) of women only, but like-
wise of men — consists in the exhibition princi-
pally of modesty. For since, by the introduction
into an appropriation ^ (in) us of the Holy Spirit,
we are all " the temple of God,"-^ Modesty is the
sacristan and priestess of that temple, who is to
suffer nothing unclean or profane to be intro-
duced (into it), for fear that the God who in-
habits it should be offended, and quite forsake
the polluted abode. But on the present occasion
we (are to speak) not about modesty, for the
enjoining and exacting of which the divine pre-
cepts which press (upon us) on every side are
sufficient ; but about the matters which pertain
to it, that is, the manner in which it behoves you
to walk. For most women (which very thing I
trust God may permit me, with a view, of course.


' Postremissimus.

^ Consecrato.

3 See I Cor. iii. i6, 17, vi. 19,


to my own personal censure, to censure in all),
either from simple ignorance or else from dis-
simulation, have the hardihood so to walk as if
modesty consisted only -^ in the (bare) integrity
of the flesh, and in turning away from (actual)
fornication ; and there were no need for any-
thing extrinsic to boot — in the matter (I mean)
of the arrangement of dress and ornament,5 the
studied graces of form and brilliance : — wear-
ing in their gait the self-same appearance as the
women of the nations, from whom the sense of
true modesty is absent, because in those who
know not God, the Guardian and Master of truth,
there is nothing true.^ For if any modesty can
be believed (to exist) in Gentiles, it is plain that
it must be imperfect and undisciplined to such a
degree that, although it be actively tenacious of
itself in the mind up to a certain point, it yet
allows itself to relax into licentious extrava-
gances of attire ; just in accordance with Gen-
tile perversity, in craving after that of which it
carefully shuns the effect." How many a one,
in short, is there who does not earnestly desire
even to look pleasing to strangers ? who does not
on that very account take care to have herself
painted out, and denies that she has (ever) been


< Comp. de Idol., c. ii.

s Cultus et ornatus. For the distinction oetween them,


'i Comp. de Pcen., c. i.
7 Or, " execution."


Chap. II.]


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


an object of (carnal) appetite? And yet, grant-
ing that even this is a practice faniiHar to Gen-
tile modesty — (namely,) not actually to cofumit
the sin, but still to be willing to do so ; or even
not to be willing, yet still not quite to refuse —
what wonder? for all things which are not God's
are perverse. Let those women therefore look
to it, who, by not holding fast the whole good,
easily mingle with evil even what they do hold
fast. Necessary it is that you turn aside from
them, as in all other things, so also in your gait ;
since you ought to be " perfect, as (is) your
Father who is in the heavens." '

CHAP. II. PERFECT MODESTY WILL ABSTAIX

FROM WHATEVER TENDS TO SIN, AS WELL AS
FROM SIN ITSELF. DIFFERENCE BETWEEN

TRUST AND PRESUMPTION. IF SECURE OUR-
SELVES, WE MUST NOT PUT TEMPTATION IN
THE WAY OF OTHERS. WE MUST LOVE OUR
NEIGHBOUR AS OURSELF,

You must know that in the eye of perfect,
that is. Christian, modesty, (carnal) desire of
one's self (on the part of others) is not only not
to be desired, but even execrated, by you : first,
because the study of making personal grace
(which we know to be naturally the inviter of
lust) a mean of pleasing does not spring from a
sound conscience : why therefore excite toward
yourself that evil (passion) ? why invite (that)
to which you profess yourself a stranger? sec-
ondly, because we ought not to open a way to
temptations, which, by their instancy, sometimes
achieve (a wickedness) which God expels from
them who are His; (or,) at all events, put the
spirit into a thorough tumult by (presenting) a
stumbling-block (to it). We ought indeed to
walk so holily, and with so entire substantiality^
of faith, as to be confident and secure in regard
of our own conscience, desiring that that (gift)
may abide in us to the end, yet not presuming
(that it will). For he who presumes feels less
apprehension ; he who feels less apprehension
takes less precaution ; he who takes less precau-
tion runs more risk. Fear 3 is the foundation of
salvation ; presumption is an impediment to fear.
More useful, then, is it to apprehend that we
may possibly fail, than to presume that we can-
not ; for apprehending will lead us to fear, fear-
ing to caution, and caution to salvation. On the
other hand, if we presume, there will be neither
fear nor caution to save us. He who acts se-
curely, and not at the same time warily, possesses
no safe and firm security ; whereas he who is
wary will be truly able to be secure. For His
own servants, may the Lord by His mercy take


' See Matt. v. 48.

= Substantia. Comp.


I'CTTIS i\-Ki.C,o}xivav


care that to them it may be lawful even to pre-
sume on His goodness ! But why are we a
(source of) danger to our neighbour? why do
we import concupiscence into our neighbour?
which concupiscence, if God, in " amplifying the
law,"-* do not 5 dissociate in (the way of) pen-
alty from the actual commission of fornication,''
I know not whether He allows impunity to him
who 7 has been the cause of perdition to some
other.. For that other, as soon as he has felt
concupiscence after your beauty, and has men-
tally already committed (the deed) which his
concupiscence pointed to,'^ perishes ; and you
have beeamade^ the sword which destroys him :
so that, albeit you be free from the (actual)
crime, you are not free from the odium (attach-
ing to it) ; as, when a robbery has been com-
mitted on some man's estate, the (actual) crime
indeed will not be laid to the owner's charge,
while yet the domain is branded with ignominy,
(and) the owner himself aspersed with the in-
famy. Are we to paint ourselves out that our
neighbours may perish? Where, then, is (the
command), "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself? " '° " Care not merely about your own
(things), but (about your) neighbour's? " " No
enunciadon of the Holy Spirit ought to be (con-
fined) to the subject immediately in hand mere-
ly, and not applied and carried out with a view
to eveij occasion to which its application is use-
ful.'^ Since, therefore, both our own interest and
that of others is imphcated in the studious pur-
suit of most perilous (outward) comeliness, it is
time for you to know '3 that not merely must the
pageantry of fictitious and elaborate beauty be
rejected by you ; but that of even natural grace
must be obliterated by concealment and negli-
gence, as equally dangerous to the glances of
(the beholder's) eyes. ^For, albeit comeliness is
not to be censured,^'^ as being a bodily happiness,
as being an additional outlay of the divine plas-
tic art, as being a kind of goodly garment '5 of
the soul ; yet it is to be feared, just on account
of the injuriousness and violence of suitors : '^
which (injuriousness and violence) even the
father of the faith, '7 Abraham,'** greatly feared in
regard of his own wife's grace;- and Isaac,"' by


•* Matt. V. 17. Comp. de Or., c. xxii. mid.; de Pa., c. vi. mid.;
de Pcen.y c. iii. stib fin.

5 The second '' non," or else the first, must apparently be
omitted.

6 Matt. V. 28. See de Idol., c. ii. : de Pa., c. vi. ; de Peru., c. iii.

7 "Qui," Oehler; " quae," Rig.

^ Comp. de Pan. c. iii. (latter halQ.

9 Tu facta es.

'° Lev. xix. 18; Matt. xix. 13, xxii. 39; Mark xii. 31; Luke x. 27;
Rom. xiii. g; Gal. v. 14; Jas. li. 8.

" Comp. I Cor. X. 24, xiii. 5; Phil. ii. 4.

'^ Comp. 2 Pet. i. 20.

'3 Jam . . . sciatis.

'* Accusandus.

'5 Comp. Gen. xxvii. 15.

"^ Sectatorum.

'^ Comp Rom. iv. 11, 16.

" Gen. xii 10-20, and xx.

■9 Gen. xxvi. 6-1 1.


20


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


[Book II.


falsely representing Rebecca as his sister, pur-
chased safety by insult ! '

CH.\P. III. GRANT THAT BEAUTY BE NOT TO BE

FEARED : STILL IT IS TO BE SHUNNED AS .UN-
NECESSARY AND VAINGLORIOUS.

Let it now be granted that excellence of form
be not to be feared, as neither troublesome to
its possessors, nor destructive to its desirers, nor
perilous to its compartners ; ^ let it be thought
(to be) not exposed to temptations, not sur-
rounded by stumbling-blocks : it is enough that
to angels of God^ it is not necessary. For,
where modesty is, there beauty is idle ; because
properly the use and fruit of beauty is voluptu-
ousness, unless any one thinks that there is some
other harvest for bodily grace to reap.^ Are
women who think that, in furnishing to their
neighbour that which is demanded of beauty,
they are furnishing it to themselves also, to aug-
ment that (beauty) when (naturally) given them,
and to strive after it when not (thus) given?
Some one will say, "Why, then, if voluptuous-
ness be shut out and chastity let in, may (we)
not enjoy the praise of beauty alone, and glory
in a bodily good? " Let whoever finds pleasure
in " glorying in the flesh " 5 see to that. To us,
in the first place, there is no studious pursuit
of " glory," because " glory " is the essence of
exaltation. Now exaltation is incongruous for
professors of humility according to God's pre-
cepts. Secondly, if all " glory " is " vain " and
insensate,'' how much more (glory) in the flesh,
especially to us ? For even if " glorying " is
(allowable), we ought to wish our sphere of
pleasing to lie in the graces 7 of the Spirit, not
in the flesh ; because we are " suitors " '^ of
things spiritual. In those things wherein our
sphere of labour lies, let our joy lie. From the
sOjUrces whence we hope for salvation, let us cull
our "glory." Plainly, a Christian will "glory "
even in the flesh ; but (it will be) when it has en-
dured laceration for Christ's sake,9 in order that
the spirit may be crowned in it, not in order
that it may draw the eyes and sighs of youths
after it. Thus (a thing) which, from whatever
point you look at it, is in your case superfluous,
you may justly disdain if you have it not, and
neglect if you have. Let a holy woman, if natu-
rally beautiful, give none so great occasion (for
carnal appetite). Certainly, if even she be so.


1 " Salutem contumelia redemit; " the 'insult" being the den
of her as his wife.

2 Conjunctis.

3 Angelis Dei. Comp. the opening sentence of the book.
< Comp. ad Ux., b. i. c. iv.

5 See Gal. vi. 13 and i Cor. iii. 21, v. 6.
* Stuporata.

7 Bonis.

8 Sectatores.

9 Comp. 2 Cor. xi 18, xii. 10; Phil. iii. 3, 4.


she ought not to set off (her beauty) , but even
to obscure it.'°


CHAP. rV. CONCERNING THE PLEA OF " PLEAS-
ING THE HUSBAND."

As if I were speaking to Gentiles, addressing
you with a Gentile precept, and (one which is)
common to all, (I would say,) "You are bound
to please your husbands only." " But you will
please them in proportion as you take no care
to please others. Be ye without carefulness,'^
blessed (sisters) : no wife is "ugly" to her own
husband. She " pleased " him enough when she
was selected (by him as his wife) ; whether
commended by form or by character. Let none
of you think that, if she abstain from the care
of her person, '3 she will incur the hatred and
aversion of husbands. Every husband is the
exactor oi chastity ; but beatity a believing (hus-
band) does not require, because we are not cap-
tivated by the same graces '■* which the Gentiles
think (to be) graces : '5 an z^«believing one, on
the other hand, even regards with suspicion, just
from that infamous opinion of us which the
Gentiles have. For whom, then, is it that you
cherish your beauty? If for a believer, he does
not exact it : if for an z^;?believer, he does not
believe in it unless it be artiess.'^ Why are you
eager to please either one who is suspicious, or
else one who desires it not?

CHAP. V. SOME REFINEMENTS IN DRESS AND

PERSONAL APPEARANCE LAWFUL, SOME UNLAW-
FUL. PIGMENTS COME UNDER THE LATTER
HEAD.

These suggestions are not made to you, of
course, to be developed into an entire crudity
and wildness of appearance ; nor are we seeking
to persuade you of the good of squalor and
slovenliness ; but of the Umit and norm and just
measure of cultivation of the person. There
must be no overstepping of that line to which
simple and sufficient refinements Hmit their
desires — that line which is pleasing to God.
For they who rub '? their skin with medicaments,
stain their cheeks with rouge, make their eyes
prominent with antimony,'*^ sin against Him. To
them, I suppose, the plastic skill '9 of God is dis-
pleasing ! In their own persons, I suppose, they
convict, they censure, the Artificer of all things !
For censure they do when they amend, when


I" Non adjuvare, sed etiam impedire, d
'■ Comp. I Cor. vii. 34.
'- Comp. I Cor. vii. 32.
'3 Compositione sui.

14 Bonis.

15 Bona.

'fi Simplicem.

17 Urgent. Comp. de Pcen., c. xi.

18 " Fuligine," lit. " soot." Comp. b.

19 See c. ii. ad fin.


Chap. VII.]


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


21


they add to, (His work;) taking these their
adclitions, of course, from the adversary artificer.
That adversary artificer is the devil.' For who
would, show the way to change the body, but he
who by wickedness transfigured man's spirit?
He it is, undoubtedly, who adapted ingenious
devices of this kind ; that in your persons it may
be apparent that you, in a certain sense, do. vio-
lence to God. Whatever is born is the work of
God. Whatever, then, is plastered on^ (that),
is the devil's work. To superinduce on a divine
work Satan's ingenuities, how criminal is it !
Our servants borrow nothing from our personal
enemies : soldiers eagerly desire nothing from
the foes of their own general ; for, to demand
for (your own) use anything from the adversary
of Him in whose hand ^ you are, is a transgres-
sion. Shall a Christian be assisted in anything
by that evil one? (If he do,) I know not
whether this name (of "Christian") will con-
tinue (to belong) to him ; for he will be his in
whose lore he eagerly desires to be instructed.
But how alien from your schoolings ■* and pro-
fessions are (these things) ! How unworthy the
Christian name, to wear a fictitious face, (you,)
on whom simplicity in every form is enjoined !
— to he in your appearance, (you,) to whom
(lying) with the tongue is not lawful ! — to seek
after what is another's, (you,) to whom is de-
livered (the precept of) abstinence from what is
another's ! — to practise adultery in your mien, 5
(you,) who make modesty your study ! Think,''
blessed (sisters), how will you keep God's pre-
cepts if you shall not keep in your own persons
His lineaments?

CHAP. VI. OF DYEING THE HAIR.

I see some (women) turn (the colour of)
their hair with saffron. They are ashamed even
of their own nation, (ashamed) that their pro-
creation did not assign them to Germany and to
Gaul: thus, as it is, they transfer their hair^
(thither) ! Ill, ay, 7nost ill, do they augur for
themselves with their flame-coloured head,^ and
think that graceful which (in fact) they are
polluting ! Nay, moreover, the force of the
cosmetics burns ruin into the hair ; and the
constant application of even any z,?«drugged
moisture, lays up a store of harm for the head ;
while the sun's warmth, too, so desirable for im-
parting to the hair at once growth and dryness,
is hurtful. What " grace " is compatible with


' Comp. b. i. c. viii.

2 Infingitur.

3 i.e., subject to whom.

* Disciplinis.
5 Species.

*> Credite.

"> Jam capillos: so Oehler and Rig. P.iit the others read /•ntriam
capillo : " they change their country by the instrumentality of their
hair."

* Comp. ad Ux., b. i. c. vi.


" injury ? " What " beauty " with " impurities ? "
Shall a Christian woman heap saffron on her
head, as upon an altar? 9 For, whatever is wont
to be burned to the honour of the unclean spirit,
that — unless it is applied for honest, and neces-
sary, and salutary uses, for which God's creature
was provided — may seem to be a sacrifice.
But, however, God saith, "Which of you can
make a white hair black, or out of a black a
white ? " ■" And so they refute the Lord ! " Be-
hold ! " say they, " instead of white or black,
we make \\. yellow, — more winning in grace." "
And yet such as repent of having lived to old
age do attempt to change it even from white to
black ! O temerity ! The age which is the
object of our wishes and prayers blushes (for
itself) ! a theft is effected ! youth, wherein we
have sinned,'^ is sighed after ! the opportunity
of sobriety is spoiled ! Far from Wisdom's
daughters be folly so great ! The more old age
tries to conceal itself, the more will it be de-
tected. Here is a veritable eternity, in the
(perennial) youth of your head ! Here we have
an " incorruptibility " to " put on," '^ ^-Jth a view
to the new house of the Lord "> which the divine
monarchy promises ! Well do you speed to-
ward the Lord ; well do you hasten to be quit
of this most iniquitous world, 's to whom it is un-
sightly to approach (your own) end !

CHAP. VII. OF ELABORATE DRESSING OF THE

HAIR IN OTHER WAYS, AND ITS BEARING UPON
SALVATION.

What service, again, does all the labour spent
in arranging the hair render to salvation ? Why
is no rest allowed to your hair, which must now be
bound, now loosed, now cultivated, now thinned
out? Some are anxious to force their hair into
curls, some to let it hang loose and flying ; not
with good simplicity : beside which, you affix I
know not what enormities of subtle and textile
perukes ; now, after the manner of a helmet of
undressed hide, as it were a sheath for the head
and a covering for the crown ; now, a mass
(drawn) backward toward the neck. The won-
der is, that there is no (open) contending
against the Lord's prescripts ! It has been pro-
nounced that no one can add to his own stature.'^
You, however, do add to your iveight some kind
of rolls, or shield-bosses, to be piled upon your
necks ! If you feel no shame at the enormity,
feel some at the pollution ; for fear you may be
fitting on a holy and Christian head the slough '?


9 Aram.

10 See Matt. V. 36.
" Gratia faciHorem.
'- Comp. Ps. XXV. 7 (in LXX. xxiv. 7).
•3 Comp. I Cor. xv. 53.
'■• Comp. 2 Cor. V. i.
>5 Sa:culo.

'f> Mensiiram. See Matt. vi. 27.
'7 Exuvias.


22


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


[Book II.


of some one else's ' head, unclean perchance,
guilty perchance and destined to hell.^ Nay,
rather banish quite away from your "free''^
head all this slavery of ornamentation. In vain
do you labour to seem adorned : in vain do you
call in the aid of all the most skilful manufac-
turers of false hair. God bids you "be veiled."'*
I believe (He does so) for fear the heads of
some should be seen ! And oh that in " that
day " 5 of Christian exultation, I, most miserable
(as I am), may elevate my head, even though
below (the level of) your heels ! I shall (then)
see whether you will rise with (your) ceruse and
rouge and saffron, and in all that parade of head-
gear : ^ whether it will be women thus tricked
out whom the angels carry up to meet Christ in
the air ! ^ If these (decorations) are now good,
and of God, they will then also present them-
selves to the rising bodies, and will recognise
their several places. But nothing can rise ex-
cept flesh and spirit sole and pure.^ Whatever,
therefore, does not rise in (the form of) 9 spirit
and flesh is condemned, because it is not of
God. From things which are condemned ab-
stain, even at the present day. At the present
day let God see you such as He will see you then.

CHAP. VIII. — MEN NOT EXCLUDED FROM THESE
REMARKS ON PERSONAL ADORNMENT.

Of course, now, I, a man, as being envious '°
of women, am banishing them quite from their
own (domains). Are there, in our case too,
some things which, in respect of the sobriety "
we are to maintain on account of the fear '^ due
to God, are disallowed ? '^ If it is true, (as it
is,) that in men, for the sake of women (just as
in women for the sake of men), there is im-
planted, by a defect of nature, the will to please ;
and if this sex of ours acknowledges to itself
deceptive trickeries of form peculiarly its own,
— (such as) to cut the beard too sharply ; to
pluck it out here and there ; to shave round
about (the mouth) ; to arrange the hair, and
disguise its hoariness by dyes ; to remove all
the incipient down all over the body ; to fix
(each particular hair) in its place with (some)
womanly pigment ; to smooth all the rest of the
body by the aid of some rough powder or other :
then, further, to take every opportunity for con-


• "Alieni:" perhaps here = " alien," i.e., " heathen," as in other
places.

^ Gehennse.

3 Comp. Gal. iv. 31, v, 13.

* See I Cor. xi. 2-16; and comp. de Or.,c. xxii., and the treatise
de Virg. I'el.

5 Comp. ad Ux ., b. ii. c. iii

6 Ambitu {Jiabitu is a conjectural emendation noticed by Oehler)
capitis

7 See I Thess. iv. 13-17.

^ Comp. I Cor. xv. 50 with i Thess. v. 23.

9 Or, " within the limits of the flesh and the spirit."
1° ^mulus;
" Gravitatis.
'- Metus.
'3 Detrahuntur.


suiting the mirror ; to gaze anxiously into it : —
while yet, when (once) the knowledge of God
has put an end to all wish to please by means of
voluptuous attraction, all these things are rejected
as frivolous, as hostile to modesty. For where
God is, there modesty is ; there is sobriety, '■♦ her
assistant and ally. How, then, shall we practise
modesty without her instrumental mean, '5 that is,
without sobriety?'^ How, moreover, shall we
bring sobriety '^ to bear on the discharge of (the
functions of) modesty, unless seriousness in ap-
pearance and in countenance, and in the general
aspect '** of the entire man, mark our carriage ?

CHAP. IX. EXCESS IN DRESS, AS WELL AS IN

PERSONAL CULTURE, TO BE SHUNNED. ARGU-
MENTS DRAWN FROM I COR. VII.

Wherefore, with regard to clothing also, and
all the remaining lumber of your self-elaboration, '^
the like pruning off and retrenchment of too
redundant splendour must be the object of your
care. For what boots it to exhibit in your face
temperance and unaffectedness, and a simplicity
altogether worthy of the divine discipline, but
to invest all the other parts of the body with the
luxurious absurdities of pomps and delicacies?
How intimate is the connection which these
pomps have with the business of voluptuousness,
and how they interfere with modesty, is easily
discernible from the fact that it is by the allied
aid of dress that they prostitute the grace of
personal comeliness : so plain is it that if (the
pomps) be wanting, they render (that grace)
bootless and thankless, as if it were disarmed
and wrecked. On the other hand, if natural
beauty fails, the supporting aid of outward em-
bellishment supplies a grace, as it were, from its
own inherent power.^° Those times of life, in
fact, which are at last blest with quiet and with-
drawn into the harbour of modesty, the splen-
dour and dignity of dress lure away (from that
rest and that harbour), and (-//.yquiet seriousness
by seductions of appetite, which compensate for
the chill of age by the provocative charms of
apparel. First, then, blessed (sisters), (take
heed) that you admit not to your use meretri-
cious and prostitutionary garbs and garments :
and, in the next place, if there are any of you
whom the exigencies of riches, or birth, or past
dignities, compel to appear in public so gor-
geously arrayed as not to appear to have attained
wisdom, take heed to temper an evil of this
kind ; lest, under the pretext of necessity, you
give the rein without stint to the indulgence of


cv. ad_fi7i


I* Gravitas.

'5 Comp. de Pa.

'6 Gravitate.

■7 Gravitatem.

18 Contemplatione.

'9 Impedimenta compositionis.

2° De suo. Comp. de Bapt.,

i. c. V. {med.).


xvii. {sub Jin.), de Cult. Fern.,


Chap. X.]


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


23


licence. For how will you be able to fulfil (the
requirements of) humility, which our (school)
profess,' if you do not keep within bounds^ the I
enjoyment of your riches and elegancies, which
tend so much to "glory?" Now it has ever [
been the wont of glory to exalt, not to humble.
"Why, shall we not use what is our own?"
Who prohibits your using it? Yet (it must be)
in accordance with the apostle, who warns us
" to use this world ^ as if we abuse it not ; for
the fashion ■♦ of this world 5 is passing away."
And " they who buy are so to act as if they pos-
sessed not."^ Why so? Because he had laid
down the premiss, saying, " The time is wound
up." 7 If, then, he shows plainly that even wives
themselves are so to be had as if they be not
had,^ on account of the straits of the times,
what would be his sentiments about these vain
appliances of theirs ? Why, are there not many,
withal, who so do, and seal themselves up to
eunuchhood for the sake of the kingdom of
God,9 spontaneously relinquishing a pleasure so
honourable,'" and (as we know) permitted? Are
there not some who prohibit to themselves (the
use of) the very " creature of God," " abstaining
from wine and animal food, the enjoyments of
which border upon no peril or solicitude ; but
they sacrifice to God the humility of their soul
even in the chastened use of food ? Sufficiently,
therefore, have you, too, used your riches and
your delicacies ; sufficiently have you cut down
the fruits of your dowries, before (receiving) the
knowledge of saving disciplines. We are they
" upon whom the ends of the ages have met,
having ended their course." '^ We have been
predestined by God, before the world '^ was, (to
arise) in the extreme end of the times.'-* And so
we are trained by God for the purpose of chas-
tising, and (so to say) emasculating, the world. '5
We are the circumcision'^ — spiritual and carnal
— of all things ; for both in the spirit and in
the flesh we circumcise worldly '^ principles.


CHAP. X. TERTULLIAN REFERS AGAIN TO THE

QUESTION OF THE ORIGIN OF ALL THESE ORNA-
MENTS AND EMBELLISHMENTS,


:8


It was God, no doubt, who showed the way
to dye wools with the juices of herbs and the


' See c. iii.

2 Repastinantes.

3 Mundo; /cdcrno). See i Cor.
* Habitus; <r;^^/aa, ib.

5 Kdcrn-ov', ih.
' I Cor. vii. 30.
^ I Cor. vii. 2g.
^ I Cor. vii. 2g.
9 Matt. xix. 12.
'0 Fortem.

" Comp. I Tim. iv. 4, 5.
'2 I Cor. X. ;
'3 Mundum.
I* In

IS Saeculo.
I* Comp. Phil. iii. 3.
17 Ssecularia.
*^ Comp. i. cc. ii. iii. v. vii. viii


r 0U5 xa TeAr) luiv aioui
temporal!. See Eph.


4 and I Pet. i.


humours of conchs ! It had escaped Him, when
He was bidding the universe to come into being, '9
to issue a command for (the production of) pur-
ple and scarlet sheep ! It was God, too, who
devised by careful thought the manufactures of
those very garments which, light and thin (in
themselves), were to be heavy in price alone;
God who produced such grand implements of
gold for confining or parting the hair ; God who
introduced (the fashion of) finely-cut wounds for
the ears, and set so high a value upon the tor-
menting of His own work and the tortures of
innocent infancy, learning to suffer with its ear-
liest breath, in order that from those scars of
the body — born for the steel ! — should hang I
know not what (precious) grains, which, as we
may plainly see, the Parthians insert, in place of
studs, upon their very shoes ! And yet even the
gold itself, the " glory " of which carries you
away, serves a certain race (so Gentile literature
tells us) for chains ! So true is it that it is not
intrinsic worth,^° but rarity, which constitutes the
goodness (of these things) : the excessive la-
bour, moreover, of working them with arts intro-
duced by the means of the sinful angels, who
were the revealers withal of the material sub-
stances themselves, joined with their rarity, ex-
cited their costliness, and hence a lust on the
part of women to possess (that) costliness. But,
if the self-same angels who disclosed both the
material substances of this kind and their charms
— of gold, I mean, and lustrous"' stones — and
taught men how to work them, and by and by in-
structed them, among their other (instructions),
in (the virtues of) eyelid-powder and the dye-
ings of fleeces, have been condemned by God,
as Enoch tells us, how shall we please God while
we joy in the things of those (angels) who, on
these accounts, have provoked the anger and the
vengeance of God ?

Now, granting that God did foresee these
things ; that God permitted them ; that Esaias
finds fault with no garment of purple,^^ represses
no coif,^3 reprobates no crescent-shaped neck
ornaments ; ^■^ still let us not, as the Gentiles do,
flatter ourselves with thinking that (]od is merely
a Creator, not likewise a Downlooker on His
own creatures. For how far more usefully and
cautiously shall we act, if we hazard the pre-
sumption that all these things were indeed pro-
vided ^5 at the beginning and placed in the world ^^
by God, in order that there should now be means
of putting to the proof the discipline of His
servants, in order that the licence of using should


'9 Universa nasci.
2° Vcritate.
2' Illiistrium

22 De conchylio.

23 KO<Tvtj.^ov<;. Isa. iii. i8 (in LXX.).

24 Lunulas = n-qviaKOVi, ib.

25 Or, " foreseen."

26 Saeculo.


24


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


[Book II.


be the means whereby the experimental trials of
nui/i/ie;ice should be conducted? Do not wise
heads of families purposely offer and permit some
things to their servants ' in order to try whether
andliow they will use the things thus permitted;
wiietiicr (they will do so) with honesty, or with
moderation? But how far more praiseworthy
(the servant) who abstains entirely; who has a
wholesome fear^ even of his lord's indulgence !
Thus, therefore, the apostle too : " All things,"
says he, "are lawful, but not all are expedient." ^
How much more easily will he fear ■» what is //«-
lawful who has a reverent dreads of what is

CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN WOMEN, FURTHER, HAVE

NOT THE SAME CAUSES FOR APPEARING IN PUB-
LIC, AND HENCE FOR DRESSING IN FINE ARRAY,
AS GENTILES. ON THE CONTRARY, THEIR AP-
PEARANCE SHOULD ALWAYS DISTINGUISH THEM
FROM SUCH.

Moreover, what causes have you for appearing
in public in excessive grandeur, removed as you
are from the occasions which call for such ex-
hibitions ? For you neither make the circuit of
the temples, nor demand (to be present at) pub-
lic shows, nor have any acquaintance with the
holy days of the Gentiles. Now it is for the
sake of all these public gatherings, and of much
seeing and being seen, that all pomps (of dress)
are exhibited before the pubHc eye ; either for
the purpose of transacting the trade of voluptu-
ousness, or else of inflating "glory." Vou, how-
ever, have no cause of appearing in public,
except such as is serious. Either some brother
who is sick is visited, or else the sacrifice is
offered, or else the word of God is dispensed.
Whichever of these you like to name is a busi-
ness of sobriety ^ and sanctity, requiring no ex-
traordinary attire, with (studious) arrangement
and (wanton) negligence.^ And if the require-
ments of Gentile friendships and of kindly offices
call you, why not go forth clad in your own
armour ; (and) all the more, in that (you have to
go) to such as are strangers to the faith? so that
between the handmaids of God and of the devil
there may be a difference ; so that you may be
an example to them, and they may be edified
in you ; so that (as the apostle says) " God may
be magnified in your body." '^ But magnified He
is in the dody through modesty : of course, too,
through attire suitable to modesty. Well, but it
is urged by some, " Let not the Name be blas-


' Or, " slaves."

2 Timuerit.

3 I Cor. X. 23.
* Timebit.

5 Verebitur.

' Gravitatis.

^ Et composito et soluto.

8 See Phil. i. 20.


phemed in us,^ if we make any derogatory change
from our old style and dress." Let us, then, not
abolish our old vices ! let us maintain the same
character, if we must maintain the same appear-
ance (as before) ; and then truly the nations will
not blaspheme ! A grand blasphemy is that by
which it is said, " Ever since she became a Chris-
tian, she walks in poorer garb !" Will you fear
to appear poorer, from the time that you have
been made more wealthy ; a.nd/oi//er,^° from the
time when you have been made more clean ? Is
it according to the decree " of Gentiles, or ac-
cording to the decree of God, that it becomes
Christians to walk?

CHAP. XII. SUCH OUTWARD ADORNMENTS MERE-
TRICIOUS, AND THEREFORE UNSUITABLE TO MOD-
EST WOMEN.

Let US only wish that we may be no cause for
just blasphemy ! But how much more provoca-
tive of blasphemy is it that you, who are called
modesty's priestesses, should appear in public
decked and painted out after the manner of the
/;;?modest? Else, (if you so do,) what inferiority
would the poor unhappy victims of the public
lusts have (beneath you) ? whom, albeit some
laws were (formerly) wont to restrain them from
(the use of) matrimonial and matronly decora-
tions, now, at all events, the daily increasing de-
pravity of the age " has raised so nearly to an
equality with all the most honourable women,
that the difficulty is to distinguish them. And
yet, even the Scriptures suggest (to us the reflec-
tion), that meretricious attractivenesses of form
are invariably conjoined with and appropriate '^ to
bodily prostitution. That powerful state '^ which
presides over 'S the seven mountains and very
many waters, has merited from the Lord the
appellation of a prostitute.'^ But what kind of
garb is the instrumental mean of her comparison
with that appellation? She sits, to be sure,
" in purple, and scarlet, and gold, and precious
stone." How accursed are the things without
(the aid of) which an accursed prostitute could
not have been described ! It was the fact that
Thamar " had painted out and adorned herself "
that led Judah to regard her as a harlot, '7 and
thus, because she was hidden beneath her "veil,"
— the quality of her garb belying her as if she
had been a harlot, — he judged (her to be one),
and addressed and bargained with (her as such).
Whence we gather an additional confirmation of
the lesson, that provision must be made in every


9 Comp. de Idol., c. xiv.

10 Sordidior.

" Or " pleasure: " placitum.

12 Ssculi.

" Debita.

I* Or, "city."

'5 Or, " sits on high above."

'6 Comp. Rev. xvii.

"7 Comp. Gen. xxxviii. 12-30.


Book II.


ON THE APPAREL OF WOMEN.


25


way against all immodest associations ' and sus-
picions. For why is the integrity of a chaste
mind defiled by its neighbour's suspicion ? Why
is a thing from which I am averse hoped for
in me? Why does not my garb pre-announce
my character, to prevent my spirit from being
wounded by shamelessness through (the chan-
nel of) my ears ? Grant that it be lawful to as-
sume the appearance of a modest woman : ^ to
assume that of an ////modest is, at all events, not
lawful.

CHAP. XIII. IT IS NOT ENOUGH THAT GOD KNOW

US TO BE CHASTE : WE MUST SEEM SO BEFORE
MEN. ESPECIALLY IN THESE TIMES OF PERSECU-
TION WE MUST INURE OUR BODIES TO THE
HARDSHIPS WHICH THEY MAY NOT IMPROBABLY
BE CALLED TO SUFFER.

Perhaps some (woman) will say : " To me it
is not necessary to be approved by men ; for I
do not require the testimony of men : ^ God
is the inspector of the heart." "^ (That) we all
know ; provided, however, we remember what
the same (God) has said through the apostle :
" Let your probity appear before men." s For
what purpose, except that malice may have no
access at all to you, or that you may be an ex-
ample and testimony to the evil? Else, what is
(that) : " Let your works shine ? " ^ Why, more-
over, does the Lord call us the light of the
world ; why has He compared us to a city built
upon a mountain ; ^ if we do not shine in (the
midst of) darkness, and stand eminent amid them
who are sunk down? If you hide your lamp
beneath a bushel,^ you must necessarily be left
quite in darkness, and be run against by many.
The things which make us luminaries of the
world are these — our good works. What is
good, moreover, provided it be true and full,
loves not darkness : it joys in being seen,'' and
elcults over the very pointings which are made at
it. To Christian modesty it is not enough to be
so, but to seem so too. For so great ought its


' Congressus.

2 Videri pudicam.

3 Comp. John v. 34: i Cor. iv. j.

4 Comp. I Sam. xvi. 7; Jer. xvii. 10; Luke xvi. 15.
s See Phil. iv. 5, 8; Rom. xii. 17; 2 Cor. viii. 21.

*> See Matt. v. 16; and comp. de Idol , c. xv. ad init.
7 Matt. V. 14.

* Matt. V. 15; Mark iv. 21; Luke viii. 16, xi. 33.
9 See John iii. 21.


plenitude to be, that it may flow out from the
mind to the garb, and burst out from the con-
science to the outward appearance ; so that even
from the outside it may gaze, as it were, upon
its own furniture,'" — (a furniture) such as to be
suited to retain faith as its inmate perpetually.
For such delicacies as tend by their softness and
effeminacy to unman the manliness " of faith are
to be discarded. Otherwise, I know not whether
the wrist that has been wont to be surrounded
with the palmleaf-like bracelet will endure till it
grow into the numb hardness of its own chain !
I know not whether the leg that has rejoiced in
the anklet will suffer itself to be squeezed into
the gyve ! I fear the neck, beset with pearl and
emerald nooses, will give no room to the broad-
sword ! Wherefore, blessed (sisters) , let us medi-
tate on hardships, and we shall not feel them ;
let. us abandon luxuries, and we shall not regret
them. Let us stand ready to endure every vio-
lence, having nothing which we may fear to leave
behind. It is these things which are the bonds
which retard our hope. Let us cast away earthly
ornaments if we desire heavenly. Love not gold ;
in which (one sul)stance) are branded all the sins
of the people of Israel. You ought to hate what
ruined your fathers ; what was adored by them
who were forsaking God.'^ Even then (we find)
gold is food for the fire.'^ But Christians always,
and now more than ever, pass their times not in
gold but in iron : the stoles of martyrdom are
(now) preparing : the angels who are to carry us
are (now) being awaited ! Do you go forth (to
meet them) already arrayed in the cosmetics and
ornaments of prophets and apostles ; drawing
your whiteness from simplicity, your ruddy hue
from modesty ; painting your eyes with bashful-
ness, and your mouth with silence ; implanting
in your ears the words of God ; fitting on your
necks the yoke of Christ. Submit your head to
your husbands, and you will be enough adorned.
Busy your hands with spinning ; keep your feet
at home ; and you will " please " better than (by
arraying yourselves) in gold. Clothe yourselves
with the silk of uprightness, the fine linen of
holiness, the purple of modesty. Thus painted,
you will have God as your Lover !


•° Supellecti|em.
" Efieminari virt
'' Comp. Ex. xx>
'•3 Ex. xxxii. 20.


26 ELUCIDATION.


ELUCIDATION.

(The Prophecy of Enoch, p. 15.)

Dr. Davidson is the author of a useful article on " Apocalyptic Literature," from which we
extract all that is requisite to inform the reader of \\\t freshest opinion as seen from his well-known
point of view. He notes Archbishop Lawrence's translation into English, and that it has been
rendered back again into German by Dillman (1853), as before, less accurately, by Hoffmann.
Ewald, Liicke, Koestlin, and Hilgenfeld are referred to, and an article of his own in Kitto's
Cyclopadia. We owe its re-appearance, after long neglect, to Archbishop Lawrence (1838), and
its preservation to the Abyssinians. It was rescued by Bruce, the explorer, in an ^thiopic
version ; and the first detailed announcement of its discovery was made by De Sacy, 1800. David-
son ascribes its authorship to pre-Messianic times, but thinks it has been interpolated by a Jewish
Christian. Tertullian's negative testimony points the other way : he evidently relies upon its
" Christology " as genuine ; and, if interpolated in his day, he could hardly have been deceived.

Its five parts are : I. The rape of women by fallen angels, and the giants that were begotten
of them. The visions of Enoch begun. II. The visions continued, with views of the Messiah's
kingdom. III. The physical and astronomical mysteries treated of. IV. Man's mystery re-
vealed in dreams from the beginning to the end of the Messianic kingdom. V. The warnings of
Enoch to his own family and to mankind, with appendices, which complete the book. The
article in Smith's Dictionary of the Bible is accessible, and need only be referred to as well
worth perusal ; and, as it abounds in references to the entire literature of criticism respecting it,
it is truly valuable. It seems to have been written by Westcott.'

The fact that St. Jude refers to Enoch's prophesyings no more proves that this book is other
than apocryphal than St. Paul's reference to Jannes and Jambres makes Scripture of the Targum.
The apostle Jude does, indeed, authenticate that particular saying by inspiration of God, and
doubtless it was traditional among the Jews. St. Jerome's references to this quotation may be
found textually in Lardner.^ Although the book is referred to frequently in the Patrohgia, Ter-
tuUian only, of the Fathers, pays it the respect due to Scripture.

' See also Pusey's reply to Dr. Farrar. ^ Credibility, etc., iv. pp. 460-462.


III.


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.'


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]


CHAP. I. — TRUTH RATHER TO BE APPEALED TO
THAN CUSTOM, AND TRUTH PROGRESSIVE IN ITS
DEVELOPMENTS.

Having already undergone the trouble peculiar
to my opinion, I will show in Latin also that it
behoves our virgins to be veiled from the time
that they have passed the turning-point of their
age : that this observance is exacted by truth, on
which no one can impose prescription — no
space of times, no influence of persons, no privi-
lege of regions. For these, for the most part,
are the sources whence, from some ignorance or
simplicity, custom finds its beginning ; and then
it is successionally confirmed into an usage, and
thus is maintained in opposition to truth. But
our Lord Christ has surnamed Himself Truth,-
not Custom. If Christ is always, and prior
to all, equally truth is a thing sempiternal and
ancient. Let those therefore look to themselves,
to whom that is new which is intrinsically old.
It is not so much novelty as truth which convicts
heresies. Whatever savours of opposition to
truth, this will be heresy, even (if it be an) an-
cient custom. On the other hand, if any is ig-
norant of anything, the ignorance proceeds from
his own defect. Moreover, whatever is matter
of ignorance ought to have been as carefully
inquired into as whatever is matter of acknowl-
edgment received. The rule of faith, indeed, is
altogether one, alone immoveable and irreform-
able ; the rule, to wit, of believing in one only
God omnipotent, the Creator of the universe,
and His Son Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin
IVLary, crucified under Pontius Pilate, raised again
the third day from the dead, received in the
heavens, sitting now at the right (hand) of the
Father, destined to come to judge quick and
dead through the resurrection of the flesh as


well (as of the spirit). This law of faith being
constant, the other succeeding points of disci-
pline and conversation admit the " novelty " of
correction ; the grace of God, to wit, operating
and advancing even to the end. For what kind
of (supposition) is it, that, while the devil is
always operating and adding daily to the inge-
nuities of iniquity, the work of God should
either have ceased, or else have desisted from
advancing? whereas the reason why the Lord
sent the Paraclete was, that, since human medi-
ocrity was unable to take in all things at .once,
discipline should, little by little, be directed, and
ordained, and carried on to perfection, by that
Vicar of the Lord, the Holy Spirit. " Still," He
said, " I have many things to say to you, but ye
are not yet able to bear them : when that Spirit
of truth shall have come, He will conduct you
into all truth, and will report to you the super-
vening (things)." 3 But above, withal. He made
a declaration concerning this His work.-* What,
then, is the Paraclete's administrative ofifice but
this : the direction of discipline, the revelation of
the Scriptures, the re-formation of the intellect,
the advancement toward the "better things? "5
Nothing is without stages of growth : all things
await their season. In short, the preacher says,
"A time to everything."^ Look how creation
itself advances little by little to fructification.
First comes the grain, and from the grain arises
the shoot, and from the shoot struggles out the
shrub : thereafter boughs and leaves gather
strength, and the whole that we call a tree ex-
pands : then follows the swelling of the germen,
and from the germen bursts the flower, and
from the flower the fruit opens : that fruit itself,
rude for a while, and unshapely, little by little,


' f Written, possibly, as early as a.d. 204.
^ John xiv. 6.


3 John xvi. 12, 13. See de Motiog.,
* See John xiv. 26.

5 Comp. Heb. xi. 40, xii. 24.

6 Eccles. iii. i, briefly.


28


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


keeping the straight course of its development,
is trained to the mellowness of its flavour." So,
too, righteousness — for the God of righteousness
and of creation is the same — was first in a ru-
dimentary state, having a natural fear of God :
from that stage it advanced, through the Law
and the Prophets, to infancy ; from that stage it
passed, through the Gospel, to the fervour of
youth : now, through the Paraclete, it is settling
into maturity. He will be, after Christ, the only
one to be called and revered as Master ; ^ for He
speaks not from Himself, but what is commanded
by Christ.3 He is the only prelate, because He
alone succeeds Christ. They who have received
Him set truth before custom. They who have
heard Him prophesying even to the present
time, not of old, bid virgins be wholly covered.

CHAP. II. BEFORE PROCEEDING FARTHER, LET

THE QUESTION OF CUSTOM ITSELF BE SIFTED.

But I will not, meantime, attribute this usage
to Truth. Be it, for a while, custom : that to
custom I may likewise oppose custom.

Throughout Greece, and certain of its barbaric
provinces, the majority of Churches keep their
virgins covered. There are places, too, beneath
this (African) sky, where this practice obtains ;
lest any ascribe the custom to Greek or barba-
rian Gentilehood. But I have proposed (as
models) those Churches which were founded by
apostles or apostolic men ; and antecedently, I
think, to certain (founders, who shall be name-
less). Those Churches therefore, as well (as
others), have the self-same authority of custom
(to appeal to) ; in opposing phalanx they range
" times " and " teachers," more than these later
(Churches do). What shall we observe ? What
shall we choose? We cannot contemptuously
reject a custom which we cannot condemn, in-
asmuch as it is not " strange," since it is not
among " strangers " that we find it, but among
those, to wit, with whom we share the law of
peace and the name of brotherhood. They and
we have one faith, one God, the same Christ, the
same hope, the same baptismal sacraments ; let
me say it once for all, we are one Church.^
Thus, whatever belongs to our brethren is ours :
only, the body divides us.

Still, here (as generally happens in all cases
of various practice, of doubt, and of uncertain-
ty), examination ought to have been made to
see which of two so diverse customs were the
more compatible with the discipline of God.
And, of course, that ought to have been chosen
which keeps virgins veiled, as being known to
God alone ; who (besides that glory must be


I Comp. Mark iv. 28.
- Comp. Matt. x.\iii. 8.
3 John xvi. 13.
* Comp. Eph. iv. 1-6.


sought from God, not from men 5) ought to
blush even at their own privilege. You put a
virgin to the blush more by praising than by
blaming her ; because the front of sin is more
hard, learning shamelessness from and in the sin
itself. For that custom which belies virgins
while it exhibits them, would never have been
approved by any except by some men who must
have been similar in character to the virgins
themselves. Such eyes will wish that a virgin be
seen as has the virgin who shall wish to be seen.
The same kinds of eyes reciprocally crave after
each other. Seeing and being seen belong to
the self-same lust. To blush if he see a virgin
is as much a mark of a chaste^ man, as of a
chaste ? virgin if seen by a man.

CHAP. III. GRADUAL DEVELOPMENT OF CUSTOM,

AND ITS RESULTS. PASSIONATE APPEAL TO
TRUTH.

But not even between customs have those
most chaste ^ teachers chosen to examine. Still,
until very recently, among tis, either custom was,
with comparative indifference, admitted to com-
munion. The matter had been left to choice,
for each virgin to veil herself or expose herself,
as she might have chosen, just as (she had equal
liberty) as to marrying, which itself withal is
neither enforced nor prohibited. Truth had
been content to make an agreement with cus-
tom, in order that under the name of custom it
might enjoy itself even partially. But when the
power of discerning began to advance, so that
the licence granted to either fashion was becom-
ing the mean whereby the indication of the
better part emerged ; immediately the great ad-
versary of good things — and much more of
good institutions — set to his own work. The
virgins of men go about, in opposition to the
virgins of God, with front quite bare, excited to
a rash audacity ; and the semblance of virgins
is exhibited by women who have the power of
asking somewhat from husbands,^ not to say
such a request as that (forsooth) their rivals —
all the more " free " in that they are the " hand-
maids " of Christ alone '° — may be surrendered
to them. " We are scandalized," they say, " be-
cause others walk otherwise (than we do) ; "
and they prefer being " scandalized " to being
provoked (to modesty). A " scandal," if I mis-
take not, is an example not of a good thing, but
of a bad, tending to sinful edification. Good
things scandalize none but an evil mind. If
modesty, if bashfulness, if contempt of glory,
anxious to please God alone, are good things,


5 Comp. John v. 44 and xii. 43.
^ Sancti.
^ Sanctae.

8 Sanctissimi.

9 The allusion is perhaps to i Cor.
'° Comp. I Cor. vii. 21, 22.


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


29


let women who are " scandalized " by such good
learn to acknowledge their own evil. For what
if the incontinent withal say they are " scan-
dalized " by the continent? Is continence to
be recalled ? And, for fear the multinubists be
"scandalized," is monogamy to be rejected?
Why may not these latter rather complain that j
the petulance, the impudence, of ostentatious
virginity is a " scandal " to tliem ? Are there-
fore chaste virgins to be, for the sake of these
marketable creatures, dragged into the church,
blushing at being recognised in public, quaking
at being unveiled, as if they had been invited as
it were to rape ? For they are no less unwilling
to suffer even this. Every public exposure of
an honourable virgin is (to her) a suffering of
rape : and yet the suffering of carnal violence is
the less (evil), because it comes of natural office.
But when the very spirit itself is violated in a
virgin by the abstraction of her covering, she has
learnt to lose what she used to keep. O sacri-
legious hands, which have had the hardihood to I
drag off a dress dedicated to God ! What worse
could any persecutor have done, if he had known
that this (garb) had been chosen by a virgin?
You have denuded a maiden in regard of her
head, and forthwith she wholly ceases to be a
virgin to herself; she has undergone a change !
Arise, therefore, Truth ; arise, and as it were
burst forth from Thy patience ! No custom do
I wish Thee to defend ; for by this time even
that custom under which Thou didst enjoy thy
own liberty is being stormed ! Demonstrate
that it is Thyself who art the coverer of virgins.
Interpret in person Thine own Scriptures, which !
Custom understandeth not ; for, if she had, she !
never would have had an existence.

CHAP. IV. OF THE ARGUMENT DRAWN FROM I

COR. XI. 5-16.

But in so far as it is the custom to argue even
from the Scriptures in opposition to truth, there
is immediately urged against us the fact that
" no mention of virgins is made by the apostle
where he is prescribing about the veil, but that
' women ' only are named ; whereas, if he had
willed virgins as well to be covered, he would
have pronounced concerning ' virgins ' also to-
gether with the 'women' named; just as," says
(our opponent), "in that passage where he is
treating of marriage,' he declares likewise with
regard to ' virgins ' what observance is to be fol-
lowed." And accordingly (it is urged) that
" they are not comprised in the law of veiling
the head, as not being named in this law ; nay
rather, that this is the origin of their being un-
veiled, inasmuch as they who are not named are
not bidden P


But we withal retort the self-same line of argu-
ment. For he who knew elsewhere how to make
mention of each sex — of virgin I mean, and
woman, that is, not-virgin — for distinction's
sake ; in these (passages), in which he does not
name a virgin, points out (by not making the
distinction) community of condition. Other-
wise he could here also have marked the dif-
ference between virgin and woman, just as
elsewhere he says, " Divided is the woman and
the virgin."" ^ Therefore those whom, by passing
them over in silence, he has not divided, he has
included in the other species.

Nor yet, because in that case " divided is both
woman and virgin,'' will this division exert its
patronizing influence in the present case as well,
as some will have it. For how many sayings,
uttered on another occasion, have no weight —
in cases, to wit, where they are not uttered —
unless the subject-matter be the same as on the
other occasion, so that the one utterance may
suffice ! But the former case of virgin and
woman is widely " divided " from the present
question. " Divided," he says, " is the ivoman
and the virgin.'' Why? Inasmuch as "the
unmarried," that is, the virgi7i, " is anxious about
those (things) which are the Lord's, that she
may be holy both in body and in spirit ; but
the married," that is, the not-virgin, "is anxious
how she may please her husband." This will be
the interpretation of that " division," having no
place in this passage (now under consideration) ;
in which pronouncement is made neither about
marriage, nor about the mind and the thought
of woman and of virgin, but about the veiling of
the head. Of which (veiling) the Holy Spirit,
willing that there should be no distinction, willed
that by the one name of woman should likewise
be understood the virgin; whom, by not spe-
cially naming. He has not separated from the
woman, and, by not separating, has conjoined to
her from whom He has not separated her.

Is it now, then, a "novelty" to use the primary
word, and nevertheless to have the other (subor-
dinate divisions) understood in that word, in
cases where there is no necessity for individually
distinguishing the (various parts of the) universal
whole? Naturally, a compendious style of
speech is both pleasing and necessary ; inas-
much as diffuse speech is both tiresome and
vain. So, too, we are content with general
words, which comprehend in themselves the
understanding of the specialties. Proceed we,
then, to the word itself. The word (expressing
the) natural (distinction) is female. Of the
natural word, the general word is woman. Of
the general, again, the special is virgin, or roife,
or widow, or whatever other names, even of the


2 I Cor. vii. 34.


30


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


successive stages of life, are added hereto. Sub-
ject, therefore, the special is to the general (be-
cause the general is prior) ; and the succedent to
the antecedent, and \\-\<t partial \.o the universal:
(each) is imi)Hed in the word itself to which it is
subject ; and is signified in it, because contained
in it. Thus neither hand, nor foot, nor any one
of the members, requires to be signified when
the body is named. And if you say the universe,
therein will be both the heaven and the things
that are in it, — sun and moon, and constella-
tions and stars, — and the earth and the seas,
and everything that goes to make up the list of
elements. You will have named all, when you
have named that which is made up of all. So,
too, by naming woman, he has named whatever
is woman'' s.

CHAP. V. OF THE WORD WOMAN, ESPECIALLY IN

CONNECTION WITH ITS APPLICATION TO EVE.

But since they use the name of woman in
such a way as to think it inapplicable save to
her alone who has known a man, the pertinence
of the propriety of this word to the sex itself,
not to a grade of the sex, must be proved by
us ; that virgins as well (as others) may be com-
monly comprised in it.

When this kind of second human being was
made by God for man's assistance, that female
was forthwith named woman; still happy, still
worthy of paradise, still virgin. " She shall be
called," said (Adam), " Woman." And accord-
ingly you have the name, — I say, not already
common to a virgin, but — proper (to her ; a
name) which from the beginning was allotted to
a virgin. But some ingeniously will have it that
it was said of the future, " She s/iall be called
woman, ^^ as if she were destined to be so when
she had resigned her virginity ; since he added
withal : " For this cause shall a man leave father
and mother, and be conglutinated to his own
woman ; and the two shall be one flesh." Let
them therefore among whom that subtlety ob-
tains show us first, if she were surnamed woman
with a future reference, what name she mean-
time received. For without a name expressive
of her present quality she cannot have been.
But what kind of (hypothesis) is it that one who,
with an eye to the future, was called by a definite
name, at the present time should have nothing
for a surname ? On all animals Adam imposed
names ; and on none on the ground of future
condition, but on the ground of the present
purpose which each particular nature served ; '
called (as each nature was) by that to which
from the beginning it showed a propensity.
What, then, was she at that time called ? Why,
as often as she is named in the Scripture, she


has the appellation woman before she was wed-
ded, and never virgin while she was a virgin.

This name was at that time the only one she
had, and (that) when nothing was (as yet) said
prophetically. For when the Scripture records
that " the two were naked, Adam and his wo-
man,'' neither does this savour of the future, as if
it said ".his wotnan" as a presage of "wife ;" but
because his woman"" was withal unwedded, as
being (formed) from his own substance. " This
bone," he says, " out of my bones, and flesh out
of my flesh, shall be called woman.'' Hence,
then, it is from the tacit consciousness of nature
that the actual divinity of the soul has educed into
the ordinary usage of common speech, unawares
to men, (just as // has thus educed many other
things too which we shall elsewhere be able to
show to derive from the Scriptures the origin of
their doing and saying,) our fashion of calling our
wives our women, however improperly withal we
may in some instances speak. For the Greeks,
too, who use the name of woman more (than
we do) in the sense of wife, have other names
appropriate to wife. But I prefer to assign this
usage as a testimony to Scripture. For when
two are made into one flesh through the mar-
riage-tie, the " flesh of flesh and bone of bones "
is called the woman of him of whose substance
she begins to be accounted by being made his
wife. Thus woman is not by nature a name of
wife, but wife by condition is a name of woman.
In fine, woman\iOo^ is predicable apart from
wife\\oo^ ; but tuife\\ood apart from womanhood.
is not, because it cannot even exist. Having
therefore settled the name of the newly-made
female — which (name) is woman — and having
explained what she formerly was, that is, having
sealed the name to her, he immediately turned
to the prophetic reason, so as to say, " On this
account shall a man leave father and mother."
The name is so truly separate from the prophecy,
as far as (the prophecy) from the individual
person herself, that of course it is not with
reference to Eve herself that (Adam) has uttered
(the prophecy), but with a view to those future
females whom he has named in the maternal
fount of the feminine race. Besides, Adam was
not to leave "father and mother" — whom he
had not — for the sake of Eve. Therefore that
which was prophetically said does not apply to
Eve, because it does not to Adam either. For
it was predicted with regard to the condition of
husbands, who were destined to leave their
parents for a woman's sake ; which could not
chance to Eve, because it could not to Adam
either.

If the case is so, it is apparent that she was
not surnamed woman on account of a future


Mulier, throughout.


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


31


(circumstance), to whom (that) future (circum-
stance) did not apply.

To this is added, that (Adam) himself pub-
lished the reason of the name. For, after say-
ing, "She shall be called woman,'^ he said,
" inasmuch as she hath been taken out of man "
— the man himself withal being still a virgin.
But we will speak, too, about the name of man '
in its own place. Accordingly, let none inter-
pret with a prophetic reference a name which
was deduced from another signification ; espe-
cially since it is apparent when she did receive a
name founded upon a future (circumstance) —
there, namely, where she is surnamed " Eve,"
with a personal name now, because the natural
one had gone before.^ For if " Eve " means
"the mother of the living," behold, she is sur-
named from a future (circumstance) ! behold,
she is pre-announced to be a wife, and not a
virgin .' This will be the name of one who is
about to wed ; for of the bride (comes) the
mother.

Thus in this case too it is shown, that it was
not from a future (circumstance) that she was at
that time named woman, who was shortly after
to receive the name which would be proper to
her future condition.

Sufficient answer has been made to this part
(of the question).

CHAP. VI. — THE PARALLEL CASE OF MARY CON-
SIDERED.

Let US now see whether the apostle withal
observes the norm of this name in accordance
with Genesis, attributing it to the sex; calling
the virgin Mary a. woman, just as Genesis (does)
Eve. For, writing to the Galatians, " God," he
says, " sent His own Son, made of a woman,^'' 3
who, of course, is admitted to have been a virgin,
albeit Hebion'* resist (that doctrine). I recog-
nise, too, the angel Gabriel as having been sent
to " a virgin''' 5 But when he is blessing her, it
is " among taomen,''' not among virgins, that he
ranks her : " Blessed (be) thou among women.''
The angel withal knew that even a virgin is called
a woman.

But to these two (arguments), again, there is
one who appears to himself to have made an
ingenious answer ; (to the effect that) inasmuch
as Mary was "betrothed," therefore it is that
both by angel and apostle she is pronounced a
woman; for a "betrothed" is in some sense a
" bride." Still, between " in some sense " and
"truth" there is difference enough, at all events
in the present place : for elsewhere, we grant,
we must thus hold. Now, however, it is not as

' Viri : so throughout.

2 See Gen. iii. 20.

3 Gal. iv. 4.

* [i.e., Ebion, founder of the Ebionites.]

* Luke i. 26, 27.


being already wedded that they have pronounced
Mary a woman, but as being none the less a
fonale even if she had not been espoused ; as
having been called by this (name) from the be-
ginning : for that must necessarily have a pre-
judicating force from which the normal type has
descended. Else, as far as relates to the present
passage, if Mary is here put on a level with a
" betrothed," so that she is called a woman not
on the ground of being a female, but on the
ground of being assigned to a husband, it imme-
diately follows that Christ was not born of a
virgin, because (born) of one "betrothed," who
by this fact will have ceased to be a virgin.
Whereas, if He was born of a virgin — albeit
withal "betrothed," yet intact — acknowledge
that even a virgin, even an intact one, is called
a woman. Here, at all events, there can be no
semblance of speaking prophetically, as if the
apostle should have named 2. future woman, that
is, bride, in saying " made of a wotnan." For
he could not be naming a posterior woman, from
whom Christ had not to be born — that is, one
who had known a man ; but she who was then
present, who was a virgin, was withal called a
woman in consequence of the propriety of this
name, — vindicated, in accordance with the pri-
mordial norm, (as belonging) to a virgin, and
thus to the universal class of women.

CHAP. VII. — OF THE REASONS ASSIGNED BY THE
APOSTLE FOR BIDDING WOMEN TO BE VEILED.

Turn we next to the examination of the rea-
sons themselves which lead the apostle to teach
that the female ought to be veiled, (to see)
whether the self-same (reasons) apply to virgins
likewise; so that hence also the community of
the name between virgins and not-virgins may
be established, while the self-same causes which
necessitate the veil are found to exist in each
case.

If " the man is head of the woman," ^ of
course (he is) of the virgin too, from whom
comes the woman who has married ; unless the
virgin is a third generic class, some monstrosity
with a head of its own. If " it is shameful for a
taoman to be shaven or shorn," of course it is
so for a virgin. (Hence let the world, the rival
of God, see to it, if it asserts that close-cut hair
is graceful to a virgin in like manner as that
flowing hair is to a boy.) To her, then, to whom
it is equally ^///becoming to be shaven or shorn,
it is equally becoming to be covered. If " the
zuoman is the glory of the man," how much
more the virgin, who is a glory withal to her-
self! If "the woman is of the man," and "for
the sake of the man," that rib of Adam 7 was
first a virgin. If " the woman ought to have


6 I Cor. xi 3 sqq.

7 Gen. ii. 23.


32


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


power upon the head," ' all the more justly ought
the virgin, to whom pertains the essence of the
cause (assigned for this assertion). For if (it is)
on account of the angels — those, to wit, whom
we read of as having fallen from God and heaven
on account of concupiscence after females —
who can presume that it was bodies already de-
filed, and relics of human lust, which such angels
yearned after, so as not rather to have been in-
flamed for virgins, whose bloom pleads an excuse
for human lust likewise ? For thus does Scrip-
ture withal suggest : " And it came to pass," it
says, " when men had begun to grow more numer-
ous upon the earth, there were withal daughters
born them ; but the sons of God, having descried
the daughters of men, that they were fair, took
to themselves wives of all whom they elected."^
For here the Greek name of women does seem
to have the sense "wives,''' inasmuch as mention
is made of marriage. When, then, it says " the
daughters of men," it manifestly purports virgins,
who would be still reckoned as belonging to their
parents — for wedded tvomen are called their
husbands' — whereas it could have said " the
wives of men : " in like manner not naming the
angels adulterers, but husbands, while they take
unwedded " daughters of men," who it has above
said were "born," thus also signifying iheix vir-
ginity : first, " born ; " but here, wedded to angels.
Anything else I know not that they were except
" born " and subsequently wedded. So perilous
a face, then, ought to be shaded, which has cast
stumbling-stones even so far as heaven : that,
when standing in the presence of God, at whose
bar it stands accused of the driving of the angels
from their (native) confines, it may blush before
the other angels as well ; and may repress that
former evil liberty of its head, — (a liberty) now
to be exhibited not even before human eyes.
But even if they were females already contami-
nated whom those angels had desired, so much
the more " on account of the angels " would it
have been the duty of virgins to be veiled, as it
would have been the more possible for virgins to
have been the cause of the angels' sinning. If,
moreover, the apostle further adds the prejudg-
ment of "nature," that redundancy of locks is
an honour to a woman, because hair serves for a
covering,^ of course it is most of all to a viigin
that this is a distinction ; for their very adorn-
ment properiy consists in this, that, by being
massed together upon the crown, it wholly covers
the very citadel of the head with an encirclement
of hair.

CHAP. VIII. — THE ARGUMENT E CONTRARIO.

The contraries, at all events, of all these (con-
siderations) effect that a man is not to cover his


• I Cor. xi. 10.

2 Gen. vi I, 2.

3 I Cor. xi. 14, 15.


head : to wit, because he has not by nature been
gifted with excess of hair ; because to be shaven
or shorn is not shameful to him ; because it was
not on his account that the angels transgressed ;
because his Head is Christ. '^ Accordingly, since
the apostle is treating of jnan and 7i'oma?i —
why the latter ought to be veiled, but the former
not — it is apparent why he has been silent as
to the virgin ; allowing, to wit, the vijgin to be
understood in the womafi by the self-same reason
by which he forbore to name the boy as implied
in the 7nan ; embracing the whole order of
either sex in the names proper (to each) of
woman and tnan. So likewise Adam, while still
intact, is surnamed in Genesis man : 5 " She
shall be called," says he, "woman, because she
hath been taken from her own fnan.''^ Thus
was Adam a man before nuptial intercourse, in
like manner as Eve a woman. On either side
the aposde has made his sentence apply with
sufficient plainness to the universal species of
each sex ; and briefly and fully, with so well-
appointed a definition, he says, "Every woman'''
What is " every," but of every class, of every
order, of every condition, of every dignity, of
every age? — if, (as is the case), "every" means
total and entire, and in none of its parts defec-
tive. But the virgin is withal a part of the
woman. Equally, too, with regard to not veil-
ing the man, he says " every." Behold two
diverse names, Man and Woman — "every one "
in each case : two laws, mutually distinctive ; on
the one hand (a law) of veiling, on the other (a
law) of baring. Therefore, if the fact that it is
said " every 77ian " makes it plain that the name
of man is common even to him who is not yet a
man, a stripling male ; (if), moreover, since the
name is common according to nature, the law
of not veiling him who among men is a virgin is
common too according to discipline : why is it
that it is not consequently prejudged that, woman
being named, every wo}nan-vitgi7t is similarly
comprised in the fellowship of the najne, so as
to be comprised too in the community of the
/aw ? If a virgiji is not a woman, neither is a
stripling a jnan. If the virgin is not covered on
the plea that she is not a woman, let the strip-
ling be covered on the plea that he is not a
man. Let identity of virginity share equality of
indulgence. As virgins are not compelled to be
veiled, so let boys not be bidden to be ?/?;veiled.
Why do we partly acknowledge the definition of
the apostle, as absolute with regard to " every
man," without entering upon disquisitions as to
why he has not withal named the boy; but partly
prevaricate, though it is equally absolute with
regard to "every tvoman?'''' "If any," he says,
" is contentious, we have not such a custom, nor


■* I Cor. xi. J.
S See Gen. ii. 23.


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


33


(has) the Church of God." ' He shows that
there had been some contention about this
point ; for the extinction whereof he uses the
whole compendiousness (of language) : not
naming the virgin, on the one hand, in order to
show that there is to be no doubt about her veil-
ing; and, on the other hand, naming "every
"woman," whereas he would have named the
z'/rgin (had the question been confined to her).
So, too, did the Corinthians themselves under-
stand him. In fact, at this day the Corinthians
do veil their virgins. What the apostles tauglit,
their disciples approve.

CHAP. IX. VEILING CONSISTENT WITH THE OTHER

RULES OF DISCIPLINE OBSERVED BY VIRGINS
AND WOMEN IN GENERAL.

Let US now see whether, as we have shown
the arguments drawn from nature and the matter
itself to be applicable to the virgin as well (as
to other females), so likewise the precepts of
ecclesiastical discipline concerning women have
an eye to the virgin.

It is not permitted to a woman to speak in
the church;^ but neither (is it permitted her)
to teach, nor to baptize, nor to offer, nor to
claim to herself a lot in any manly function, not
to say (in any) sacerdotal office. Let us inquire
whether any of these be lawful to a virgin. If
it is not lawful to a virgin, but she is subjected
on the self-same terms (as the woman), and the
necessity for humility is assigned her together
with the li'oman, whence will this one thing be
lawful to her which is not lawful to any and
ev&ry female ? If any is a virgin, and has pro-
posed to sanctify her flesh, what prerogative
does she (thereby) earn adverse to her own
condition ? Is the reason why it is granted her
to dispense with the veil, that she may be nota-
ble and marked as she enters the church? that
she inay display the honour of sanctity in the
liberty of her head? More worthy distinction
could have been conferred on her by according
her some prerogative of manly rank or office !
I know plainly, that in a certain place a virgin
of less than twenty years of age has been placed
in the order of widows .' whereas if the bishop
had been bound to accord her any relief, he
might, of course, have done it in some other
way without detriment to the respect due to
discipline ; that such a miracle, not to say mon-
ster, should not be pointed at in the church, a
virgin-widoiu ! the more portentous indeed, that
not even as a widow did she veil her head ;
denying herself either way ; both as virgin, in
that she is counted a widow, and as widow, in
that she is styled a virgin. But the authority


which licenses her sitting in that seat uncovered
tvi the same which allows her to sit there as a
virgin : a seat to which (besides the " sixty
years "3) not merely "single-husbanded "(wo-
men) — that is, married women — are at length
elected, but " mothers " to boot, yes, and " edu-
cators of children ; " in order, forsooth, that
their experimental training in all the affections
may, on the one hand, have rendered them
capable of readily aiding all others with counsel
and comfort, and that, on the other, they may
none the less have travelled down the whole
course of probation whereby a female can be
tested. So true is it, that, on the ground of her
position, nothing in the way of public honour is
permitted to a virgin.

CHAP. X. IF THE FEMALE VIRGINS ARE TO BE

THUS CONSPICUOUS, WHY NOT THE MALE AS
WELL ?

Nor, similarly, (is it permitted) on the ground
of any distinctions whatever. Otherwise, it were
sufficiently discourteous, that while females, sub-
jected as they are throughout to men, bear in
their front an honourable mark of their virginity,

! whereby they may be looked up to and gazed at
on all sides and magnified by the brethren, so
many men-virgins, so many voluntary eunuchs,
should carry their glory in secret, carrying no
token to make them, too, illustrious. For they,
too, will be bound to claim some distinctions for
themselves — either the feathers of the Gara-
mantes, or else the fillets of the barbarians, of
else the cicadas of the Athenians, or else the
curls of the Germans, or else the tattoo-marks
of the Britons ; or else let the opposite course
be taken, and let them lurk in the churches with
head veiled. Sure we are that the Holy Spirit
could rather have made some such concession to
males, if He had made it to females ; forasmuch
as, besides the authority of sex, it would have
been more becoming that 7nales should have
been honoured on the ground of continency it-
self likewise. The more their sex is eager and

I warm toward females, so much the more toil
does the continence of (this) greater ardour in-
volve ; and therefore the worthier is it of all
ostentation, if ostentation of virginity is dignity.
For is not continence withal superior to virginity,
whether it be the continence of the widowed,
or of those who, by consent, have already re-
nounced the common disgrace (which matri-
mony involves) ? ■* For constancy of virginity is
maintained by grace ; of continence, by virtue.
For great is the struggle to overcome concupis-
cence when you have become accustomed to
such concupiscence ; whereas a concupiscence


■ I Cor. xi. i6.

^ I Cor XIV. 34, 35; I Tim. ii.


3 I Tim. V. 9.

* See I Cor. vii. 5. Comp. ad U.


.; dc Ex. Cast., a.


34


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


the enjoyment whereof you have never known
you will subdue easily, not having an adversary
(in the shape of) the concupiscence of enjoy-
ment.' How, then, would God have failed to
make any such concession to men more (than
to ivomen), whether on the ground of nearer in-
timacy, as being " His own image," or on the
ground of harder toil? But if nothing (has
been thus conceded) to the 7nale, much more
to the female.

CHAP. XI. THE RULE OF VEILING NOT APPLICA-
BLE TO CHILDREN.

But what we intermitted above for the sake of
the subsequent discussion — not to dissipate its
coherence — we will now discharge by an an-
swer. For when we joined issue about the apos-
tle's absolute definition, that " every woman "
must be understood (as meaning woman) of
even every age, it might be replied by the oppo-
site side, that in that case it behoved the virgin
to be veiled from her nativity, and from the first
entry of her age (upon the roll of time).

But it is not so ; but from the time when she
begins to be self-conscious, and to awake to the
sense of her own nature, and to emerge from
the virgin's (sense), and to experience that novel
(sensation) which belongs to the succeeding age.
For withal the founders of the race, Adam and
Eve, so long as they were without intelligence,
went " naked ; " but after they tasted of " the
tree of recognition," they were first sensible of
nothing more than of their cause for shame.
Thus they each marked their intelligence of
their own sex by a covering.- But even if it is
"on account of the angels" that she is to be
veiled,^ doubtless the age from which the law
of the veil will come into operation will be that
from which "the daughters of men" were able
to invite concupiscence of their persons, and to
experience marriage. For a virgin ceases to be
a virgin from the time that it becomes possible
for her not to be one. And accordingly, among
Israel, it is unlawful to deliver one to a husband
except after the attestation by blood of her ma-
turity \ ■* thus, before this indication, the nature*
is unripe. Therefore if she is a virgin so long
as she is unripe, she ceases to be a virgin when
she is perceived to be ripe ; and, as not-virgin^
is now subject to the law, just as she is to mar-
riage. And the betrothed indeed have the ex-
ample of Rebecca, who, when she was being
conducted — herself still unknown — to an un-
known betrothed, as soon as she learned that he
whom she had sighted from afar was the man,


1 So_ Oehler and others. But one MS. reads " concupiscentise
fructum" for " concupiscentiam fructus; " which would make the
sense somewhat plainer, and hence is perhaps less likely to be the
genuine reading.

2 See Gen. ii. 25, iii. 7 (in LXX. iii. i, iii. 7).

3 See ch. vii. above.

* See Deut. xxii. 13-21.


awaited not the grasp of the hand, nor the meet-
ing of the kiss, nor the interchange of salutation ;
but confessing what she had felt — namely, that
she had been (already) wedded in spirit — de-
nied herself to be a virgin by then and there
veiling herself 5 Oh woman already belonging
to Christ's discipline ! For she showed that
marriage likewise, as fornication is, is transacted
by gaze and mind ; only that a Rebecca likewise
some do still veil. With regard to the rest, how-
ever (that is, those who are 7tot betrothed), let
the procrastination of their parents, arising from
straitened means or scrupulosity, look (to them) ;
let the vow of continence itself look (to them).
In no respect does (such procrastination) per-
tain to an age which is already running its own
assigned course, and paying its own dues to
maturity. Another secret mother. Nature, and
another hidden father, Time, have wedded their
daughter to their own laws. Behold that virgin-
daughter of yours already wedded — her soul by
expectancy, her flesh by transformation — for
whom you are preparing a second husband !
Already her voice is changed, her limbs fully
formed, her *' shame " everywhere clothing itself,
the months paying their tributes ; and do you
deny her to be a woman whom you assert to be
undergoing womanly experiences? If the con-
tact of a 7nan makes a wojnan, let there be no
covering except after actual experience of mar-
riage. Nay, but even among the heathens (the
betrothed) are led veiled to the husband. But
if it is at betrothal that they are veiled, because .
(then) both in body and in spirit they have
mingled with a male, through the kiss and the
right hands, through which means they first in
spirit unsealed their modesty, through the com-
mon pledge of conscience whereby they mutu-
ally plighted their whole confusion ; how much
more will time veil them? — (time) without
which espoused they cannot be ; and by whose
urgency, without espousals, they cease to be vir-
gins. Time even the heathens observe, that, in
obedience to the law of nature, they may render
their own rights to the (different) ages. For
their females they despatch to their businesses
from (the age of) twelve years, but the male from
two years later ; decreeing puberty (to consist)
in years, not in espousals or nuptials. " House-
wife " one is called, albeit a virgin, and " house-
father," albeit a stripling. By us not even
natural laws are observed ; as if the God of
nature were some other than ours !

CHAP. XII. — WOMANHOOD SELF-EVIDENT, AND NOT
TO BE CONCEALED BY JUST LEAVING THE HEAD
BARE.

Recognise the woman, ay, recognise the wed-
ded woman, by the testimonies both of body


S Gen. xxiv. 64, 65. Comp. de Or., c. xxii. ad fin.


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


35


and of spirit, which she experiences both in
conscience and in flesh. These are the earher
tablets of natural espousals and nuptials. Im-
pose a veil externally upon her who has (already)
a covering internally. Let her whose lower parts
are not bare have her upper likewise covered.
Would you know what is the authority which
age carries? Set before yourself each (of these
two) ; one prematurely ' compressed in woman'' s
garb, and one who, though advanced in maturity,
persists in virginity with its appropriate garb :
the former will more easily be denied to be a
woman than the latter believed a virgin. Such
is, then, the honesty of age, that there is no over-
powering it even by garb. What of the fact that
these {virgins) of ours confess their change of
age even by their garb ; and, as soon as they
have understood themselves to be women., with-
draw themselves from virgins, laying aside (be-
ginning with their head itself) their former selves :
dye = their hair ; and fasten their hair with more
wanton pin ; professing manifest womanhood
with their hair parted from the front. The next
thing is, they consult the looking-glass to aid
their beauty, and thin down their over-exacting
face with washing, perhaps withal vamp it up
with cosmetics, toss their mantle about them
with an air, fit tightly the multiform shoe, carry
down more ample appliances to the baths. \Miy
should I pursue particulars ? But their manifest
appliances alone ^ exhibit their perfect woman-
hood: yet they wish to play the virgin by the
sole fact of leaving their head bare — denying
by one single feature what they profess by their
entire deportment.


in the presence of men as of the Lord, consists
in identity of liberty. To what purpose, then,
do they thrust their glory out of sight abroad,
but expose it in the church ? I demand a reason.
Is it to please the brethren, or God Himself?
If God Himself, He is as capable of beholding
whatever is done in secret, as He is just to re-
munerate what is done for His sole honour. In
fine. He enjoins us not to trumpet forth ^ any
one of those things which will merit reward in
His sight, nor get compensation for them from
men. But if we are prohibited from letting
" our left hand know " when we bestow the
gift of a single halfpenny, or any eleemosynary
\ bounty whatever, how deep should be the dark-
ness in which we ought to enshroud ourselves
when we are offering God so great an oblation
of our very body and our very spirit — when we
are consecrating to Him our very nature ! It
follows, therefore, that what cannot appear to
be done for God's sake (because God wills not
that it be done in such a way) is done for the
: sake of men, — a thing, of course, primarily un-
lawful, as betraying a lust of glory. For glory
is a thing unlawful to those whose probation con-
I sists in humihation of every kind. And if it is
i by God that the virtue of continence is con-
: ferred, " why gloriest thou, as if thou have not
received?"^ If, however, you have not re-
ceived it, "what hast thou which has not been
given thee?" But by this very fact it is plain
that it has not been given you by God — that
it is not to God alone that you offer it. Let us
see, then, whether what is hitman be firm and
true. *


CHAP. XIII. IF UNVEILING BE PROPER, WHY NOT

PRACTISE IT ALWAYS, OUT OF THE CHURCH AS
WELL AS IN IT?

If on account of men'* they adopt a false garb, I
let them carry out that garb fully even for that
end ; 5 and as they veil their head in presence
of heathens, let them at all events in the church
conceal their virginity, which they do veil out-
side the church. They fear strangers : let them
stand in awe of the brethren too ; or else let
them have the consistent hardihood to appear
as virgins in the streets as well, as they have the
hardihood to do in the churches. I will praise
their vigour, if they succeed in selling aught of
virginity among the heathens withal.'' Identity
of nature abroad as at home, identity of custom

' Oehler's " imniutare" appears certainly to be a misprint for
" iviiiiature."

^ Vertunt: or perhaps " change the style of." But comp, (with
Oehler) de Cult. Fern., 1 ii. c. vi

■5 I.e., without appealing to any further proof. jb

■* As distinguished from the " on account of the angels " oWp. xi.

5 I.e., for the sake of the brethren, who (after all) are men, as
the heathens are (Oehler, after Rig.).

^ i.e., as Rig. quoted by Oehler explains it, in inducing the hea-
thens to practise it.


CHAP. XI\^ PERILS TO THE VIRGINS THE^HSELVES

ATTENDANT UPON NOT-VEILING.

They report a saying uttered at one time by
some one when first this question was mooted,
"And how shall we invite the other {virgins) to
similar conduct? " Forsooth, it is their numbers
that will make us happy, and not the grace of
God and the merits of each individual ! Is it
virgins who (adorn or commend) the Church in
the sight of God, or the Church which adorns or
commends e'/;;f^///i- .? (Our objector) has there-
fore confessed that " glory " lies at the root of
the matter. Well, where glory is, there is solici-
tation ; where solicitation, there compulsion ;
where compulsion,' there necessity ; where neces-
sity, there infirmity. Deserv^edly, therefore, while
they do not cover their head, in order that they
may be solicited for the sake of glory, they are
forced to cover their bellies by the ruin resulting
from infirmity. For it is emulation, not religion,
which impels' them. Sometimes it is that god —


;ee Matt, vi
Cor. iv. 7.


.(


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


their belly ' — himself; because the brotherhood
rcadih- undertakes the maintenance of virgins.
JUit, moreover, it is not merely that they are
ruined, but they draw after them "a long rope
of sins." - For, after being brought forth into
the midst (of the church), and elated by the
])ublic appropriation of their property,^ and
laden by the brethren with every honour and
charitable bounty, so long as they do not fall, —
when any sin has been committed, they meditate
a deed as disgraceful as the honour was high
which they had. (It is this.) If an uncovered
head is a recognised mark of virginity, (then)
if any virgin falls from the grace of virginity,
she remains permanently with head uncovered,
for fear of discovery, and walks about in a garb
which then indeed is another's. Conscious of
a now undoubted womanhood, they have the
audacity to draw near to God with head bare.
But the' "jealous God and Lord," who has said,
'• Nothing covered which shall not be revealed," ■♦
brings such in general before the public gaze ;
for confess they will not, unless betrayed by the
cries of their infants themselves. But, in so far
as they are " more numerous," will you not just
have them suspected of the more crimes? I will
say (albeit I would rather not) it is a difficult
thing for one to turn woman once for all who
fears to do so, and who, when already so turned
(in secret), has the power of (still) falsely pre-
tending to be a virgiti under the eye of God.
What audacities, again, will (such an one) ven-
ture on with regard to her womb, for fear of be-
ing detected in being a mother as well ! God
knows how many infants He has helped to per-
fection and through gestation till they were born
sound and whole, after being long fought against
by their mothers ! Such virgins ever conceive
with the readiest facility, and have the happiest
deliveries, and children indeed most like to their
fathers !

These crimes does a forced and unwilling vir-
ginity incur. The very concupiscence of non-
concealment is not modest : it experiences
somewhat which is no mark of a virgi7i, — the
study of pleasing, of course, ay, and (of pleasing)
7nen. Let her strive as much as you please with
an honest mind ; she must necessarily be imper-
illed by the public exhibition 5 of herself, while
she is penetrated by the gaze of untrustworthy
and multitudinous eyes, while .she is tickled by


' Comp. Phil. iii. iq.

2 See Isa. v. i8.

3 So Oehler, with Rig., seems to understand " pubUcato bono
suo." But it niay be doubted whether the use of the singular " bono,"
and the sense in which " publicare " and " bonum " have previously
occurred in this treatise, do not warrant the rendering, " and elated
by the public announcement of their good deed " — in self-devotion.
Comp. " omnis publicatio virginis bonae " in c. iii., and similar
phrases. Perhaps the two meanings may he intentionally implied

■•■ Matt. X. 26. Again apparently a double meaning, in the word
" revelabitus " = " unveiled," which (of course) is the strict sense of
" revealed," i e., " re-veiled."

5 Comp. the note above on " /uih'cato bono suo."


pointing fingers, while she is too well loved, while
she feels a warmth creep over her amid assidu-
ous embraces and kisses. Thus the forehead
hardens ; thus the sense of shame wears away ;
thus it relaxes ; thus is learned the desire of
pleasing in another way !

CHAP. XV. OF FASCINATION.

Nay, but true and absolute and pure virginity
fears nothing more than itself. 'Evtn female eyes
it shrinks from encountering. Other eyes itself
has. It betakes itself for refuge to the veil of
the head as to a helmet, as to a shield, to pro-
tect its glory against the blows of temptations,
against the darts of scandals, against suspicions
and whispers and emulation ; (against) envy also
itself. For there is a something even among the
heathens to be apprehended, which they call
Fascination, the too unhappy result of excessive
praise and glory. This we sometimes interpreta-
tively ascribe to the devil, for of him comes hatred
of good ; sometimes we attribute it to God, for
of Him comes judgment upon haughtiness, ex-
alting, as He does, the humble, and depressing
the elated.^ The more holy virgin, accordingly,
will fear, even under the name of fascinadon, on
the one hand the adversary, on the other God, —
the envious disposition of the former, the cen-
sorial light of the latter ; and will joy in being
known to herself alone and to God. But even
if she has been recognized by any other, she is
wise to have blocked up the pathway against
temptations. For who will have the audacity to
intrude with his eyes upon a shrouded face ? a
face without feeling? a face, so to say, morose?
Any evil cogitation whatsoever will be broken by
the very severity. She who conceals her virgin-
ity, by that fact denies even her womanhood.

CHAP. XVI, TERTULLIAN, HAVING SHOWN HIS DE-
FENCE TO BE CONSISTENT WITH SCRIPTURE, NA-
TURE, AND DISCIPLINE, APPEALS TO THE VIRGINS
THEMSELVES.

Herein consists the defence of our opinion, in
accordance with Scripture, in accordance with
Nature, in accordance with Discipline. Scripture
founds the law ; Nature joins to attest it ; Disci-
pline exacts it. Which of these (three) does a
custom founded on (mere) opinion appear in
behalf of? or what is the colour of the opposite
view ? God's is Scripture ; God's is Nature ;
God's is Discipline. Whatever is contrary to
these is not God's. If Scripture is uncertain,
Nature is manifest; and concerning Nature's
testimony Scripture cannot be uncertain.^ If
there is a doubt about Nature, Discipline points
out what is more sanctioned by God. For noth-


6 Comp. Ps. cxlvii. (in LXX. and Vulg. cxlvi.) 6; Luke i. 52.

7 See I Cor. xi. 14, above quoted.


ON THE VEILING OF VIRGINS.


Z7


ing is tci Him dearer than humility ; nothing
more acceptable than modesty ; nothing more
offensive than "glory" and the study of men-
pleasing. Let that, accordingly, be to you Scrip-
ture, and Nature, and Discipline, which you shall
find to have been sanctioned by God ; just as
you are bidden to " examine all things, and dili-
gently follow whatever is better." '

It remains likewise that we turn to (the z'/r-
gins) themselves, to induce them to accept these
(suggestions) the more willingly. I pray you,
be you mother, or sister, or virgin-d2L\ig\\ttr —
let me address you according to the names
proper to your years — veil your head : if a
mother, for your sons' sakes ; if a sister, for your
brethren's sakes ; if a daughter for your fathers'
sakes. All ages are perilled in your person.
Put on the panoply of modesty ; surround your-
self with the stockade of bashfulness ; rear a
rampart for your sex, which must neither allow
your own eyes egress nor ingress to other peo-
ple's. Wear the full garb of woman, to preserve
the standing of virgin. Belie somewhat of your
inward consciousness, in order to exhibit the
truth to God alone. And yet you do not belie
yourself in appearing as a bride. For wedded
you are to Christ : to Him you have surrendered
your flesh ; to Him you have espoused your
maturity. Walk in accordance with the will of
your Espoused. Christ is He who bicis the es-
poused and wives of others veil themselves ; ^
(and,) of course, much more His own.


CHAP. XVII. AN APPEAL TO THE MARRIED

WOMEN.

But we admonish you, too, women of the
second (degree of) modesty, who have fallen
into wedlock, not to outgrow so far the disci-
pline of the veil, not even in a moment of an
hour, as, because you cannot refuse it, to take
some other means to nullify it, by going neither
covered nor bare. For some, with their turbans
and woollen bands, do not veil their head, but
bind it up ; protected, indeed, in front, but,
where the head properly lies, bare. Others are
to a certain extent covered over the region of
the brain with linen coifs of small dimensions
— I suppose for fear of pressing the head — and
not reaching quite to the ears. If they are so
weak in their hearing as not to be able to hear
through a covering, I pity them. Let them
know that the whole head constitutes " the 7uo-
man." ^ Its limits and boundaries reach as far as
the place where the robe begins. The region
of the veil is co-extepsive with the space covered


' See I Thess. v. 2

2 See I Cor. xi.

3 I Cor. xi. 6, etc.


by the hair when unbound ; in order that the
necks too may be encircled. For it is they
which must be subjected, for the sake of which
" power " ought to be " had on the head : " the
veil is their yoke. ^ Arabia's \\Q.z.'Oci^n females will
be your judges, who cover not only the head,
but the face also, so entirely, that they are con-
tent, with one eye free, to enjoy rather half the
light than to prostitute the entire face. K female
would rather see than be seen. And for this
reason a certain Roman queen said that they
were most unhappy, in that they could more
easily fall in love than be fallen in love with ;
whereas thay are rather happy in their immunity
from that second (and indeed more frequent)
infelicity, that females are more apt to be fallen
in love with than to fall in love. And the
modesty of heathen discipline, indeed, is more
simple, and, so to say, more barbaric. To us
the Lord has, even by revelations, measured the
space for the veil to extend over. For a certain
sister of ours was thus addressed by an angel,
beating her neck, as if in applause : " Elegant
neck, and deservedly bare ! it is well for thee to
unveil thyself from the head right down to the
loins, lest withal this freedom of thy neck profit
thee not ! " And, of course, what you have said
to one you have said to all. But how severe a
chastisement will they likewise deserve, who,
amid (the recital of) the Psalms, and at any
mention of (the name of) God, continue un-
covered; (who) even when about to spend
time in prayer itself, with the utmost readiness
place a fringe, or a tuft, or any thread whatever,
on the crown of their heads, and suppose them-
selves to be covered? Of so small extent do
they falsely imagine their head to be ! Others,
who think the palm of their hand plainly greater
than any fringe or thread, misuse their head no
less; like a certain (creature), more beast than
bird, albeit winged, with small head, long legs,
and moreover of erect carriage. She, they say,
when she has to hide, thrusts away into a
thicket her head alone — plainly the whole of it,
(though) — leaving all the rest of herself ex-
posed. Thus, while she is secure in head, (but)
bare in her larger parts, she is taken wliolly,
head and all. Such will be their plight withal,
covered as they are less than is useful.

It is incumbent, then, at all times and in
every place, to walk mindful of the law, prei)ared
and equipped in readiness to meet every men-
tion of God ; who, if He be in the heart, will be
recognised as well in the head o{ females. To
such as read these (exhortations) with good
will, to such as prefer Utility to Custom, may
peace and grace from our Lord Jesus Christ
redound : as likewise to Septimius TertuUianus,
whose this tractate is.


SS ELUCIDATIONS.


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(Vicar of the Lord, p. 27.)
The recurrence of this emphatic expression in our author is worthy of special note. He
knew of no other " Vicar of Christ " than the promised Paraclete, who should bring all Christ's
words to remembrance, and be "another Comforter." Let me quote from Dr. Scott' a very
striking passage in illustration : "The Holy Ghost, after Christ's departure from the world, acted
immediately under Christ as the supreme vicegerent of his kingdom ; for next, and immeaiately
under Christ, He authorized the bishops and governors of the Church, and constituted them over-
seers of the flock (Acts xx. 28). It was He that chose their persons, and appointed their work,
and gave them their several orders and directions : in all which, it is evident that He acted under
Christ as His supreme substitute. Accordingly, by TertuUian he is styled ' the Vicarious Virtue,
or Power,' as He was the Supreme Vicar and substitute of Christ in mediating for God with
men."

II.

(She shall be called woman, p. 31.)

The Vulgate reads, preserving something of the original epigrammatic force, "Vocabitur
ViR-ago, quoniam de Vir-o sumpta est." The late revised English gives us, in the margin,
Isshah and Ish, which marks the play upon words in the Hebrew, — " She shall be called Isshah
because she was taken out oi Ish:' This Epithalamiicm is the earliest poem, and Adam was the
first poet.

x\s to the argument of our author, it is quite enough to say, that, whatever we may think
of his refinements upon St. Paul, he sticks to the inspired text, and enforces God's Law in the
Gospel. Let us reflect, moreover, upon the awful immodesty of heathen manners (see Martial,
passim), and the necessity of enforcing a radical reform. All that adorns the sex among Chris-
tians has sprung out of these severe and caustic criticisms of the Gendle world and its customs.
And let us reflect that there is a growing licence in our age, which makes it important to revert
to first principles, and to renew the apostolic injunctions, if not as TertuUian did, still as best we
may, in our own times and ways.

III.

(These crimes, p. 36.)

The iniquity here pointed at has become of frightful magnitude in the United States of
America. We shall hear of it again when we come to Hippolytus.^ May the American editor
be pardoned for referring to his own commonitory to his countrywomen on this awful form of
murder, in Moral Refoj'ms,^ a little book upon practical subjects, addressed to his own diocese.

Hippolytus speaks of the crime which had shocked TertuUian as assuming terrible propor-
tions at Rome in the time of Callistus'^ and under his patronage, circa a.d. 220. But in this case
it was not so much the novelty of the evil which attracted the rebuke of the Christian moralist,
but the fact that it was licensed by a bishop.


The Christian Life, vol. iii. p. 64.

TertuUian speaks of the heathen as " decimated by abortions." See ad Uxor., p. 41, infra.


3 Lippincotts, Philadelphia,
* Bunsen, vol. i. p. 134.


IV.
TO HIS WIFE.'


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]

BOOK I.


CHAP. I. — DESIGN OF THE TREATISE. DISAVOWAL 1 110 restoration of marriage is promised in the

OF PERSONAL MOTIVES IN WRITING IT.


I HAVE thought it meet, my best beloved
fellow-servant in the Lord, even from this early
period,^ to provide for the course which you
must pursue after my departure from the world,^
if I shall be called before you ; (and) to entrust
to your honour ■♦ the observance of the provision.
For in things worldly s we are active enough,
and we wish the good of each of us to be con-
sulted. If we draw up wills for such matters,
why ought we not much more to take forethought
for our posterity^ in things divine and heavenly,
and in a sense to bequeath a legacy to be re-
ceived before the inheritance be divided, — (the
legacy, I mean, of) admonition and demonstra-
tion touching those (bequests) which are allotted ^
out of (our) immortal goods, and from the heri-
tage of the heavens ? Only, that you may be
able to receive in its entirety^ this feoffment in
trusts of my admonition, may God grant; to
whom be honour, glory, renown, dignity, and
power, now and to the ages of the ages !

The precept, therefore, which I give you is,
that, with all the constancy you may, you do,
after our departure, renounce nuptials ; not that
you will on that score confer any benefit on me,
except in that you will profit yourself. But to
Christians, after their departure from the world, '°

■ [Written rzVfrt A. D. 207. TertuUian survived his wife: and we
cannot date these books earher than about the time of his writing the
De Patlio, in the opinion of some.]

^ Jam hinc.

3 SeecuIo.

* Fidei.

S Saecularibus.

* Posteritati; or, with Mr. Dodgson, " our future."
^ Deputantur.

8 SoUdum; alhidinK to certain laws respecting a widow's power
of receiving " in its entirety " her deceased husband's property.

9 Fidei comniissum.
'° Sa;culo.


] day of the resurrection, translated as they wil
be into the condition and sanctity of angels."
Therefore no solicitude arising from carnal jeal-
ousy will, in the day of the resurrection, even in
the case of her whom they chose to represent as
having been married to seven brothers succes-
sively, wound any one'^ of her so many hus-
bands ; nor is any (husband) awaiting her to put
her to confusion.'^ The question raised by the
Sadducees has yielded to the Lord's sentence.
Think not that it is for the sake of preserving to
the end for myself the entire devotion of your
flesh, that I, suspicion^ of the pain of (antici-
pated) slight, am even at this early period ''^
instilling into you the counsel of (perpetual)
widowhood. There will at that day be no re-
sumption of voluptuous disgrace between us.
No such frivolities, no such impurities, does God
promise to His (servants). But whether to you,
or to any other woman whatever who pertains to
God, the advice which we are giving shall be
profitable, we take leave to treat of at large.

CHAP. II. — MARRIAGE LAWFUL, BUT NOT POLYGAMY.

We do not indeed forbid the union of man
and woman, blest by God as the seminary of the
human race, and devised for the replenishment
of the earth 's and the furnishing of the world, '^
and therefore permitted, yet singly. For Adam
was the one husband of Eve, and Eve his one
wife, one woman, one rib.'^ We grant '^ that


" Luke XX. 36.

'2 Nulla . . . neminem — two negatives.

'3 See Matt. xxii. 23-33; Mark xii. 18-27

'■• Jam hinc. See beginning of chapter.

'5 Orbi. Gen. i. 28.

"" Saiculo.

'' Gen. ii. 21, 22.

'8 Sane.

39


40


TO HIS WIFE.


[Book I.


among our ancestors, and the patriarchs them-
sehes, it was lawful ' not only to marry, but even
to multiply wives.^ There were concubines, too,
(in those days.) But although the Church did
come in figuratively in the synagogue, yet (to
interpret simply) it was necessary to institute
(certain things) which should afterward deserve
to be either lopped off or modified. For the
Law was (in due time) to supervene. (Nor was
that enough:) for it was meet thc^t causes for
making up the deficiencies of the Law should
have forerun (Him who was to supply those de-
ficiencies). And so to the Law presently had
to succeed the Word^ of God introducing the
spiritual circumcision."* Therefore, by means of
the wide licence of those days, materials for
subsequent emendations were furnished before-
hand, of which materials the Lord by His Gos-
pel, and then the aposde in the last days of the
(Jewish) age,5 either cut off the redundancies or
reafulated the disorders.


CHAP. III. MARRIAGE GOOD : CELIBACY PREFER-
ABLE.

But let it not be thought that my reason for
premising thus much concerning the liberty
granted to the old, and the restraint imposed on
the later time, is that I may lay a foundation for
teaching that Christ's advent was intended to
dissolve wedlock, (and) to abolish marriage
unions ; as if from this period onward ^ I were
prescribing an end to marrying. Let them see
to that, who, among the rest of their perversi-
ties, teach the disjoining of the " one flesh in
twain j " 7 denying Him vi^ho, after borrowing
the female from the male, re-combined between
themselves, in the matrimonial computation, the
two bodies taken out of the consortship of the
self-same material substance. In short, there is
no place at all where we read that nuptials are
prohibited ; of course on the ground that they
are ''a good thing." What, however, is />cffer
than this "good," we learn from the aposde,
who permits marrying indeed, but prefeis absti-
nence ; the former on account of the insidious-
nesses of temptations, the latter on account of
the straits of the times.''^ Now, by looking into


' "Fas," strictly divine law, opp. to "jus," httinnn law; thus
" lawful," as opp. to " legal."

2 Plurifariam matrimoniis uti. The neut. pi. " matrimonia " is
sometimes used for " wives." Comp. c. v. ad fin. and de Pan., c. xii.
ad fill.

3 Sermo, i.e., probably the personal Word. Comp. de Or., c. i.
ad I nit.

•* Rom. ii. 28, 29; Phil. iii. 3; Col. ii. 11.

5 Sa;culi. The meaning here seems clearly to be, as in the text,
" the Jewish age " or dispensatioti ; as in the passages referred to —
I Cor. X. II, where it is rd xeAr; tmv aiuji'cui/ ; and Heb. ix. 26, where
again it is 7uiv alMfuiv, the Jewish and all precedmg ages being
intended.

6 "Jam hinc," i.e., apparently from the time of Christ's advent.

7 Matt. xix. 5, 6.

8 I Cor. vii.


the reason thus given for each proposition, it is
easily discerned that the ground on which the
power of marrying is conceded is necessity ; but
whatever necessity grants, she by her very nature
depreciates. In fact, in that it is written, " To
marry is better than to burn," whai, pray, is the
nature of this "good" which is (only) com-
mended by comparison with " evil," so that the
reason why " marrying " is mo7'e good is (merely)
that " burning " is less ? Nay, but how far bet-
ter is it neither to marry nor to burn? Why,
even in persecutions it is bettei- to take advan-
tage of the permission granted, and " flee from
town to town," 9 than, when apprehended and
racked, to deny (the faith). '° And therefore
more blessed are they who have strength to de-
part (this life) in blessed confession of their
testimony." I may say. What vi permitted \^ not
good. For how stands the case? I must of
necessity die (if I be apprehended and confess
my faith.) If I think (that fate) deplorable,
(then flight) is good ; but if I have a fear of the
thing which is permitted, (the permitted thing)
has some suspicion attaching to the cause of its
permission. But that which is " better " no one
(ever) "permitted," as being undoubted, and
manifest by its own inherent purity. There are
some things which are not to be desired merely
because they are not forbidden, albeit they are
in a certain sense fo-bidden when other things
are preferred to them ; for the preference given
to the higher things is a dissuasion from the low-
est. A thing is not " good " merely because it is
not " evil," nor is it " evil " merely because it
is not " harmful." '^ Further : that which is fully
"good " excels on this ground, that it is not only
not harmful, but profitable into the bargain.
For you are bound to prefer what is profitable
to what is (merely) not harmful. For the first
place is what every struggle aims at ; the second
has consolation attaching to it, but not victory.
But if we listen to the apostle, forgetting what is
behind, let us both strain after what is before, '^
and be followers after the better rewards. Thus,
albeit he does not " cast a snare '•♦ upon us," he
points out what tends to utility when he says,
" The unmarried woman thinks on the things of
the Lord, that both in body and spirit she may
be holy ; but the married is solicitous how to
please her husband." 's But he nowhere permits
marriage in such a way as not rather to wish us
to do our utmost in imitation of his own ex-
ample. Happy the man who shall prove like
Paul !


9 Matt. X. 23; perhaps confused with xxiii. 34.
'° Comp. de Idol., c. xxiii., and the note there on " se negant."
" i.e., in martyrdom, on the ground of that open confession.
'- Non obest.
" Phil. iii. 13, I4._

'■i Laqueum = ^p6-)(ov (i Cor. vii. 35), "a noose," "lasso'
(" snare," Eng. ver.). " Laqueo trahuntur inviti " (Bengel).
'5 See note 13.


Chap. V.]


TO HIS WIFE.


41


CHAP. IV. OF THE INFIRMITY OF THE FLESH,

AND SIMILAR PLEAS.

But we read " that the flesh is weak ; " ' and
hence we soothe ^ ourselves in some cases. Yet
we read, too, that "the spirit is strong; "3 for
each clause occurs in one and the same sentence.
Flesh is an earthly, spirit a heavenly, material.
Why, then, do we, too prone to self-excuse, put
forward (in our defence) the weak part of us,
but not look at'* the strong? Why should not
the earthly yield to the heavenly ? If the spirit
is stronger than the flesh, because it is withal of
nobler origin, it is our own fault if we follow the
weaker. Now there are two phases s of human"
weakness which make marriages'' necessary to
such as are disjoined from matrimony. The
first and most powerful is that which arises fronT'
fleshly concupiscence ; the second, from worldly
concupiscence. But by us, who are servants
of God, who renounce both voluptuousness and
ambition, each is to be repudiated. Fleshly
concupiscence claims the functions of adult age,
craves after beauty's harvest, rejoices in its own
shame, pleads the necessity of a husband to the
female sex, as a source of authority and of com-
fort, or to render it safe from evil rumours. To
meet these its counsels, do you apply the ex-
amples of sisters of ours whose names are with
the Lord,7 — who, when their husbands have
preceded them (to glory), give to no oppor-
tunity of beauty or of age the precedence over
holiness. They prefer to be wedded to God.
To God their beauty, to God their youth (is
dedicated) . With Him they live ; with Him
they converse ; Him they " handle " ** by day and
by night ; to the Lord they assign their prayers
as dowries ; from Him, as oft as they desire it,
they receive His approbation ^ as dotal gifts.
Thus they have laid hold for themselves of an
eternal gift of the Lord ; and while on earth, by
abstaining from marriage, are already counted
as belonging to the angelic family. Training
yourself to an emulation of (their) constancy
by the examples of such women, you will by
spiritual affection bury that fleshly concupis-
cence, in abolishing the temporal '° and fleeting
desires of beauty and youth by the compen-
sating gain of immortal blessings.

On the other hand, this worldly concupiscence


(to which I referred) has, as its causes, glory,
cupidity, ambition, want of sufficiency ; through
which causes it trumps up the " necessity " for
marrying, — promising itself, forsooth, heavenly
things in return — to lord it, (namely,) in an-
other's family ; to roost " on another's wealth ;
to extort splendour from another's store ; to
lavish expenditure '^ which you do not feel ! Far
be all this from believers, who have no care
about maintenance, unless it be that we distrust
the promises of God, and (His) care and provi-
dence, who clothes with such grace the lilies of
the field ; '^ ^ho, without any labour on their
part, feeds the fowls of the heaven ; '■♦ who pro-
hibits care to be taken about to-morrow's food
and clothing, '5 promising that He knows what is
needful for each of His servants — not indeed
ponderous necklaces, not burdensome garments,
j not Gallic mules nor German bearers, which all
add lustre to the glory of nuptials ; but " suffi-
ciency," '^ which is suitable to moderation and
modesty. Presume, I pray you, that you have
needof nothing if you "attend upon the Lord ;" '7
nay, that you have all things, if you have the
Lord, whose are all things. Think often '** on
things heavenly, and you will despise things
earthly. To widowhood signed and sealed be-
fore the Lord nought is necessary but perse-
verance.


CHAP. V. OF THE LOVE OF OFFSPRING AS A PLEA

FOR MARRIAGE.

Further reasons for marriage which men allege
for themselves arise from anxiety for posterity,
and the bitter, bitter pleasure of children. To
us this is idle. For why should we be eager to
bear children, whom, when we have them, we
desire to send before us (to glory) "^ (in respect,
I mean, of the distresses that are now immi-
nent) ; desirous as we are ourselves, too, to be
taken out of this most wicked world,^° and re-
ceived into the Lord's presence, which was the
desire even of an apostle?^' To the servant
of God, forsooth, offspring is necessary ! For of
our own salvation we are secure enough, so that
we have leisure for children ! Burdens must be
sought by us for ourselves which are a\oided
even by the majority of the Gentiles, wlio are
compelled by laws,-^ who are decimated -^ by


' Matt. xxvi. 41.

2 Adulamiir: " we fawn upon," or " caress," or " flatter." Comp.
de Pien , c. vi. S7ib itiit. : " flatter their own sweetness."

3 " Firmum," opp. to " infirmam " above. In the passage there
referred to (Matt. x.\vi. 41) the word is -npo^vfi-ov.

* Tuemur. Mr. Dodgson renders, "guard not."

5 Species.

o I.e., apparently jcfdwrf marriages: " rt'/.?junctis a matrimonio "
can scarcely include such as were never "juncti; " and comp. the
" praemissis maritis " below.

7 Comp. Phil. iv. 3; 2 Tim. ii. 19; Mai. iii. 16; and similar
passages.

^ I John i. i; Luke xxiv. 39; John xx. 17.

9 Dignationem.
'° Or, " temporary."


" Incubare.

'- C«edere sumptum.

" Matt. vi. 28-30.

■•♦ Matt. vi. 26.

"5 Matt. vi. 31,, 34.

"' Comp. Phil. iv. 19; i Tim. vi. 8.

■7 Comp. I Cor. vii. 35, esp. in Eng. ver.

18 Recogita.

'9 Comp. c. iv. above " praemissis maritis;

have preceded them (to glory)."

-° Sfficulo.

-' Phil. i. 23; comp dc Pa., c. ix. ad Jin

2- i.e., to get children.

23 Expugnantur.


' when their husbands


42


TO HIS WIFE.


[Book I.


abortions ; ' burdens which, finally, are to zis
most of all unsuitable, as being perilous to faith !
For why did the Lord foretell a " woe to them
that are with child, and them that give suck," ^
except because He testifies that in that day of
disencumbrance the encumbrances of children
will be an inconvenience? It is to marriage,
of course, that those encumbrances appertain ;
but that ("woe") will not pertain to widows.
{They) at the first trump of the angel will spring
forth disencumbered — will freely bear to the
end whatsoever pressure and persecution, with
no burdensome fruit of marriage heaving in the
womb, none in the bosom.

Therefore, whether it be for the sake of the
flesh, or of the world,^ or of posterity, that mar-
riage is undertaken, nothing of all these " neces-
sities " affects the ser\'ants of God, so as to
prevent my deeming it enough to have once for
all yielded to some one of them, and by one
marriage appeased ^ all concupiscence of this
kind. Let us marry daily, and in the midst of
our marrying let us be overtaken, like Sodom
and Gomorrah, by that day of fear ! 5 For the7-e
it was not only, of course, that they were dealing
in marriage and merchandise ; but when He
says, " They were marrying and buying," He
sets a brand ^ upon the very leading vices of the
flesh and of the world,^ which call -men off the
most from divine disciplines — the one through
the pleasure of rioting, the other though the
greed of acquiring. And yet that " blindness "
ihen was felt long before " the ends of the
world." *^ What, then, will the case be if God
7107U keep us from the vices which of old were
detestable before Him? "The time," says (the
apostle), "is compressed.9 It remaineth that
they who have wives '° act as if they had them
not."

CH.AP. ^^. — EXAMPLES OF HEATHENS URGED AS
COMMENDATORY OF WIDOWHOOD AND CELIBACY.

But if they who have (wives) are (thus)
bound to consign to oblivion what they have,
how much more are they who have Jiof, pro-
hibited from seeking a second time what they
no longer have ; so that she whose husband has
departed from the world should thenceforward
impose rest on her sex by abstinence from mar-

' " Parricidiis." So Oehler seems to understand it.

2 Luke xxi. 23; Matt. xxiv. iq.

3 Saeculi.

* " Expiasse " — a rare but Ciceronian use of the word.
^ Luke xvii. 28, 29.

* Denotat.
7 Sseculi.

* Saculi. Comp. i Cor. x. 11 : but the Greek there is, rot tcAt)
Tuv aiiitviav. By the " blindness," TertuUian may refer to Gen. xix.
II.

9 Or, "short" (Eng. ver.); i Cor. vii. 29. 6 Katpbs <rvvi(TTa\-
li.€vos, " in coUecto."

1° " Matrirrionia," neut. pi. again for the fern., the abstract for the
concrete. See c. ii., " to multiply wives," and the note there. In the
Greek (i Cor. vii. 29) it is yvvaiKa^: but the ensuing chapter shows
that TertuUian refers the passage to women as well.


riage — abstinence which numbers of Gentile
women devote to the memory of beloved hus-
bands ! When anything seems difficult, let us
survey others who cope with still greater diffi-
culties. How many are there who from the mo-
ment of their baptism set the seal (of virginity)
upon their flesh? How many, again, who by
equal mutual consent cancel the debt of matri-
mony— voluntary eunuchs" for the sake of
their desire after the celestial kingdom ! But
if, while the marriage-tie is still intact, absti-
nence is endured, how much more when it has
been undone ! For I believe it to be harder for
what is intact to be quite forsaken, than for what
has been lost not to be yearned after, A hard
and arduous thing enough, surely, is the conti-
nence for God's sake of a holy woman after her
husband's decease, when Gentiles, '= in honour of
their own Satan, endure sacerdotal offices which
involve both virginity and widowhood ! '^ At
Rome, for instance, they who have to do with
the type of that "inextinguishable fire,'"-* keep-
ing watch over the omens of their own (future)
penalty, in company with the (old) dragon 'S
himself, are appointed on the ground of virgin-
ity. To the Achaean Juno, at the town /Egium,
a virgin is allotted ; and the (priestesses) who
rave at Delphi know not marriage. Moreover,
we know that widoius minister to the African
Ceres ; enticed away, indeed, from matrimony
by a most stern oblivion : for not only do they
withdraw from their still living husbands, but
they even introduce other wives to them in their
own room — the husbands, of course, smiling on
it — all contact (with males), even as far as the
kiss of their sons, being forbidden them ; and
yet, with enduring practice, they persevere in
such a discipline of widowhood, which excludes
the solace even of holy affection."'' These pre-
cepts has the devil given to his servants, and he
is heard ! He challenges, forsooth, God's ser-
vants, by the continence of his own, as if on
equal terms ! Continent are even the priests of
hell ! '7 For he has found a way to ruin men
even in good pursuits ; and with him it makes
no difference to slay some by voluptuousness,
some by continence. ^

CHAP. VII. THE DE.'^TH OF A HUSBAND IS GOD'S

CALL TO THE WIDOW TO CONTINENCE. FUR-
THER EVIDENCES FROM SCRIPTURE AND FROM
HE.A.THENISM.

To US continence has been pointed out by the
Lord of salvation as an instrument for attaining


'' Comp. de Pa., xiii., and Matt. xix. 12. Comp., too, de Ex.
Cast.,c. i.

'^ i.e., Gentile ivomcn.

•^ Oehler marks this as a question.

!•• Matt, iii 12. «

'5 Comp. Rev. xii. 9, and dc Dapt., 1.

16 Pietatis.

'7 Gehennae; comp. de Pten., c. xii. ad znt't.


I M


Chap. VIII.]


TO HIS WIFE.


43


eternity,' and as a testimony of (our) faith ; as
a commendation of this flesh of ours, which is
to be sustained for the "garment of immor-
tahty,"^ which is one day to supervene; for
enduring, in fine, the will of God. Besides, re-
flect, I advise you, that there is no one who is
taken out of the world ^ but by the will of God,
if, (as is the case,) not even a leaf falls from off
a'tree without it. The same who brings us into
the world,-* must of necessity take us out of it
too. Therefore when, through the will of God,
the husband is deceased, the marriage likewise,
by the will of God, deceases. Why should you
restore what God has put an end to ? Why do
you, by repeating the servitude of matrimony,
spurn the liberty which is offered you? "You
have been bound to a wife," s says the apostle \
" seek not loosing. You have been loosed from
a wife ; s seek not binding." For even if you
do -not " sin " in re-marrying, still he says " press-
ure of the flesh ensues."*^ Wherefore, so far
as we can, let us love the opportunity of conti-
nence ; as soon as it off"ers itself, let us resolve to
accept it, that what we have not had strength ?
(to follow) in matrimony we may follow in wid-
owhood. The occasion must be embraced which
puts an end to that which necessity'^ commanded


CHAP. VIII.


CONCLUSION.

For, concerning the honours which widow-
hood enjoys in the sight of God, there is a brief
summary in one saying of His through the
prophet : " Do thou '^ justly to the widow and
to the orphan ; and come ye,''' let us reason,
saith the Lord." These two names, left to the
care of the divine mercy, in proportion as they
are destitute of human aid, the Father of all
undertakes to defend. Look how the widow's
benefactor is put on a level with the widow her-
self, whose champion shall " reason with the
Lord ! " Not to virgins, I take it, is so great a
gift given. Although in their case perfect in-
tegrity and entire sanctky shall have the nearest
vision of the face of God, yet the widow has a
task more toilsome, because it is easy not to
crave after that which you know not, and to turn
away from what you have never had to regret.'^
More glorious is the continence which is aware
of its own right, which knows what it has seen.
The virgin may possibly be held the happier, but
the widow the more hardly tasked ; the former in
that she has always kept " the good," '^ the latter
in that she has found "the good for herself."
In the former it is grace, in the latter virtue,
that is crowned. For some things there are
How detrimental to faith, how obstructive to ^yhich are of the divine liberality, some of our
holiness, second marriages are, the discipline of ^^^.j^ working. The indulgences granted by the
the Church and the prescription of the apostle


declare, when he suffers not men twice married
to preside (over a Church 9), when he would not
grant a widow admittance into the order unless
she had been " the wife of one man ; " ■" for it
behoves God's altar " to be set forth pure. That
whole halo '^ which encircles the Church is repre-
sented (as consisting) of holiness. Priesthood
is (a function) of widowhood and of celibacies
among the nations. Of course (this is) in con-
formity with the devil's principle of rivalry.
For the king of heathendom, '^ the chief pon-
tiff,"' to marry a second time is unlawful. How
pleasing must holiness be to God, when even
His enemy affects it ! — not, of course, as having
any affinity with anything good, but as contu-
meliously afi"ecting what is pleasing to '5 God the
Lord.


' consecutio a;tcrnitatis," de Bapt.,


' i.e., eternal life; comp
2 I Cor. XV. 53 ; 2 Cor. v. 4.
y 3 Saeciilo.
■♦ Mundo.

5 " Matriraonio," or " by matrimony."
hihiaixi. yvi'aLKi : n'ri ^>)Tfi Kvcnv ' \e\v<Tai
yvvalKa. TcrtiiUian's rendering, it will be seen, is not verbatim.

6 I Cor. vii. 28.

7 Or, " been able " — valuimus. But comp. c. vi.

8 See c. iii., "quod autem necessitas pra;stat, depretiat ipsa
etc.

9 I Tim. ii. 2; Tit. i. 6.
•° I Tim. V. 9, 10.

" Aram.

*2 Comp. (ie Cor.,
and Oehler's note.
" Saeculi.

'■♦ Or, " Pontifex maximus."
'S Or, " has been decreed by


Comp. I Cor. vii. 27;


de martyriir(?7;(//V/a melius coronatus,'


Lord are regulated by their own grace; the
things which are objects of man's striving are
attained by earnest pursuit. Pursue earnestly,
therefore, the virtue of continence, which is
modesty's agent; industry, which allows not
women to be " wanderers ; " '^ frugality, which
scorns the world.=° Follow companies and con-
versations worthy of (kxl, mindful of that short
verse, sanctified by the aposde's quotation of it,
" 111 interviews good morals do corrupt." ^' Talk-
ative, idle, winebibbing, curious tent-fellows," do
the very greatest hurt to the purpose of widow-
hood. Through talkativeness there creep in
words unfriendly to modesty ; through idleness
they seduce one from strictness ; through wine-
bibbing they insinuate any and every evil ;
through curiosity they convey a spirit of rivalry
in lust. Not one of such women knows how to
speak of the good of single-husbandhood ; for
their "god," as the apostle says, "is their
belly; ""'3 and so, too, what is neighbour to the
belly.


16 So Oehler reads, with Rhenanus and the mss. The other cdd.
have the plural in each case, as the LXX. in the passage referred to

17 besi'deraveris. Oehler reads " desideres."

18 Comp. c. iii.
>9 I Tim. V. 13.

=° ^w'rsTsaid to be Menander's, quoted by St. Paul, i Cor xv
33; quoted again, but somewhat dilTcrcnlly rendered, by lertulUan
in b. i. c. iii. „

22 i.e., here " female companions.

23 Phil. iii. 19.


44


TO HIS WIFE.


[Book II.


These considerations, dearest fellow-servant, I
commend to you thus early,' handled throughout
superfluously indeed, after the apostle, but likely


Com p.


to prove a solace to you, in that (if so it shall
turn out') you will cherish my memory in
them.


, if I be called before you; comp. c.


BOOK II.


CHAP. I. — REASONS WHICH LED TO THE WRITING
OF THIS S^OND BOOK.

Very lately, best beloved fellow- servant in the
Lord I, as my ability permitted, entered for your
benefit at some length into the question what
course is to be followed by a holy woman when
her marriage has (in whatever way) been brought
to an end. Let us now turn our attention to the
next best advice, in regard of human infirmity ;
admonished hereto by the examples of certain
who, when an opportunity for the practice of
continence has been offered them, by divorce,
or by the decease of the husband, have not only
thrown away the opportunity of attaining so
great a good, but not even in their remarriage
have chosen to be mindful of the rule that
" above all ' they marry in the Lord." And thus
my mind has been thrown into confusion, in the
fear that, having exhorted you myself to perse-
verance in single husbandhood and widowhood,
I may now, by the mention of precipitate - mar-
riages, put "an occasion of falling " 3 in your
way. But if you are perfect in wisdom, you
know, of course, that the course which is the
more useful is the course which you must keep.
But, inasmuch as that course is difficult, and not
without its embarrassments,* and on this account
is the highest aim of (widowed) life, I have
paused somewhat (in my urging you to it) ; nor
would there have been any causes for my recur-
ring to that point also in addressing you, had I
not by this time taken up a still graver soUcitude.
For the nobler is the continence of the flesh
which ministers to widowhood, the more par-
donable a thing it seems if it be not persevered
in. For it is then when things are difficult that
their pardon is easy. But in as far as marrying
"in the Lord" is permissible, as being within
our power, so far more culpable is it not to ob-
serve that which you can observe. Add to this
the fact that the apostle, with regard to widows
and the unmarried, advises them to remain per-


manently in that state, when he says, " But I desire
all to persevere in (imitation of) my example :"5
but touching marrying "in the Lord," he no
longer advises, but plainly^ bids J Therefore in
this case especially, if we do not obey, we run
a risk, because one may with more impunity
neglect an "advice" than an "order;" in that
the former springs from counsel, and is proposed
to the will (for acceptance or rejection) : the
other descends from authority, and is bound to
necessity. Li the former case, to disregard ap-
pears liberty, in the latter, contumacy.


CHAP. II. — OF THE APOSTLE'S MEANING IN I COR.

VII. 12-14.
Therefore, when in these days a certain woman
removed her marriage from the pale of the
Church, and united herself to a Gentile, and
when I remembered that this had in days gone
by been done by others : wondering at either
their own waywardness or else the double-deal-
ing*^ of their advisers, in that there is no scrip-
ture which holds forth a licence of this deed, —
" I wonder," said I, " whether they flatter them-
selves on the ground of that passage of the first
(Episde) to the Corinthians, where it is written :
' If any of the brethren has an unbelieving wife,
and she consents to the matrimony, let him not
dismiss her ; similarly, let not a believing woman
married to an unbeliever, if she finds her husband
acrreeable (to their continued union), dismiss
htm : for the unbelieving husband is sanctified
by the believing wife, and the unbelieving wife by
the believing husband ; else were your children
unclean.' " 9 It may be that, by understanding
crenerally this monition regarding married be-
lievers, they think that licence is granted (there-
by) to marry even ?/;;believers. God forbid that
he who thus interprets (the passage) be wittingly
ensnaring himself! But it is manifest that this
scripture points to those believers who may have

'comp. the use of " exertus " in de Baft., cc. xii. and


' I Cor.


1 Potissimum; G

2 Proclivium.

3 Ps. Ixix. 23 (according to the " Great Bible" version, ed. 1539.
This is the translation found in the " Book of Common Prayer ).
Comp. Rom. xiv. 13.

* Necessitatibus.


5 I Cor. ^

6 Exerte.

'"'■ I Cor vii. 39, where the i>.6vov iv Kvp... js_on the same footing


Rom. vii. I (in the Eng. yer. 2). .

8 Pra;varicationem. Comp. de /"f«., c. nu
i,ra-varicator perspicacise suEe (Deus) non est.

9 I Cor. vii. 12-14, in sense, not verOaitm.


' Dissimulator


Chap. III.]


TO HIS WIFE.


45


been found by the grace of God in (the state
of) Gentile matrimony; according to the words
themselves : " If," it says, " any believer has
an unbelieving wife ; " it does not say, " takes an
unbelieving wife." It shows that it is the duty
of one who, already living in marriage with an
unbelieving woman,' has presently been by the
grace of God converted, to continue with his
wife ; for this reason, to be sure, in order that no
one, after attaining to faith, should think that he
must turn away from a woman ^ who is now in
some sense an "ahen" and " stranger." ^ Ac-
cordingly he subjoins withal a reason, that "we
are called in peace unto the Lord God ; " and
that '' the unbeliever may, through the use of
matrimony, be gained by the believer." ^ The
very closing sentence of the period confirms
(the supposition) that this is thus to be under-
stood. " As each," it says, " is called by the
Lord, so let him persevere." s But it is Gentiles
who " are called," I take it, not believers. But
if he had been pronouncing absolutely, (in the
words under discussion,) touching the marriage
of believers merely, (then) had he (virtually)
given to saints a permission to marry pro-
miscuously. If, however, he had given such
a permission, he would never have subjoined a
declaration so diverse from and contrary to his
own permission, saying : "The woman, when her
husband is dead, is free : let her marry whom
she wishes, only in the Lord."^ Here, at all
events, there is no need for reconsidering ; for
what there might have been reconsideration
about, the Spirit has oracularly declared. For
fear we should make an ill use of what he says,
" Let her marry whom she wishes," he has added,
"only in the Lord," that is, in the name of the
Lord, which is, undoubtedly, " to a Chrisdan."
That " Holy Spirit," ^ therefore, who prefers that
widows and unmarried women should persevere
in their integrity, who exhorts us to a copy ^ of
himself, prescribes no other manner of repeating
marriage except "in the Lord : " to this condition
alone does he concede the foregoing '5 of con-
tnience. " Only," he says, " in the Lord : " he
has added to his law a weight — " onlyP Utter
that word with what tone and manner you may,
It is weighty : it both bids and advises ; both
enjoins and exhorts ; both asks and threatens.
It is a concise, '° brief sentence ; and by its own
very brevity, eloquent. Thus is the divine voice


' Mulieris.

^ Femina.

3 Conip. Eph. ii. 12, 19

< Comp. I Cor. vii. 15, 16, and Phil iii. 8, in Vulg., for the word
■' lucrifieri."

5 I Cor. vii. 17, inexactly given, like the two preceding citations.

<> I Cor. vii. 30, not verlatim.

'' i.e., St. Paul, who, as inspired by the Holy Spirit, is regarded
by Tertiillian as merged, so to speak, in the Spirit.

8 '• ExempKim," a rarer use of the word, but found in Cic. The
reference is to 1 Cor. vii. 7.

9 Detrimcnta.

'° Districta (? = dis-stricta, " doubly strict").


wont (to speak), that you may instantly under-
stand, instantly observe. For who but could
understand that the apostle foresaw many dangers
and wounds to faith in marriages of this kind,
which he prohibits ? and that he took precaution,
in the first place, against the defilement of holy
flesh in Gentile flesh ? At this point some one
says, " What, then, is the difference between him
who is chosen by the Lord to Himself in (the
state of) Gentile marriage, and him who was of
old (that is, before marriage) a believer, that
they should not be equally cautious for their
flesh? — whereas the one is kept from marriage
with an unbeliever, the other bidden to continue
in it. Why, if we are defiled by a Gentile, is
not the one disjoined, just as the other is not
bound?" I will answer, if the Spirit give (me
ability) ; alleging, before all (other arguments),
that the Lord holds it more pleasing that matri-
mony should not be contracted, than that it
should at all be dissolved : in short, divorce He
prohibits, except for the cause of fornication ;
but continence He commends. Let the one,
therefore, have the necessity of continuing ; the
other, further, even the power of not marrying.
Secondly, if, according to the Scripture, they
who shall be "apprehended"" by the faith in
(the state of) Gentile marriage are not defiled
(thereby) for this reason, that, together with
themselves, others '^ also are sanctified : without
doubt, they who have been sanctified before
marriage, if they commingle themselves with
"strange flesh," '^ cannot sanctify that (flesh) in
(union with) which they were not "appre-
hended." The grace of God, moreover, sancti-
fies that which it finds. Thus, what has not
been able to be sanctified is unclean ; what is
unclean has no part with the holy, unless to defile
and slay it by its own (nature).

CH.AP. III. — REM.\RKS ON SOME OF THE " DANGERS
.4ND WOUNDS " REFERRED TO IN THE PRECED-
ING CHAPTER.

If these things are so, it is certain that believers
contracdng marriages with Gentiles are guilty of
fornication,'^ and are to be excluded fromyall
communication with the brotherhood, in accord-
ance with the letter of the apostle, who says that
" with persons of that kind there is to be no
taking of food even." 'S Or shall we "in that
day " '^ produce (our) marriage certificates before
the Lord's tribunal, and allege that a marriage
such as He Himself has forbidden has been duly
contracted? What is prohibited (in the pas-


" Comp. Phil. iii. 12, and c. vii. ad inil.

'- See I Cor. vii. 14.

'J Comp. Judc 7, and above, " an alien and stranger," with the
reference there.

'■I Comp. de Pn., c. xii. (mid.), and the note there.

'5 Comp. I Cor. V. 11.

"> The translator has ventured to read " du illo " here, instead ol
Oehler's " dv lUo."


46


TO HIS WIFE.


[Book II.


sage just referred to) is not " adultery ; " it is
not " fornication." The admission of a strange
man (to your couch) less violates " the temple
of God," ■ less commingles " the members of
Christ " with the members of an adulteress. ^
So far as I know, " we are not our own, but
bought with a price ; " 3 and what kind of price ?
The blood of God.'* In hurting this flesh of
ours, therefore, we hurt Him directly.s What
did that man mean who said that " to wed a
'stranger' was indeed a sin, but a very small
one?" whereas in other cases (setting aside the
injury done to the flesh which pertains to the
Lord) every voluntary sin against the Lord is
great. For, in as far as there was a power of
avoiding it, in so far is it burdened with the
charge of contumacy.

Let us now recount the other dangers or
wounds (as I have said) to faith, foreseen by
the apostle ; most grievous not to the flesh
merely, but likewise to the spirit too. For who
would doubt that faith undergoes a daily pro-
cess of obliteration by unbelieving intercourse ?
" Evil confabulations corrupt good morals ; " "^
how much more fellowship of life, and indivisi-
ble intimacy ! Any and every believing woman
must of necessity obey God. And how can she
serve two lords ^ — the Lord, and her husband
— a Gentile to boot ? For in obeying a Gentile
she will carry out Gentile practices, — personal
attractiveness, dressing of the head, worldly^
elegancies, baser blandishments, the very secrets
even of matrimony tainted : not, as among the
saints, where the duties of the sex are discharged
with honour (shown) to the very necessity
(which makes them incumbent), with modesty
and temperance, as beneath the eyes of God.


CHAP. IV. OF THE HINDRANCES WHICH AN UN-
BELIEVING HUSBAND PUTS IN HIS VVIFE'S WAY.

But let her see to (the question) how she dis-
charges her duties to her husband. To the
Lord, at all events, she is unable to give satis-
faction according to the requirements of disci-
pline ; having at her side a servant of the devil,
his lord's agent for hindering the pursuits and
duties of believers : so that if a station 9 is to be
kept, the husband at daybreak makes an appoint-
ment with his wife to meet him at the baths ;
if there are fasts to be observed, the husband


* I Cor. iii. i6, comp. vi. iq.

2 I Cor. vi. 15.

3 I Cor. vi. 19, 20.

-l See the last reference, and Acts xx. 28, where the mss. vary
between ©eou and Kupiou.

5 De proximo. Comp. (/<?. P^., cc. v. and vii. "Tieo de proximo
amicus; " " de proximo in Deum peccat."

f- Comp. b. i. c. viii. sub. fin., where Tertullian quotes the same
passage, but renders it somewhat differently.

^ Comp. Matt. vi. 24; Luke xvi. 13.

° ScECulares.

9 Tor the meaning of " statio," see di Or., c. xlx.


that same day holds a convivial banquet ; if a
charitable expedition has to be made, never is
family business more urgent. For who would
suffer his wife, for the sake of visiting the breth-
ren, to go round from street to street to other
men's, and indeed to all the poorer, cottages?
Who will willingly bear her being taken from his
side by nocturnal convocations, if need so be?
Who, finally, will without anxiety endure her
absence all the night long at the paschal solem-
nities ? Who will, without some suspicion of his
own, dismiss her to attend that Lord's Supper
which they defame? Who will suffer her to
creep into prison to kiss a martyr's bonds ? nay,
truly, to meet any one of the brethren to ex-
change the kiss? to offer water for the saints'
feet?'° to snatch (somewhat for them) from
her food, from her cup? to yearn (after them) ?
to have (them) in her mind? If a pilgrim
brother arrive, what hospitality for him in an
alien home ? If bounty is to be distributed to
any, the granaries, the storehouses, are fore-
closed.


CHAP. V. OF SIN AND DANGER INCURRED EVEN

WITH A "tolerant" HUSB.A.ND.

" But some husband does endure our (prac-
tices), and not annoy us." Here, therefore,
there is a sin ; in that Gentiles know our (prac-
tices); in that we are subject to the privity of
the unjust ; in that it is thanks to them that we
do any (good) work. He who " endures " (a
thing) cannot be ignorant of it ; or else, if he
is kept in ignorance because he does not endure
(it), he is feared. But since Scripture com-
mands each of two things — namely, that we
work for the Lord without the privity of any
second person," and without pressure upon our-
selves, it matters not in which quarter you sin ;
whether in regard to your husband's privity, if
he be tolerant, or else in regard of your own
affliction in avoiding his ///tolerance. " Cast
not," saith He, "your pearls to swine, lest they
trample them to pieces, and turn round and
overturn you also." '^ "Your pearls" are the
distinctive marks '3 of even your daily conversa-
tion. The more care you take to conceal them,
the more liable to suspicion you will make them,
and the more exposed to the grasp of Gentile
curiosity. Shall you escape notice when you
sign your bed, (or) your body ; when you blow
away some impurity ; '•* when even by night you
rise to pray? Will you not be thought to be
engaged in some work of magic? Will not your
husband know what it is which you secretly


»o I Tim. V. 10.

" Comp. Matt. vi. 1-4.

1= Matt, vil, 6.

'3 Insignia.

'* Comp. de Idol., c. xi. sub Jin.


Chap. VIII.


TO HIS WIFE.


47


taste before (taking) any food? and if he knows
it to be bread, does he not beUeve it to be that
(bread) which it is said to be? And will every
(husband), ignorant of the reason of these
things, simply endure them, without murmuring,
without suspicion whether it be bread or poison ?
Some, (it is true,) do endure (them) ; but it is
that they may trample on, that they may make |
sport of such women ; whose secrets they keep
in reserve against the danger which they believe
in, in case they ever chance to be hurt : they do
endure (wives), whose dowries, by casting in
their teeth their (Christian) name, they make
the wages of silence ; while they threaten them,
forsooth, with a suit before some spy ' as arbi-
trator ! which most women, not foreseeing, have
been wont to discover either by the extortion
of their property, or else by the loss of their
faith.

CH.4P. VI. — DANGER OF HAVING TO TAKE PART IN
HE.ATHENISH RITES AND REVELS.

The handmaid of God^ dwells amid ahen
labours ; and among these (labours), on all the j
memorial days ^ of demons, at all solemnities of
kings, at the beginning of the year, at the begin-
ning of the month, she will be agitated by the
odour of incense. And she will have to go
forth (from her house) by a gate wreathed with
laurel, and hung with lanterns, as from some new
consistory of public lusts ; she will have to sit
with her husband ofttimes in club meetings, oft-
times in taverns ; and, wont as she was formerly
to minister to the " saints," will sometimes have
to minister to the " unjust." + And will she not
hence recognise a prejudgment of her own
damnation, in that she tends them whom (for-
merly) she was expecting to judge ? s whose hand
will she yearn after? of whose cup will she par-
take? What will her husband sing^ to her, or
she to jier husband ? P>om the tavern, I sup-
pose, she who sups upon God ^ will hear some-
what ! From hell what mention of God (arises)?
what invocation of Christ ? Where are the fos-
terings of faith by the interspersion of the
Scriptures (in conversation)? Where the Spirit?
where refreshment i* where the divine benedic-
tion? All things are strange, all inimical, all
condemned ; aimed by the Evil One for the
attrition of salvation !


1 " Speculatorem ; " also = an executioner. Comp, Mark vi. 27.

2 Comp. Luke i. 38, and de Cult. Fern., b. ii. c. 1. ad init.

3 Nominibus; al. honoribus.

* Sanctis — iniquis. Comp. St. Paul's antithesis of o-Ukihv and
ayiui/ in i Cor. vi. i.

5 See I Cor. vi. 2, 3.

' See Eph. v. 19.

' So Oehler understands (apparently) the meaning to be. The
translator is inclined to think that, adopting Oehler's reading, we
may perhaps take the " r>ei " with " aliquid," and the " coenans "
absolutely, and render, " From the tavern, no doubt, while supping,
she will hear some (strain) of God," in allusion to the former seri-
tciice, and to such passages as Ps. cxxxvii. 4 (in the LXX. it is
cxxxvi. 4),


CHAP. VII. THE CASE OF A HEATHEN WHOSE

WIFE IS CONVERTED AFTER MARRIAGE WITH HIM
VERY DIFFERENT, AND MUCH MORE HOPEFUL.

If these things may happen to those women
also who, having attained the faith while in (the
state of) Gentile matrimony, continue in that
state, still they are excused, as having been
"apprehended by God " '^ in these very circum-
stances ; and they are bidden to persevere in
their married state, and are sanctified, and have
hope of "making a gain "9 held out to them.
"If, then, a marriage of this kind (contracted
before conversion) stands ratified before God,
why should not (one contracted after conver-
sion) too go prosperously fonvard, so as not to
be thus harassed by pressures, and straits, and
hindrances, and defilements, having already (as
it has) the partial sanction of divine grace?"
Because, on the one hand, the wife '° in the
former case, called fro7n among the Gentiles to
the exercise of some eminent heavenly virtue, is,
by the visible proofs of some marked (divine)
regard, a terror to her Gentile husband, so as to
make him less ready to annoy her, less active in
laying snares for her, less diligent in playing the
spy over her. He has felt " mighty works ; " "
he has seen experimental evidences ; he knows
her changed for the better : thus even he him-
self is, by his fear,'- a candidate for God. '^ Thus
men of this kind, with regard to whom the grace
of God has established a familiar intimacy, are
more easily " gained." But, on the other hand,
to descend into forbidden ground unsolicited
and spontaneously, is (quite) another thing.
Things which are not pleasing to the Lord, of
course offend the Lord, are of course introduced
by the Evil One. A sign hereof is this fact, that
it is wooers only who find the Christian name
pleasing; and, accordingly, some heathen men
are found not to shrink in horror from Christian
women, just in order to exterminate them, to
wrest them away, to exclude them from the
faith. So long as marriage of this kind is pro-
cured by the Evil One, but condemned by God,
you have a reason why you need not doubt that
it can in no case be carried to a prosperous end.

CHAP. VIII. — ARGUMENTS DRAWN EVEN FROM
HEATHENISH LAWS TO DISCOUNTENANCE MAR-
RIAGE WITH UNBELIEVERS. THE HAPPINESS OF
UNION BETWEEN PARTNERS IN THE FAITH EN-
LARGED ON IN CONCLUSION.

Let us further inquire, as if we were in very
deed inquisitors of divine sentences, whether


^ Comp. Phil. iii. 12, and c. ii. su/>fin.
9 Comp. I Cor. vii. 16, and i Pet. iii. i.

1° TertuUian here and in other places appears, as the best editors
maintain, to use the ma.sculine gender for the feminine.
'I Magnalia. Comp. 2 Cor. xii. 12.
>2 Timore.

'3 Comp, de Or., c. iii. (ined.), "angelorum candidati; ' and d*
Bapt., c. X. sub fin., " candidatus remissionis."


48


TO HIS WIFE.


[Book II.


they be lawfully (thus condemned). Even
among the nations, do not all the strictest lords
and most tenacious of discipline interdict their
own slaves from marrying out of their own
house? — in order, of course, that they may not
run into lascivious excess, desert their duties,
purvey their lords' goods to strangers. Yet,
further, have not (the nations) decided that
such women as have, after their lords' ' formal
warning, persisted in intercourse with other men's
slaves, may be claimed as slaves ? Shall earthly
disciplines be held more strict than heavenly
prescripts ; so that Gentile women, if united to
strangers, lose their liberty ; ours conjoin to
themselves the devil's slaves, and continue in
their (former) position? Forsooth, they will
deny that any formal warning has been given
them by the Lord through His own apostle ! ^

What am I to fasten on as the cause of this
madness, except the weakness of faith, ever
prone to the concupiscences of worldly ^ joys ?
— which, indeed, is chiefly found among the
wealthier ; for the more any is rich, and inflated
with the name of " matron," the more capacious
house does she require for her burdens, as it
were a field wherein ambition may run its course.
To such the churches look paltry. A rich man
is a difficult thing (to find) in the house of
God ; ■+ and if such an one is (found there), dif-
ficult (is it to find such) unmarried. What,
then, are they to do? Whence but from the
devil are they to seek a husband apt for main-
taining their sedan, and their mules, and their
hair-curlers of outlandish stature ? A Christian,
even although rich, would perhaps not afford
(all) these. Set before yourself, I beg of you,
the examples of Gentiles. Most Gentile women,
noble in extraction and wealthy in property,
unite themselves indiscriminately with the igno-
ble and the mean, sought out for themselves for
luxurious, or mutilated for hcentious, purposes.
Some take up with their own freedmen and
slaves, despising public opinion, provided they
may but have (husbands) from whom to fear no
impediment to their own liberty. To a Chris-
tian believer it is irksome to wed a believer in
ferior to herself in estate, destined as she will


1 Oehler refers us to Tac, Ann., xii. 53, and the notes on that
passage. (Consult especially Orelli's edition.)

2 The translator inclines to think that Tertullian, desiring to keep
up the parallelism of the last-mentioned case, in which (see note i)
the slave s master had to give the " warning," means by " domino "
here, not " the Lord," who on his hypothesis is the ivoinan's Master,
not the slave's, but the " lord " of the " unbeliever," i.e. , the devil : so
that the meaning would be (with a bitter irony, especially if we com-
pare the end of the last chapter, where " the Evil One " is said to
" procure " these marriages, so far is he from " condemning " them) :
" Forsooth, they" (i.e., the Christian women) "will deny that a
formal warning has been given them by the lord " (of the unbelievers,
i.e., the Evil One) " through an aposde of his! " If the other inter-
pretation be correct, the reference will be to c. ii. above.

3 Saecularium.

_ ■» Matt. xix. 23, 24; Mark x. 23, 24; Luke xviii. 24, 25; i Cor.
I. 26, 27.


be to have her wealth augmented in the person
of a poor husband ! For if it is " the poor,"
not the rich, "whose are the kingdoms of the
heavens," 5 the rich will find more in the poor
(than she brings him, or than she would in the
rich). She will be dowered with an ampler
dowry from the goods of him who is rich in
God. Let her be on an equality with him on
earth, who in the heavens will perhaps not be so.
Is there need for doubt, and inquiry, and re-
peated deliberation, whether he whom God has
entrusted with His own property ^ is fit for dotal
endowments?? Whence are we to find (words)
enough fully to tell the happiness of that mar-
riage which the Church cements, and the obla-
tion confirms, and the benediction signs and
seals ; (which) angels carry back the news of
(to heaven), (which) the Father holds for rati-
fied ? For even on earth children ^ do not
rightly and lawfully wed without their fathers'
consent. What kind of yoke is that of two
believers, (partakers) of one hope, one desire,*?
one discipline, one and the same service ? Both
(are) brethren, both fellow servants, no differ-
ence of spirit or of flesh ; nay, (they are) truly
" two in one flesh." '° Where the flesh is on6,
one is the spirit too. Together they pray, to-
gether prostrate themselves, together perform
their fasts ; mutually teaching, mutually exhort-
ing," mutually sustaining. Equally (are they)
both (found) in the Church of God ; equally at
the banquet of God ; equally in straits, in perse-
cutions, in refreshments. Neither hides (S'ught)
from the other ; neither shuns the other ; neither
is troublesome to the other. The sick is visited,
the indigent relieved, with freedom. Alms (are
given) without (danger of ensuing) torment ;
sacrifices (attended) without scruple ; daily dili-
gence (discharged) without impediment : (there
is) no stealthy signing, no trembling greeting,
no mute benediction. Between the two echo
psalms and hymns ; '^ and they mutually chal-
lenge each other which shall better chant to
their Lord. Such things when Christ sees and
hears, He .joys. To these He sends His own
peace.'3 Where two (are), there withal (is) He
Himself.'"* Where He (is), there the Evil One
is not.

These are the things which that utterance of


5 Matt. V. 3; but Tertullian has omitted "spiritu," which he in-
serts in de Pa., c. xi., where he refers to the same passage. In Luke
vi. 20 there is no roi irrev/iaTi,

6 Censum.

^ Invecta. Comp. de Fa., c. xiii ad itiit.

8 Filii.

9 Comp. de Or,, c. v. ad Jin. ; de Pa., c. ix. ad fin. ; ad Ux., i.
c. V. ad init.

1° Gen. ii. 24; Matt. xix. 5; Mark x. 8; Eph. v. 31.

" Col. iii. 16.

12 Eph. V. 19; Col. iii. 16.

'3 Comp. John xiv. 27,

'■* Matt, xviii. 20.


ELUCIDATION.


49


the apostle has, beneath its brevity, left to be
understood by us. These things, if need shall
be, suggest to your own mind. By these turn
yourself away from the examples of some. To


marry otherwise is, to believers, not " lawful
is not " expedient." '


Comp. I Cor. x. 23.


ELUCIDATION.

(Marriage lawful, p. 39.)

St. Peter was a married apostle, and the traditions of his wife which connect her married life
with Rome itself render it most surprising that those who claim to be St. Peter's successors should
denounce the marriage of the clergy as if it were crime. The touching story, borrowed from
Clement of Alexandria, is related by Eusebius. " And will they," says Clement, " reject even the
apostles ? Peter and Philip, indeed, had children ; Philip also gave his daughters in marriage to
husbands ; and Paul does not demur, in a certain Epistle, to mention his own wife, whom he did
not take about with him, in order to expedite his ministry the better." Of St. Peter and his
wife, Eusebius subjoins, " Such was the marriage of these blessed ones, and such was their per-
fect affection." '

The Easterns to this day perpetuate the marriage of the clergy, and enjoin it ; but unmar-
ried men only are chosen to be bishops. Even Rome relaxes her discipline for the Uniats, and
hundreds of her priesthood, therefore, live in honourable marriage. Thousands live in secret
marriage, but their wives are dishonoured as " concubines." It was not till the eleventh century
that the celibate was enforced. In England it was never successfully imposed ; and, though the
"priest's le?tian" was not called his wife (to the disgrace of the whole system), she was yet
honoured (see Chaucer), and often carried herself too proudly.

The enormous evils of an enforced celibacy need not here be remarked upon. The history
of Sacerdotal Celibacy, by Henry C. Lea^ of Philadelphia, is compendious, and can be readily
procured by all who wish to understand what it is that this treatise of Tertullian's orthodoxy may
best be used to teach ; viz., that we must not be wiser than God, even in our zeal for His service.


Eccl. Hist., Book III. cap. xxx.


^ Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, & Co., second edition, enlarged,


V.


ON EXHORTATION TO CHASTITY.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]


CHAP. I. INTRODUCTION. VIRGINITY CLASSIFIED

UNDER THREE SEVERAL SPECIES.

I DOUBT not, brother, that after the preraission
in peace of your wife, you, being wholly bent
upon the composing of your mind (to a right
frame), are seriously thinking about, the end of
your lone life, and of course are standing in
need of counsel. Although, in cases of this
kind, each individual ought to hold colloquy
with his own faith, and consult its strength ;
still, inasmuch as, in this (particular) species (of
trial), the necessity of the flesh (which generally
is faith's antagonist at the bar of the same inner
consciousness, to which I have alluded) sets
cogitation astir, faith has need of counsel from
without, as an advocate, as it were, to oppose
the tiecessities of the flesh : which necessity, in-
deed, may very easily be circumscribed, if the
will rather than the indulge?ice of God be con-
sidered. No one deserves (favour) by availing
himself of the indulgence, but by rendering a
prompt obedience to the will, Cof his master).^
The will of God is our sanctification,^ for He
wishes His "image" — us — to become hkewise
His " likeness ;" 4 that we may be "holy" just
as Himself is "holy."5 That good — sanctifi-
cation, I mean — I distribute into several species,
that in some one of those species we may be
found. The first species is, virginity from one's
birth : the second, virginity from one's second
birth, that is, from the font ; which (second vir-
ginity) either in the marriage state keeps (its
subject) pure by mutual compact,^ or else per-
severes in widowhood from choice : a third grade
remains, monogamy, when, after the interception
of a marriage once contracted, there is there-


' [Written, possibly, circa A.D. 204.]

2 Comp. c. iii. and the references there.

3 I Thess. iv. 3.

* Comp. I Cor. xi. 7, where the Greek is elKtuv xat io'fa.

s Lev. xi. 44; I Pet. i. 16.

'' Comp. I Cor. vii. 5; and ad Ux., b. i. c. vi.

50


after a renunciation of sexual connection. The
first virginity is (the virginity) of happiness, (and
consists in) total ignorance of that from which
you will afterwards wish to be freed : the second,
of virtue, (and consists in) contemning that the
power of which you know full well : the remain-
ing species, (that) of marrying no more after
the disjunction of matrimony by death, besides
being the glory of virtue, is (the glory) of mod-
eration likewise ; ^ for moderation is the not re-
gretting a thing which has been taken away, and
taken away by the Lord God,^ without whose will
neither does a leaf glide down from a tree, nor
a sparrow of one farthing's worth fall to the
earth. 9

CHAP. II. THE BL'^ME OF OUR MISDEEDS NOT TO

BE CAST UPON GOD. THE ONE POWER WHICH
RESTS WITH MAN IS THE POWER OF VOLITION.

What moderation, in short, is there in that
utterance, "The Lord gave, the Lord hath taken
away; as seemed (good) to the Lord, so hath
it been done !"'° And accordingly, if we renew
nuptials which have been taken away, doubtless
we strive against the will of God, willing to have
over again a thing which He has not willed us to
have. For had He willed (that we should). He
would not have taken it away ; unless we inter-
pret this, too, to be the will of God, as if He
again willed us to have what He just now did
not will. It is not the part of good and solid
faith to refer all things to the will of God in
such a manner as that ; and that each individual
should so flatter " himself by saying that " noth-
ing is done without His permission," as to make
us fail to understand that there is a something


7 Comp. ad Ux., b. i. c. viii.

8 Comp. Job i. 21.

9 Comp. Matt. X. 29.

10 Job i. 21 (in LXX. and Vulg.).

" Adulari. Comp. de Pcen., c. vi. sub init.; ad Ux., b.
ad init.


ON EXHORTATION TO CHASTITY.


in our own power. Else every sin will be ex-
cused if we persist in contending that nothing
is done by us without the will of God; and that
definition will go to the destruction of (our)
whole discipline, (nay), even of God Himself;
if either He produce by ' His own will things
which He wills not, or else (if) there is nothing
which God wills not. But as there are some
things which He forbids, against which He
denounces even eternal punishment — for, of
course, things which He forbids, and by which
withal He is offended, He does not will — so,
too, on the contrary, what He does will, He en-
joins and sets down as acceptable, and repays
with the reward of eternity.^ And so, when we
have learnt from His precepts each (class of ac-
tions), what He does not will and what He does,
we still have a volition and an arbitrating power
of electing the one ; just as it is written, " Be-
hold, I have set before thee good and evil : for
thou hast tasted of the tree of knowledge."
And accordingly we ought not to lay to the ac-
count of the Lord's will that which lies subject
to our own choice ; (on the hypothesis) that He
does not will, or else (positively) nills what is
good, who does nill what is evil. Thus, it is a
volition of our own when we will what is evil, in
antagonism to God's will, who wills what is good.
Further, if you inquire whence comes that voli-
tion whereby we will anything in antagonism to
the will of God, I shall say. It has its source in
ourselves. And I shall not make the assertion
rashly — for you must needs correspond to the
seed whence you spring — if indeed it be true,
(as it is), that the originator of our race and
our sin, Adam,^ willed the sin which he com-
mitted. For the devil did not impose upon him
the volition to sin, but subministered material
to the volition. On the other hand, the will of
Gcd had come to be a question of obedience.-*
In like manner you, too, if you fail to obey God,
who has trained you by setting before you the
precept of free action, will, through the liberty
of your will, willingly turn into the downward
course of doing what God nills : and thus you
think yourself to have been subverted by the
devil ; who, albeit he does will that you should
will something which God nills, still does not fuake
you will it, inasmuch as he did not reduce those
our protoplasts to the volition of sin ; nay, nor
(did reduce them at all) against their will, or
in ignorance as to what God nilled. For, of
course, He nilled (a thing) to be done when He
made death the destined consequence of its
commission. Thus the work of the devil is
one : to make trial whether you do will that


' Or, "from" — de.

2 i.e., eternal life : as in de Bapt., c. ii.; ad Ux., b. i. c. vii. ad
init.

3 De Pren.,c. xii. ad ^n.
* In obaudientiam vcncrat.


which it rests with you to will. But when you
have willed, it follows that he subjects you to
himself; not by having wrought volition in you,
but by having found a favourable opportunity in
your volition. Therefore, since the only thing
which is in our power is volition — and it is
herein that our mind toward God is put to
proof, whether we will the things which coincide
with His will — deeply and anxiously must the
will of God be pondered again and again, I say,
(to see) what even in secret He may will.

CHAP. III. OF INDULGENCE AND PURE VOLITION.

THE QUESTION ILLUSTRATED. 5

For what things are ftiani/estwt all know ; and
in what sense these very things are manifest
must be thoroughly examined. For, albeit some
things seem to savour of " the will of God," see-
ing that they are allowed by Him, it does not
forthwith follow that everything which is per-
mitted proceeds out of the mere and absolute will
of him who permits. Indulgence is the source
oi dSS. permission. And albeit indulgence is not
independent of volition, still, inasmuch as it has
its cause in him to whom the indulgence is
granted, it comes (as it were) from unwilling
volition, having experienced a producing cause
of itself which constrains volition. See what is
the nature of a volition of which some second
party is the cause. There is, again, a second
species of pu7-e volition to be considered. God
wills us to do some acts pleasing to ^ Himself, in
which it is not indulgence which patronizes, but
discipline which lords it. If, however. He has
given a preference over these to some other acts
— (acts), of course, which He more wills — is
there a doubt that the acts which we are to pur-
sue are those which He more wills ; since those
which He less wills (because He wills others
more) are to be similarly regarded as if He did
not Avill them ? For, by showing what He more
wills. He has effaced the lesser volition by the
greater. And in as far as He has proposed each
(volition) to your knowledge, in so far has He
defined it to be your duty to pursue that which
He has declared that He more wills. Then, if
the object of His declaring has been that you
may pursue that which He OT<7;r wills ; doubtless,
unless you do so, you savour of contrariety to
His volition, by savouring of contrariety to His
superior volition ; and you rather offend than
merit reward, by doing what He wills indeed, and
rejecting what He more wills. Partly, you sin ;
partly, if you sin not, still you deserve no re-
ward. Moreover, is not even the unwillingness
to deserve reward a sin ?

If, therefore, second marriage finds the source
of its allowance in that " will of God " which is


5 From I Cor. vii.

6 Or, " decreed by."


52


ON EXHORTATION TO CHASTITY.


called indulgence, we shall deny that that which
has indulgence for its cause is volition pure ; if
in that to which some other — that, namely,
which regards continence as more desirable — is
preferred as superior, we shall have learned (by
what has been argued above), that the not-supe-
rior is rescinded by the superior.

Suffer me to have touched upon these consid-
erations, in order that I may now follow the
course of the apostle's words. But, in the first
place, I shall not be thought irreligious if I re-
mark on what he himself professes; (namely),
that he has introduced all indulgence in regard
to marriage from his own (judgment) — that is,
from human sense, not from divine prescript.
For, withal, when he has laid down the definitive
rule with reference to " the widowed and the
unwedded," that they are to " marry if they can-
not contain," because "better it is to marry than
to burn," ' he turns round to the other class, and
says : " But to the wedded I make official decla-
ration— not indeed I, but the Lord." Thus he
shows, by the transfer of his own personality to
the Lord, that what he had said above he had
pronounced not in the Lord's person, but in his
own: "Better it is to marry than to burn."
Now, although that expression pertain to such as
are " apprehended" by the faith in an unwedded
or widowed condition, still, inasmuch as all cling
to it with a view to licence in the way of marry-
ing, I should wish to give a thorough treatment
to the inquiry what kind of good he is pointing
out which is " better than " a penalty ; which
cannot seem good but by comparison with some-
thing very bad ; so that the reason why " mar-
rying " is good, is that "burning" is worse.
" Good " is worthy of the name if it continue to
keep that name without comparison, I say not
with evil, but even with some second good ; so
that, even if it is compared to some other good,
and is by some other cast into the shade, it do
nevertheless remain in possession of the name
" good." If, however, it is the nature of an evil
which is the means which compels the predicat-
ing "good," it is not so much "good" as a spe-
cies of inferior evil, which by being obscured by
a superior evil is driven to the name of good.
Take away, in short, the condition of compari-
son, so as not to say, " Better it is to marry than
to burn ; " and I question whether you will have
the hardihood to say, "Better it is to marry,"
not adding what that is which is better. There-
fore what is not better, of course is not good
either ; inasmuch as you have taken away and
removed the condition of comparison, which,
while it makes the thing " better," so compels it
to be regarded as "good." "Better it is to
marry than to burn " is to be understood in the


same way as, " Better it is to lack one eye than
two : " if, however, you withdraw from the com-
parison, it will not be " better " to have one eye,
inasmuch as it is not "good " either. Let none
therefore catch at a defence (of marriage) from
this paragraph, which properly refers to " the
unmarried and widows," for whom no (matri-
monial) conjunction is yet reckoned : although
I hope I have shown that even such must under-
stand the nature of the permission.

chap. iv. further remarks upon the

apostle's language.

However, touching second marriage, we know
plainly that the apostle has pronounced : " Thou
hast been loosed from a wife ; seek not a wife.
But if thou shalt marry, thou wilt not sin." ^
Still, as in the former case, he has introduced the
order of this discourse too from his personal
suggestion, not from a divine precept. But there
is a wide difference between a 'precept of God
and a suggestion of man. " Precept of the
Lord," says he, " I have not ; but I give advice,
as having obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful." 3 In fact, neither in the Gospel nor in
Paul's own Epistles will you find a precept of
God as the source whence repetition of marriage
is permitted. Whence the doctrine that unity
(of marriage) must be observed derives confir-
mation ; inasmuch as that which is not found to
be permitted by the Lord is acknowledged to be
forbidden. Add (to this consideration) the fact,
that even this very introduction of human advice,
as if already beginning to reflect upon its own
extravagance, immediately restrains and recalls
itself, while it subjoins, " However, such shall
have pressure of the flesh ; " while he says that
he " spares them ; " while he adds that " the
time is wound up," so that " it behoves even such
as have wives to act as if they had not ; " while
he compares the solicitude of the wedded and
of the unwedded : for, in teaching, by means of
these considerations, the reasons why marrying
is not expedient, he dissuades from that to which
he had above granted indulgence. And this is
the case with regard to first marriage : how much
more with regard to second ! When, however,
he exhorts us to the imitation of his own exam-
ple, of course, in showing what he does wish us
to be ; that is, continent ; he equally declares
what he does not wish us to be, that is, ///conti-
nent. Thus he, too, while he wills one thing,
gives no spontaneous or true permission to that
which he nills. For had he willed, he would not
have permitted ; nay, rather, he would have com-
manded. " But see again : a woman when her
husband is dead, he says, can marry, if she wish


^ I Cor. vii 27, 28.

3 Or, " to be a believer;" ver. 25.


ON EXHORTATION TO CHASTITY.


53


to marry any one, only ' in the Lord.' " Ah !
but " happier will she be," he says, " if she shall
remain permanently as she is, according to my
opinion. I think, moreover, I too have the
Spirit of God." We see two advices : that
whereby, above, he grants the indulgence of
marrying ; and that whereby, just afterwards, he
teaches continence with regard to marrying.
"To which, then," you say, "shall we assent?"
Look at them carefully, and choose. In granting
indulgence, he alleges the advice of a prudent
man; in enjoining continence, he affirms the
advice of the Holy Spirit. Follow the admo-
nition which has divinity for its patron. It is
true that believers likewise " have the Spirit of
God ; " but not all believers are apostles. When,
then, he who had called himself a "believer,"
added thereafter that he " had the Spirit of
God," which no one would doubt even in the
case of an (ordinary) believer ; his reason for
saying so was, that he might re-assert for himself
apostolic dignity. For apostles have the Holy
Spirit properly, who have Him fully, in the oper-
ations of prophecy, and the efficacy of (heahng)
virtues, and the evidences of tongues ; not par-
tially, as all others have. Thus he attached the
Holy Spirit's authority to that form (of advice)
to which he willed us rather to attend ; and
forthwith it became not an advice of the Holy
Spirit, but, in consideration of His majesty, a
precept.

CHAP. V. UNITY OF MARRIAGE TAUGHT BY ITS

FIRST INSTITUTION, AND BY THE APOSTLE'S AP-
PLICATION OF THAT PRIMAL TYPE TO CHRIST
AND THE CHURCH.

For the laying down ' of the law of once mar-
rying, the very origin of the human race is our
authority ; witnessing as it emphatically does
what God constituted in the beginning for a type
to be examined with care by posterity. For
when He had moulded man, and had foreseen
that a peer was necessary for him, He borrowed
from his ribs one, and fashioned for him one
woman ; - whereas, of course, neither the Artifi-
cer nor the material would have been insuffi-
cient (for the creation of more). There were
more ribs in Adam, and hands that knew no
weariness in God ; but not more wives ^ in the
eye of God.'* And accordingly the man of God,
Adam, and the woman of God, Eve, discharging
mutually (the duties of) one marriage, sanctioned
for mankind a type by (the considerations of)
the authoritative precedent of their origin and
the primal will of God. Finally, " there shall
be," said He, " two in one flesh," 5 not three nor


' Dirigendam.

2 Gen. ii. 21, 22.

3 Or, " but no plurality of wives."
* Apud Deum.

s Gen. ii. 24.


four. On any other hypothesis, there would no
longer be " one flesh," nor " two (joined) into
one flesh." These will be so, if the conjunction
and the growing together in unity take place
once for all. If, however, (it take place) a sec-
ond time, or oftener, immediately (the flesh)
ceases to be "one," and there will not be " two
(joined) into one flesh," but plainly one rib
(divided) into more. But when the apostle in-
terprets, "The two shall be (joined) into one
flesh," ^ of the Church and Christ, according to
the spiritual nuptials of the Church and Christ
(for Christ is one, and one is His Church), we
are bound to recognise a duplication and addi-
tional enforcement for us of the law of unity of
marriage, not only in accordance with the foun-
dation of our race, but in accordance with the
sacrament of Christ. From one marriage do we
derive our origin in each case ; carnally in Adam,
spiritually in Christ. The two births combine in
laying down one prescriptive rule of monogamy.
In regard of each of the two, is he degenerate
who transgresses the limit of monogamy. Plu-
rality of marriage began with an accursed man.
Lamech was the first who, by marrying himself
to two women, caused tliree to be (joined) " into
one flesh." ^

CHAP. VI. THE OBJECTION FROM THE POLYGAMY

OF THE PATRIARCHS ANSWERED.

" But withal the blessed patriarchs," you say,
" made mingled alliances not only with more
wives (than one), but with concubines likewise."
Shall that, then, make it lawful for us also to
marry without limit? I grant that it will, if
there still remain types — sacraments of some-
thing future — for your nuptials to figure ; or
if even now there is room for that command,
" Grow and multiply ; " ^ that is, if no other
command has yet supervened : " The time is
already wound up ; it remains that both the}'
who have wives act as if they had not : " for, of
course, by enjoining continence, and restraining
concubitance, the seminary of our race, (this
latter command) has abolished that " Grow and
multiply." As I think, moreover, each pro-
nouncement and arrangement is (the act) of
one and the same God ; who did then indeed,
in the beginning, send forth a sowing of the
race by an indulgent laxity granted to the reins
of connubial alliances, until the world should be
replenished, until the material of the new dis-
cipline should attain to forwardness : now, how-
ever, at the extreme boundaries of the times,
has checked (the command) which He had
sent out, and recalled the indulgence which He
had granted ; not without a reasonable ground


* Eph. V. 31.

7 Gen. iv. i3, 19.

8 Gen. i. 28.


54


ON EXHORTATION TO CHASTITY.


for the extension (of that indulgence) in the
beginning, and the Hmitation ' of it in the end.
Laxity is ahvays allowed to the beginning (of
things) . The reason why any one plants a wood
and lets it grow, is that at his own time he may
cut it. The wood was the old order, which is
being pruned down by the new Gospel, in which
withal "the axe has been laid at the roots." ^
So, too, " Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth," ^
has now grown old, ever since " Let none render
evil for evil " •* grew young. I think, moreover,
that even with a view to human institutions and
decrees, things later prevail over things primi-
tive.

CHAP. VII. EVEN THE OLD DISCIPLINE WAS NOT

WITHOUT PRECEDENTS TO ENFORCE MONOGAMY.
BUT IN THIS AS IN OTHER RESPECTS, THE NEW
HAS BROUGHT IN A HIGHER PERFECTION,

^^'hy, moreover, should we not rather recog-
nise, from among (the store of) primitive prece-
dents, those which communicate with the later
(order of things) in respect of discipline, and
transmit to novelty the typical form of antiquity ?
For look, in the old law I find the pruning-knife
applied to the licence of repeated marriage.
There is a caution in Leviticus : " My priests
shall not pluralize marriages." 5 I may affirm
even that that is plural which is not once for all.
That which is not unity is number. In short,
after unity begins number. Unity, moreover, is
everything which is once for all. But for Christ
was reserved, as in all other points so in this also,
the "fulfilling of the law." ^ Thence, therefore,
among t/s the prescript is more fully and more
carefully laid down, that they who are chosen
into the sacerdotal order must be men of one
marriage ; ^ which rule is so rigidly observed,
that I remember some removed from their office
for digamy. But you will say, " Then all others
may (marry more than once), whom he excepts."
Vain shall we be if we think that what is not law-
ful for priests '^ is lawful for laics. Are not even
we laics priests ? It is written : " A kingdom
also, and priests to His God and Father, hath
He made us." ? It is the authority of the
Church, and the honour which has acquired
sanctity through the joint session of the Order,
which has established the difference between the
Order and the laity. Accordingly, where there
is no joint session of the ecclesiastical Order,


1 Repastinationis. Comp. dc Cult. Fern., I. ii. c. ix., repasti-
nantes.

2 Comp. Matt. iii. lo.

3 Ex. xxi. 24; Lev. xxiv. 20; Deut. xix. 21; Matt. v. 3S.
< See Rom. xii. 17; Matt. v. 39; i Thess. v. 16.

s I cannot find any such passage. Oehler refers to Lev. xxi. 14,
Ht neither the Septuagint nor the Vulgate has any such prohibition
there.

* Matt. V. 17, very often referred to by Tertullian.

7 Comp. I Tim. iii. 1,2; Tit. i. 5, 6; and EUicott's Commentary.

* Sacerdotibus.
9 Rev. i. 6.


you offer, and baptize, and are priest, alone for
yourself. But where three are, a church is, albeit
they be laics. For each individual lives by his
own faith, '° nor is there exception of persons with
God ; since it is not hearers of the law who are
justified by the Lord, but doers, according to
what the apostle withal says." Therefore, if you
have the right of a priest in your own person, in
cases of necessity, it behoves you to have like-
wise the discipline of a priest whenever it may be
necessary to have the right of a priest. If you
are a digamist, do you baptize? If you are a
digamist, do you offer? How much more capi-
tal (a crime) is it for a digamist laic to act as a
priest, when the priest himself, if he turn diga-
mist, is deprived of the power of acting the
priest ! " But to necessity," you say, " indulgence
is granted." No necessity is excusable which is
avoidable. In a word, shun to be found guilty
of digamy, and you do not expose yourself to
the necessity of administering what a digamist
may not lawfully administer. God wills us all to
be so conditioned, as to be ready at all times
and places to undertake (the duties of) His
sacraments. There is " one God, one faith," '^
one discipline too. So truly is this the case, that
unless the laics as well observe the rules which
are to guide the choice of presbyters, how will
there be presbyters at all, who are chosen to that
office from among the laics? Hence we are
bound to contend that the command to abstain
from second marriage relates first to the laic ;
so long as no other can be a presbyter than a
laic, provided he have been once for all a hus-
band.

CHAP. VIII. IF IT BE GRANTED TH.AT SECOND

MARRIAGE IS LAWFUL, VET ALL THINGS LAWFUL
ARE NOT EXPEDIENT.

Let it now be granted that repetition of mar-
riage is lawful, if everything which is lawful is
good. The same apostle exclaims : " All things
are lawful, but all are not profitable." '^ Pray,
can what is "not profitable" be called good?
If even things which do not make for salvation
are "lawful," it follows that even things which
are not good are " lawful." But what will it be
your duty rather to choose ; that which is good
because it is " lawful," or that which is so be-
cause it is " profitable ? " A wide difference I
take to exist between " licence " and salvation.
Concerning the " good " it is not said " it is law-
ful ; " inasmuch as " good " does not expect to
be permitted, but to be assumed. But that is
" permitted " about which a doubt exists whether
it be " good ; " which may likewise not be per-


10 SeeHab. ii. 4; Rom. i. 17; Gal. iii.

I : Heb. X. 38.

" Rom. ii. 13; Eph. vi. 9; Col. iii. 25;

I Pet. i. 17; Deut. x. 17.

'2 Eph. iv. 5, 6.

» I Cor. X. 23.

ON EXHORTATION TO CHASTITY.


55


mitted, if it have not some first (extrinsic) cause
of its being : — inasmuch as it is on account of
the danger of incontinence that second marriage,
(for instance), is permitted: — because, unless
the " licence " of some not (absolutely) good
thing were subject (to our choice), there were
no means of proving who rendered a willing
obedience to the Divine will, and who to his
own power ; which of us follows presentiality,
and which embraces the opportunity of licence.
" Licence," for the most part, is a trial of disci-
phne ; since it is through trial that discipline is
proved, and through " licence " that trial oper-
ates. Thus it comes to pass that " all things are
I lawful, but not all are expedient," so long as (it
remains true that) whoever has a " permission "
I granted is (thereby) tried, and is (consequently)
j judged during the process of trial in (the case of
j the particular) " permission." Apostles, withal,
I had a " licence " to marry, and lead wives about
(with them'). They had a " licence," too, to
" live by the Gospel." ^ But he who, when occa-
sion required,^ " did not use this right," provokes
us to imitate his own example ; teaching us that
our probation consists in that wherein " licence "
has laid the groundwork for the experimental
proof of abstinence.

CHAP. IX. SECOND MARRIAGE A SPECIES OF ADUL-
TERY. MARRIAGE ITSELF IMPUGNED, AS AKIN TO
ADULTERY.

If we look deeply into his meanings, and in-
terpret them, second marriage will have to be
termed no other than a species of fornication.
For, since he says that married persons make
this their solicitude, " how to please one an-
other" •♦ (not, of course, morally, for a good
solicitude he would not impugn) ; and (since),
he wishes them to be understood to be solicit-
ous about dress, and ornament, and every kind
of personal attraction, with a view to increasing
their power of allurement; (since), moreover,
to please by personal beauty and dress is the
genius of carnal concupiscence, which again is
the cause of fornication : pray, does second
marriage seem to you to border upon fornica-
tion, since in it are detected those ingredients
which are appropriate to fornication? The Lord
Himself said, " Whoever has seen a woman with
a view to concupiscence has already violated
her in his heart." 5 But has he who has seen
her with a view to marriage done so less or
more? What if he have even married her? —
which he would not do had he not desired her
with a view to marriage, and seen her with a
view to concupiscence ; unless it is possible for


' See I Cor. ix. 5.
^ See vers. 4, 9-18.
^ In occasionem.
•♦ Sibi, " themselves,
S Matt. V. 28. Specie rdol.,
i'em., \. ii. c, ii. ; de Fa., c. vi,


., mutually. See i Cor. vii. 32-3;.

xxxxi.; ds Pirn.,z.\\x.\ de Cult.


a wife to be married whom you have not seen or
desired. I grant it makes a wide difference
whether a married man or an unmarried desire
another woman. Every woman, (however) , even
to an unmarried man, is "another," so long as she
belongs to some one else ; nor yet is the mean
through which she becomes a married woman
any other than that through which withal (she
becomes) an adulteress. It is laws which seem
to make the difference between marriage and
fornication ; through diversity of illicitness, not
through the nature of the thing itself. Besides,
what is the thing which takes place in all men
and women to produce marriage and fornication ?
Commixture of the flesh, of course ; the con-
cupiscence whereof the Lord put on the same
footing with fornication. " Then," says (some
one), "are you by this time destroying first —
that is, single — marriage too?" And (if so) not
without reason ; inasmuch as it, too, consists of
that which is the essence of fornication.^ Ac-
cordingly, the best thing for a man is not to
touch a woman \ and accordingly the virgin's is
the principal sanctity,^ because it is free from
affinity with fornication. And since these con-
siderations may be advanced, even in the case
of first and single marriage, to forward the cause
of continence, how much more will they afford
a prejudgment for refusing second marriage?
Be thankful if God has once for all granted you
indulgence to marry. Thankful, moreover, you
will be if you know not that He has granted
you that indulgence a second time. But you
abuse indulgence if you avail yourself of it with-
out moderation. Moderation is understood (to
be derived) from modus, a limit. It does not
suffice you to have fallen back, by marrying,
from that highest grade of immaculate virginity ;
but you roll yourself down into yet a third, and
into a fourth, and perhaps into more, after you
have faHed to be continent in the second stage ;
inasmuch as he who has treated about contract-
ing second marriages has not willed to prohibit
even more. Marry we, therefore, daily .'^ And
marrying, let us be overtaken by the last day,
like Sodom and Gomorrah ; that day when the
" woe " pronounced over " such as are with child
and giving suck" shall be fulfilled, that is, over
the married and the incontinent : for from mar-
riage result wombs, and breasts, and infants.
And when an end of marrying? I believe after
the end of living !

CHAP. X- — APPLICATION OF THE SUBJECT. AD-
VANTAGES OF WIDOWHOOD.

Renounce we things carnal, that we may at
length bear fruits spiritual. Seize the opportu-


6 But compare, or rather contrast, herewith, nd Vx., 1. i. cc. ii. iii.

7 Comp. ad Ux., I. i. c. viii. ; c. i. above ; and dc I ir^. f'V/., c. x.
' Comp. ad Ux., 1. i. c. v. ad fin.


56


ON EXHORTATION TO CHASTITY.


nity — albeit not earnestly desired, yet favoura-
ble — of not having any one to whom to pay
a debt, and by whom to be (yourself) repaid !
You have ceased to be a debtor. Happy man !
You have released ' your debtor ; sustain the
loss. ^Vhat if you come to feel that what we
have called a loss is a gain? For continence
will be a mean whereby you will traffic in^ a
mighty substance of sanctity : by parsimony of
the flesh you will gain the Spirit. For let us
ponder over our conscience itself, (to see) how
different a man feels himself when he chances to
be deprived of his wife. He savours spiritually.
If he is making prayer to the Lord, he is near
heaven. If he is bending over the Scriptures,
he is "wholly in them."^ If he is singing a
psalm, he satisfies himself.^ If he is adjuring a
demon, he is confident in himself. Accordingly,
the apostle added (the recommendation of) a
temporary abstinence for the sake of adding an
efficacy to prayers,5 that we might know that
what is profitable " for a time " should be always
practised by us, that it may be always profitable.
Daily, every moment, prayer is necessary to
men ; of course continence (is so) too, since
prayer is necessary. Prayer proceeds from con-
science. If the conscience blush, prayer blushes.
It is the spirit which conducts prayer to God.
If the spirit be self-accused of a blushing ^ con-
science, how will it have the hardihood to con-
duct prayer to the altar ; seeing that, if prayer
blush, the holy minister (of prayer) itself is suf-
fused too ? For there is a prophetic utterance of
the Old Testament : " Holy shall ye be, because
God is holy ; " ^ and again : " With the holy
thou shalt be sanctified ; and with the innocent
man thou shalt be innocent ; and with the elect,
elect." ^ For it is our duty so to walk in the
Lord's discipline as is "worthy,'"? not according
to the filthy concupiscences of the flesh. For
so, too, does the apostle say, that " to savour
according to the flesh is death, but to savour ac-
cording to the spirit is life eternal in Jesus Christ
our Lord." '° Again, through the holy prophetess
Prisca" the Gospel is thus preached : that "the
holy minister knows how to minister sanctity."
" For purity," says she, "is harmonious, and they
see visions ; and, turning their face downward,
they even hear manifest voices, as salutary as
they are withal secret." If this dulling (of the
spiritual faculties), even when the carnal nature
is allowed room for exercise in first marriage.


1 Z)zmisisti, al. amisisti = " you have lost."

2 Or, " amass" — negotiaberis. See Luke xix. 15.

3 Comp. I Tim. iv. 15.
* Placet sibi.

S See I Cor. vii. 5.

^ i.e., guilty.

7 See Lev. xi. 44, 45, xix. 2, xx. 7, LXX. and Vulg.


sp. in Vulg. and LXX., where it is xvii


8 See Ps. xvni. 25,
26, 27.

9 See Eph. iv. i; Col. i. 10; i Thess. ii. t2.
■° See Rom. viii. 5, 6, esp. in Vulg.

" A Marcionite prophetess, abo called Priscilla.


averts the Holy Spirit ; how much more when it
is brought into play in second marriage !

CHAP. XL THE MORE THE WIVES, THE GREATER

THE DISTRACTION OF THE SPIRIT.

For (in that case) the shame is double ; inas-
much as, in second marriage, two wives beset the
same husband — one in spirit, one in flesh. For
the first wife you cannot hate, for whom you re-
tain an even more religious affection, as being
already received into the Lord's presence ; for
whose spirit you make request ; for whom you
render annual oblations. Will you stand, then,
before the Lord with as many wives as you com-
memorate in prayer ; and will you offer for two ;
and will you commend those two (to God) by
the ministry of a priest ordained (to his sacred
office) on the score of monogamy, or else con-
secrated (thereto) on the score even of virgin-
ity, surrounded by widows married but to one
husband? And will your sacrifice ascend with
unabashed front, and — among all the other
(graces) of a good mind — will you request for
yourself and for your wife chastity ?

CHAP. XII. — EXCUSES COMMONLY URGED IN DE-
FENCE OF SECOND MARRIAGE. THEIR FUTILITY,
ESPECIALLY IN THE CASE OF CHRISTIANS, POINTED
OUT.

I am aware of the excuses by which we
colour our insatiable carnal appetite.'^ Our pre-
texts are : the necessities of props to lean on ;
a house to be managed ; a family to be gov-
erned ; chests '3 and keys to be guarded ; the
wool-spinning to be dispensed ; food to be
attended to ; cares to be generally lessened.
Of course the houses of none but married men
fare well ! The families of celibates, the estates
of eunuchs, the fortunes of military men, or of
such as travel without wives, have gone to rack
and ruin ! For are not we, too, soldiers ? Sol-
diers, indeed, subject to all the stricter disci-
pline, that we are subject to so great a General? •*
Are not we, too, travellers in this world ? '5 Why
moreover. Christian, are you so conditioned,
that you cannot (so travel) without a wife ? " In
my present (widowed) state, too, a consort in
domestic works is necessary." (Then) take some
spiritual wife. Take to yourself from among the
widows one fair in faith, dowered with poverty,
sealed with age. You will (thus) make a good
marriage. A plurality of such wives is pleasing
to God. " But Christians concern themselves
about posterity" — to whom there is no to-mor-
row ! '^ Shall the servant of God yearn after
heirs, who has disinherited himself from the


•2 Comp. herewith, ati Ux., 1. i. c. iv.
'3 Or " purses."

■■i Comp. 2 Tim. ii. 3, 4; Heb. ii. 10.

'5 Or "age" — sseculo. Comp. Ps. xxxix. 12 (in LXX. xxxviii.
13, as in Vulg) and Heb. xi. 13.

>6 Comp. Matt. vi. 34; Jas. iv. 13-15.


ON EXHORTATION TO CHASTITY.


57


world ? And is it to be a reason for a man to
repeat marriage, if from his first (marriage) he
have no children? And shall he thus have, as
the first benefit (resulting therefrom), this, that
he should desire longer life, when the apostle
himself is in haste to be "with the Lord?"'
Assuredly, most free will he be from encum-
brance in persecutions, most constant in mar-
tyrdoms, most prompt in distributions of his
goods, most temperate in acquisitions ; lastly,
undistracted by cares will he die, when he has
left children behind him — perhaps to perform
the last rites over his grave ! Is it then, per-
chance, in forecast for the commonwealth that
such (marriages) are contracted? for fear the
states fail, if no rising generations be trained up ?
for fear the rights of law, for fear the branches
of commerce, sink quite into decay? for fear
the temples be quite forsaken? for fear there be
none to raise the acclaim, "The lion for the
Christians?" — for these are the acclaims which
they desire to hear who go in quest of offspring !
Let the well-known burdensomeness of children
— especially in our case — suffice to counsel
widowhood : (children) whom men are com-
pelled by laws to undertake (the charge of) ;
because no wise man would ever willingly have
desired sons ! What, then, will you do if you
succeed in filling your new wife with your own
conscientious scruples? Are you to dissolve the
conception by aid of drugs ? I think to us it is
no more lawful to hurt (a child) in process of
birth, than one (already) born. But perhaps at
that time of your wife's pregnancy you will have
the hardihood to beg from God a remedy for so
grave a solicitude, which, when it lay in your
own power, you refused? Some (naturally)
barren woman, I suppose, or (some woman) of
an age already feeling the chill of years, will be
the object of your forecasting search. A course
prudent enough, and, above all, worthy of a be-
liever ! For there is no woman whom we have
believed to have borne (a child) when barren or
old, when God so willed ! which he is all the
more likely to do if any one, by the presump-
tion of this foresight of his own, provoke emu-
lation on the part of God. In fine, we know a
case among our brethren, in which one of them
took a barren woman in second marriage for his
daughter's sake, and became as well for the
second time a father as for the second time a
husband,

CHAP. XIII. — EXAMPLES FROM AMOXG THE
HEATHEN, AS WELL AS FROM THE CHURCH, TO
ENFORCE THE FOREGOING EXHORTATION.

To this my exhortation, best beloved brother,
there are added even heathenish examples ;


Comp. Phil.


which have often been set by ourselves as well
(as by others) in evidence, when anything good
and pleasing to God is, even among " strangers,"
recognised and honoured with a testimony. In
short, monogamy among the heathen is so held
in highest honour, that even virgins, when legiti-
mately marrying, have a woman never married
but once appointed them as brideswoman ; and
if you say that " this is for the sake of the
omen," of course it is for the sake of a good
omen ; again, that in some solemnities and offi-
cial functions, single-husbandhood takes the pre-
cedence : at all events, the wife of a Flamen
must be but once married, which is the law of
the Flamen (himself) too. For the fact that the
chief pontiff himself must not iterate marriage
is, of course, a glory to monogamy. When,
however, Satan affects God's sacraments, it is a
challenge to us ; nay, rather, a cause for blush-
ing, if we are slow to exhibit to God a con-
tinence which some render to the devil, by
perpetuity sometimes of virginity, sometimes of
widowhood. We have heard of Vesta's virgins,
and Juno's at the town ^ of Achaia, and Apollo's
among the Delphians, and Minerva's and Diana's
in some places. We have heard, too, of conti-
nent men, and (among others) the priests of the
famous Egyptian bull : women, moreover, (dedi-
cated) to the African Ceres, in whose honour
they even spontaneously abdicate matrimony,
and so live to old age, shunning thenceforward
all contact with males, even so much as the
kisses of their sons. The devil, forsooth, has
discovered, after voluptuousness, even a chastity
which shall work perdition ; that the guilt may
be all the deeper of the Christian who refuses
the chastity which helps to salvation ! A testi-
mony to us shall be, too, some of heathendom's
women, who have won renown for their obstinate
persistence in single-husbandhood : some Dido,^
(for instance), who, refugee as she was on alien
soil, when she ought rather to have desired,
without any external solicitation, marriage with
a king, did yet, for fear of experiencing a sec-
ond union, prefer, contrariwise, to "burn " rather
than to " marry ; " or the famous Lucretia, who,
albeit it was but once, by force, and against her
will, that she had suffered a strange man, washed
her stained flesh in her own blood, lest she
should live, when no longer single-husbanded in
her own esteem ! A little more care will furnish
you with more examples from our own (sisters) ;
and those indeed, superior to the others, inas-
much as it is a greater thing to live in chastity
than to die for it. Easier it is to lay down your
life because you have lost a blessing, than to


= ^gium (Jos. Scaliger, in Oehler).

3 But Tertullian overlooks the fact that both Ovid and \ ireil
represent her as more than willing to marry /Eitcas. [Why should
he note the fables of poets ? This testimony of a Carthaginian it
historic evidence of the fact.J


58


ELUCIDATION.


keep by living that for which you would rather
die outright. How many men, therefore, and
how many women, in Ecclesiastical Orders, owe
their position to continence, who have preferred
to be wedded to God ; who have restored the
honour of their flesh, and who have already
dedicated themselves as sons of that (future)
age, by slaying in themselves the concupiscence


of lust, and that whole (propensity) which could
not be admitted within Paradise ! ' Whence it
is presumable that such as shall wish to be re-
ceived within Paradise, ought at last to begin to
cease from that thing from which Paradise is
intact.


Comp. INIatt. xxii. 29, 30; Mark xii. 24, 25; Luke xx. 34-36.


ELUCIDATION.

(Albeit they be laics, p. 54.)

In the tract on Baptism ' Tertullian uses language implying that three persons compose a
Church, But here we find it much more strongly pronounced, — Ubi ires, Ecdesia est, licet Laid.
The question of lay-baptism we may leave till we come to Cyprian, only noting here, that, while
Cyprian abjures his " master " on this point, his adversary, the Bishop of Rome, adopts Tertul-
lian's principle in so far. But, in view of Matt, xviii. 20, surely we may all allow that three are a
quorum when so "gathered together in Christ's name," albeit not for all purposes. Three
women may claim the Saviour's promise when lawfully met together for social devotions, nor can
it be denied that they have a share in the priesthood of the " peculiar people." So, too, even of
three pious children. But it does not follow that they are a church /^r all purposes, — preaching,
celebrating sacraments, ordaining, and the like. The late Dean Stanley was fond of this passage
of Tertullian, but obviously it might be abused to encourage a state of things which all orderly
and organized systems of religion must necessarily discard.- On p. 58 there is a reference,
apparently, to deaconesses as "women in Ecclesiastical Orders."


Chap. vi. vol. iii. p. 672, this series.


2 Hooker, Eccl. Polity, b. iii. cap. i. 14.


VI.
ON MONOGAMY.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.


CHAP. I. DIFFERENT VIEWS IN REGARD TO MAR-
RIAGE HELD BY HERETICS, PSYCHICS, AND SPIR-
ITUALISTS.

Heretics do away with marriages ; Psychics
accumulate them. The former marry not even
once ; the latter not only once. What dost thou,
Law of the Creator ? Between alien eunuchs and
thine own grooms, thou complainest as much of
the over-obedience of thine own household as
of the contempt of strangers. They who abuse
thee, do thee equal hurt with them who use thee
not. In fact, neither is such continence lauda-
ble because it is heretical, nor such Ucence de-
fensible because it is psychical. The former is
blasphemous, the latter wanton ; the former de-
stroys the God of marriages, the latter puts Him
to the blush. Among us, however, whom the
recognition of spiritual gifts entitles to be deserv-
edly called Spiritual, continence is as religious as
licence is modest ; since both the one and the
other are in harmony with the Creator. Conti-
nence honours the law of marriage, licence tem-
pers it ; the former is not forced, the latter is reg-
ulated ; the former recognises the power of free
choice, the latter recognises a hmit. We admit
one marriage, just as we do one God. The law
of marriage reaps an accession of honour where
it is associated with shamefastness. But to the
Psychics, since they receive not the Spirit, the
things which are the Spirit's are not pleasing.
Thus, so long as the things which are the Spirit's
please them not, the things which are of the flesh
will please, as being the contraries of the Spirit.
"The flesh," saith (the apostle), "lusteth against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh." ^ But
what will the flesh " lust " after, except what is
more of the flesh ? For which reason withal, in
the beginning, it became estranged from the


' [Written against orthodoxy, say circa A.D. 208. But see Elu-
cidation I.].
* Gal. V. 17.


Spirit. "My Spirit," saith (God), "shall not
permanently abide in these men eternally,^ for
that they are flesh." '^

CHAP. II. THE SPIRITUALISTS VINDICATED FROM

THE CHARGE OF NOVELTY.

And so they upbraid the discipline of monog-
amy with being a heresy ; nor is there any other
cause whence they find themselves compelled to
deny the Paraclete more than the fact that they
esteem Him to be the institutor of a novel disci-
pline, and a discipline which they find most
harsh : so that this is already the first ground on
which we must join issue in a general handling
(of the subject), whether there is room for main-
taining that the Paraclete has taught any such
thing as can either be charged with novelty, in
opposition to catholic tradition,5 or with burden-
someness, in opposition to the "light burden"^
of the Lord.

Now concerning each point the Lord Himself
has pronounced. For in saying, " I still have
many things to say unto you, but ye are not yet
able to bear them : when the Holy Spirit shall
be come. He will lead you into all truth," ? He
sufficiently, of course, sets before us that He will
bring such (teachings) as maybe esteemed alike
novel, as having never before been published,
and finally burdensome, as if that were the reason
why they were not published. " It follows,"
you say, " that by this line of argument, anything
you please which is novel and burdensome may
be ascribed to the Paraclete, even if it have come
from the adversary spirit." No, of course. For
the adversary spirit would be apparent from the
diversity of his preaching, beginning by adulter-


3 In jevum; ei« rbi' aXCiva (LXX.) ; in aeternum (Vulg.).
* Gen. vi. 3.

5 Comp. I Cor. xi. 2; 3 Thess. ii. 15, iii. 6. Comp. the Gr. text
and the Vulg. in locis.
'' See Matt. xi. 30.
7 John xvi. 12, 13. Tertullian's rendering is not vcrbaiim,

59


6o


ON MONOGAMY.


ating the rule of faith, and so (gomg on to)
adulterating the order of discipline ; because the
corruption of that which holds the first grade,
(that is, of faith, which is prior to discipline,)
comes first. A man must of necessity hold he-
retical views of God first, and then of His insti-
tution. But the Paraclete, having many things
to teach fully which the Lord deferred till He
came, (according to the pre-definition,) will be-
gin by bearing emphadc witness to Christ, (as
being) such as we believe (Him to be), together
with the whole order of God the Creator, and
will glorify Him,' and will "bring to remem-
brance " concerning Him. And when He has
thus been recognised (as the promised Com-
forter), on the ground of the cardinal rule. He
will reveal those " many things" which appertain
to disciplines ; while the integrity of His preach-
ing commands credit for these (revelations),
albeit they be " novel," inasmuch as they are
now in course of revelation, albeit they be " bur-
densome," inasmuch as not even now are they
found bearable : (revelations), however, of none
other Christ than (the One) who said that He
had withal " other many things " which were to
be fully taught by the Paraclete, no less burden-
some to men of our own day than to them, by
whom they were then " not yet able to be borne."

CHAP, III. — THE QUESTION OF NOVELTY FURTHER
CONSIDERED IN CONNECTION WITH THE WORDS
OF THE LORD AND HIS APOSTLES.

But (as for the question) whether monogamy
be " burdensome," let the still shameless " infir-
mity of the flesh " look to that : let us meantime
come to an agreement as to whether it be
"novel." This (even) broader assertion we
make : that even if the Paraclete had in this our
day definitely prescribed a virginity or continence
total and absolute, so as not to permit the heat
of the flesh to foam itself down even in single
marriage, even thus He would seem to be intro-
ducing nothing of "novelty;" seeing that the
Lord Himself opens " the kingdoms of the heav-
ens " to "eunuchs,"^ as being Himself, withal, a
virgin ; to whom looking, the apostle also —
himself too for this reason abstinent — gives the
preference to continence.^ ("Yes"), you say,
"but saving the law of marriage." Saving it,
plainly, and we will see under what limitations ;
nevertheless already destroying it, in so far as he
gives the preference to continence. " Good,"
he says, "(it is) for a man not to have contact
with a woman." It follows that it is evil to have
contact with her ; for nothing is contrary to good
except evil. And accordingly (he says), "It


remains, that both they who have wives, so be as
if they have not," * that it may be the more bind-
ing on them who have not to abstain from hav-
ing them. He renders reasons, likewise, for so
advising : that the unmarried think about God,
but the married about how, in (their) marriage,
each may please his (partner). 5 And I may
contend, that what is permitted is not absolutely
good.^ For what is absolutely good is not per-
mitted, but needs no asking to make it lawful.
Permission has its cause sometimes even in
necessity. Finally, in this case, there is no voli-
tion on the part of him who permits marriage.
For his volition points another way. " I will,''
he says, "that you all so be as I too (am)." 7
And when he shows that (so to abide) is "bet-
ter," what, pray, does he demonstrate himself to
"will," but what he has premised is "better?"
And thus, if he pei-7}iits something other than
what he has "willed" — permitted not volunta-
rily, but of necessity — he shows that what he has
unwillingly granted as an indulgence is not abso-
lutely good. Finally, when he says, " Better it
is to marry than to burn," what sort of good
must that be understood to be which is better
than a penalty? which cannot seem "better"
except when compared to a thing very bad?
" Good " is that which keeps this name per se ;
without comparison — I say not with an evil, but
even — with some other good : so that, even if
it be compared to and overshadowed by another
good, it nevertheless remains in (possession of)
the name of good. If, on the other hand, com-
parison with evil is the mean which obliges it to
be called good ; it is not so much " good " as a
species of inferior evil, which, when obscured by
a higher evil, is driven to the name of good.
Take away, in short, the condition, so as not to
say, " Better it is to marry than to burn ; " and
I question whether you will have the hardihood
to say, " Better (it is) to marry," not adding
than what it is better. This done, then, it
becomes not " better ; " and while not " better,"
not " good " either, the condition being taken
away which, while making it " better " than
another thing, in that sense obliges it to be con-
sidered " good." Better it is to lose one eye
than two. If, however, you withdraw from the
comparison of either evil, it will not be better to
have one eye, because it is not even good.

What, now, if he accommodatingly grants all
indulgence to marry on the ground of his own
(that is, of human) sense, out of the necessity
which we have mentioned, inasmuch as " better
it is to marry than to burn? " In fact, when he


• See John xvi 14.

^ See Matt. xix. 12. Comp. de. Pa., (


dc. Cult. Fan., \.


3 See I Cor. vii. i, 7, 37, 40; and comp. de Ex. Cast., c.


* I Cor. vii. ag.

5 I Cor. vii. 32-34.

6 Comp. ad Ux., 1. i. c. iii.; de Czilt. Fern., 1. ii. c. x. sttb Jiit. ;
and de Ex. Cast., c. iii , which agrees nearly verbatim with what fol-
lows.

7 I Cor. vii. 7, only the Greek is fle'Au, not ^oiiAofiai.


ON MONOGAMY.


6i


turns to the second case, by saying, "But to
the married I officially announce — not I, but
the Lord" — he shows that those things which
he had said above had not been (the dictates)
of the Lord's authority, but of human judgment


credible that He should have tempered what it
would have become Him even to have abolished,
if you understand what Christ's " will " is. Here-
in also you ought to recognise the Paraclete in
His character of Comforter, in that He excuses


When however, he turns their minds back to ' your infirmity 7 from (the stringency of) an abso-
continence, (" But I will you all so to be,") ;' I lute continence.


think, moreover," he says, " I too have the Spirit
of God ; " in order that, if he had granted any
indulgence out of necessity, that, by the Holy
Spirit's authority, he might recall. But John,
too, when advising us that " we ought so to walk
as the Lord withal did," ' of course admonished
us to walk as well in accordance with sanctity of
the flesh (as in accordance with His example
in other respects). Accordingly he says more
manifestly: "And every (man) who hath this
hope in Him maketh himself chaste, just as
Himself withal is chaste." => For elsewhere,
again, (we read) : " Be ye holy, just as He withal
was holy " 3 —in the flesh, namely. For of the
Spirit he would not have said (that), inasmuch
as the Spirit is without any external influence
recognised as " holy ; " nor does He wait to be
admonished to sanctity, which is His proper
nature. But the flesh is taught sanctity ; and
that withal, in Christ, was holy.

Therefore, if all these (considerations) obliter-
ate the licence of marrying, whether we look into
the condition on which the licence is granted,
or the preference of continence which is
posed, why, after the apostles, could not the
same Spirit, supervening for the purpose of con-
ducting disciplehood 4 into "all truth" through
the gradations of the times (according to what
the preacher says, "A time to everything " s),
impose by this time a final bridle upon the flesh.


CHAP. IV. WAIVING ALLUSION TO THE PARA-
CLETE, TERTULLIAN COMES TO THE CONSIDERA-
TION OF THE ANCIENT SCRIPTURES, AND THEIR
TESTIMONY ON THE SUBJECT IN HAND.

Waiving, now, the mention of the Paraclete,
as of some authority of our own, evolve we the
common instruments of the primitive Scriptures.
This very thing is demonstrable by us : that the
rule of monogamy is neither novel nor strange,
nay rather, is both ancient, and proper to Chris-
tians ; so that you may be sensible that the
Paraclete is rather its ;rstitutor than zV/stitutor.
As for what pertains to antiquity, what more
ancient formal type can be brought fonvard,
than the very original fount of the human race ?
One female did God fashion for the male, cull-
ing one rib of his, and (of course) (one) out of
a plurality. But, moreover, in the introductory
speech which preceded the work itself, He said,
" It is not good for the man that he be alone ;
let us make an help-meet for him." For He
would have said " helpers " if He had destined
'',^''' I him to have more wives (than one). He added,
too, a law concerning the future ; if, that is, (the
words) "And two shall be (made) into one
flesh" — not three, nor more; else they would
be no more "two " if (there were) more — were
prophetically uttered. The law stood (firm).
In short, the unity


of marriage lasted to the


no longer obliquely calling us away from mar- ^^^^ ^^^^ -^^ ^^ case of the authors of our race ;
riage, but openly ; since now more (than ever) I ^^j. because there were no other women, but
"the time is become wound up,'"^ — about 160^1^^^,^^^^ ^^ reason why there were none was
years having elapsed since then ? Would you ^^^ ^^ first-fruits of the race might not be con-
not spontaneously ponder (thus) in your own ; taminated by a double marriage. Otherwise,
mind : " This discipline is old, shown before- j^^^^ q^^ (-go) willed, there could withal have
hand, even at that early date, in the Lord's flesh ; ^^^^^ (others) ; at all events, he might have
and will, (and) successively thereafter in both j ^^\^^^ fj-om the abundance of his own daughters


the counsels and the examples of His apostles?
Of old we were destined to this sanctity. Noth-
ing of novelty is the Paraclete introducing.
What He premonished. He is (now) definitively


having no less an Eve (taken) out of his own
bones and flesh — if piety had allowed it to be
done. But where the first crime (is found) —
homicide, inaugurated in fratricide — no crime


appointing; what He deferred. He is (now) ! ^^.^^ ^^ ^^^^j-^l^y of tl-^e second place as a double
exacting." And presently, by revolving these ^ ^^^rriage. For it makes no difference whether


thoughts, you will easily persuade yourself that it
was much more competent to the Paraclete to
preach unity of marriage, who could withal have
preached its annulling ; and that it is more


' I John ii. 6.

2 I John iii. 3.

3 There is no such passage i
e similar in i Pet. i. 15.

< Disciplinam.
S Eccles. iii. I.
<> I Cor. vii. 29.


any Epistle of St. John. There is


a man have had two wives singly, or whether
individuals (taken) at the same time have made
two. The number of (the individuals) conjoined
and separate is the same. Still, God's institu-
tion, after once for all suffering violence through
Lamech, remained firm to the very end of that
race. Second Lamech there arose none, in the


^ Comp. Rom. viii. 26.


62


ON MONOGAMY.


way of being husband to two wives. What
Scripture does not note, it denies. Other iniqui-
ties provoke the deluge : (iniquities) once for
all avenged, whatever was their nature ; not,
however, " seventy-seven times," ' which (is the
vengeance which) double marriages have de-
served. ^ '•-.'■' 1 :' .

But again : the re-formation of the second
human race is traced from monogamy as its
mother. Once more, " two (joined) into one
flesh " vmdertake (the duty of) " growing and
multiplying," — Noah, (namely), and his wife,
and their sons, in single marriage.^ Even in the
very animals monogamy is recognised, for fear
that even beasts should be born of adultery.
"Out of all beasts," said (God),^ "out of all
flesh, two shalt thou lead into the ark, that they
may live with thee, male and female : they shall
be (taken) from all flying animals according to
(their) kind, and from all creepers of the earth
according to their kind ; two out of all shall
enter unto thee, male and female." In the same
formula, too. He orders sets of sevens, made up
of pairs, to be gathered 'to him, consisting of
male and female — one male and one female.^
What more shall I say? Even unclean birds
were not allowed to enter with two females each.


CHAP. v. CONNECTION OF THESE PRIMEVAL

TESTIMONIES WITH CHRIST.

Thus far for the testimony of things primor-
dial, and the sanction of our origin, and the
pre-judgment of the divine institution, which
of course is a law, not (merely) a memorial ;
inasmuch as, if it was " so done from the be-
ginning," we find ourselves directed to the
beginning by Christ : just as, in the question of
divorce, by saying that that had been permitted
by Moses on account of their hard-heartedness,
but from the beginning it had not been so. He
doubd.^ss recalls to "the beginning" the (law
of) the individuity of marriage. And accord-
ingly, those whom God "from the beginning"
conjoined, " two into one flesh," man shall not
at the present day separates The apostle, too,
writing to the Ephesians, says that God " had
proposed in Himself, at the dispensation of the
fulfilment of the times, to recaU to the head "
(that is, to the beginning) " things universal in
Christ, which are above the heavens and above
the earth in Him." '' So, too, the two letters of
Greece, the first and the last, the Lord assumes
to Himself, as figures of the beginning and end
which concur in Himself: so that, just as Alpha


1 Septuagies septies. See Gen. iv. 19-24.

2 Comp. Gen. vii. 7 with i Pet. iii. 20 adjiti.

3 Comp, Gen. vi. 19, 20.
* See Gen. vii. 3.

5 See Matt. xix. 6.

'' Eph. i. q, 10. The Latin of Tertiillian deserves careful com-
parison with fhe original Greek of St. Paul.


rolls on till it reaches Omega, and again Omega
rolls back till it reaches Alpha, in the same way
He might show that in Himself is both the
downward course of the beginning on to the
end, and the backward course of the end up to
the beginning ; so that every economy, ending
in Him through whom it began, — through the
Word of God, that is, who was made flesh, 7 —
may have an end correspondent to its beginning.
And so truly in Christ are all things recalled to
" the beginning," that even faith returns from
circumcision to the integrity of that (original)
flesh, as "it was from the beginning;" and free-
dom of meats and abstinence from blood alone,
as " it was from the beginning ; " and the indi-
viduality of marriage, as " it was from the begin-
ning ; " and the restriction of divorce, which
was not " from the beginning ; " and lastly, the
whole man into Paradise, where he was " from
the beginning." Why, then, ought He not to
restore Adam thither at least as a monogamist,
who cannot present him in so entire perfection
as he was when dismissed thence ? Accordingly,
so far as pertains to the restitution of the begin-
ning, the logic both of the dispensation you live
under, and of your hope, exact this from you,
that what was " from the beginning " (should
be) mlicclDrdance with "the beginning;" which
(beginning) you find counted in Adam, and re-
counted in Noah. Make your election, in which
of the twain you account your " beginning." In
both, the censorial power of monogamy claims
you for itself. But again : if the beginning passes
on to the end (as Alpha to Omega), as the end
passes back to the beginning (as Omega to Al-
pha) , and thus our origin is transferred to Christ,
the animal to the spiritual — inasmuch as "(that
was) not first which is spiritual, but (that) which
(is) animal ; then what (is) spiritual,"^ — let us,
in like manner (as before), see whether you owe
this very (same) thing to this second origin also :
whether the last Adam also meet you in the
selfsame form as the first ; since the last Adam
(that is, Christ) was entirely unwedded, as was
even the first Adam before his exile. But, pre-
senting to your weakness the gift of the example
of His own flesh, the more perfect Adam — that
is, Christ, more perfect on this account as well
(as on others), that He was more entirely pure
— stands before you, if you are willing (to copy
Him), as a voluntary celibate in the flesh. If,
however, you are unequal (to that perfection),
He stands before you a monogamist in spirit,
having one Church as His spouse, according to
the figure of Adam and of Eve, which (figure)
the aposde interprets of that great sacrament of
Christ and the Church, (teaching that), through
the spiritual, it was analogous to the carnal


7 See John i. i-

8 I Cor. XV. 46.


ON MONOGAMY


63


monogamy. You see, therefore, after what man-
ner, renewing your origin even in Christ, you
cannot trace down that (origin) without the
profession of monogamy; unless, (that is), you
be in flesh what He is in spirit ; albeit withal,
what He was in flesh, you equally ought to have
been.

CHAP. VI. THE C.A.SE OF ABRAHAM, AND ITS

BEARING ON THE PRESENT QUESTION.

But let US proceed with our inquiry into some
eminent chief fathers of our origin : for there are
some to whom our monogamist parents Adam
and Noah are not pleasing, nor perhaps Christ
either. To Abraham, in fine, they appeal ; pro-
hibited though they are to acknowledge any
other father than God.' Grant, now, that Abra-
ham is our father ; grant, too, that Paul is. " In
the Gospel," says he, "I have begotten you."^
Show yourself a son even of Abraham. For your
origin in him, you must know, is not referable
to every period of his life : there is a definite
time at which he is your father. For if " faith "
is the source whence we are reckoned to Abra-
ham as his " sons " (as the apostle teaches, say-
ing to the Galatians, " You know, consequently,
that (they) who are of faith, these are sons of
Abraham "3)^ lijhen did Abraham "believe God,
and it was accounted to him for righteousness?"
I suppose when still in monogamy, since (he
was) not yet in circumcision. But if afterwards
he changed to either (opposite) — to digamy
through cohabitation with his handmaid, and to
circumcision through the seal of the testament
— you cannot acknowledge him as your father
except at that time when he " believed God,"
if it is true that it is according to faith that you
are his son, not according to flesh. Else, if it
be the later Abraham whom you follow as your
father — that is, the digamist (Abraham) — re-
ceive him withal in his circumcision. If you
reject his circumcision, it follows that you wfll
refuse his digamy too. Two characters of his,
mutually diverse in two several ways, you will not
be able to blend. His digamy began with cir-
cumcision, his monogamy with uncircumcision.'*
You receive digamy ; admit circumcision too.
You retain uncircumcision ; you are bound to
monogamy too. Moreover, so true is it that it
is of the monogamist Abraham that you are the
son, just as of the uncircumcised, that if you be
circumcised you immediately cease to be his
son, inasmuch as you will not be "of faith," but
of the seal of a faith which had been justified
in uncircumcision. You have the apostle : learn
(of him), together with the Galatians. = In like


' See Matt, xxiii. 9.

^ I Cor. iv. 15, where it is 5ia toO euayyeAi'ou.
3 Gal. iii. 7.

* This is an error. Comp. Gen xvi. with Gen. xvii.
__S See Gal. iii. iv. and comp. Rom. iv.


manner, too, if you have involved yourself in
digamy, you are not the son of that Abraham
whose " faith " preceded in monogamy. For
albeit it is subsequently that he is caUed "a
father of many nations,"^ still it is of those
(nations) who, as the fruit of the "faith" which
precedes digamy, had to be accounted " sons
of Abraham."?

Thenceforward let matters see to themselves.
Figures are one thing; laws another. Images
are one thing; statutes another. Images pass
away when fulfilled : statutes remain permanently
to be fulfilled. Images prophesy : statutes gov-
ern. What that digamy of Abraham portends,
the same apostle fully teaches,^ the interpreter of
each testament, just as he likewise lays it down
that our " seed " is caUed in Isaac.9 If you are
" of the free woman," and belong to Isaac, he,
at all events, maintained unity of marriage to
the last.

These accordingly, I suppose, are they in whom
my origin is counted. All others I ignore. And
if I glance around at their examples — (exam-
ples) of some David heaping up marriages for
himself even through sanguinary means, of some
Solomon rich in wives as well as in other riches —
you are bidden to " follow the better things ; " '°
and you have withal Joseph but once wedded,
and on this score I venture to say better than
his father ; you have Moses, the intimate eye-
witness of God ; " you have Aaron the chief
priest. The second Moses, also, of the second
People, who led our representatives into the
(possession of) the promise of God, in whom
the Name (of Jesus) was first inaugurated, was
no digamist.

CHAP. VII. FROM PATRIARCHAL, TERTULLIAN

COMES TO LEGAL, PRECEDENTS.

After the ancient examples of the patriarchs,
let us equally pass on to the ancient documents
of the legal Scriptures, that we may treat in
order of all our canon. And since there are
some who sometimes assert that they have
nothing to do with the law (which Christ has
not dissolved, but fulfilled),'- sometimes catch at
such parts of the law as they choose ; ])lainly do
we too assert that the law has deceased in this
sense, that its burdens — according to the sen-
tence of the apostles — which not even the fath-
ers were able to sustain,'^ have wholly ceased :
such (parts), however, as relate to righteous-
ness not only permanently remain reserved, but


6 See Gen. xvii. 5.

7 See Rom. iv. 11, 12, Gal. iii. 7; and comp. Ma

8 See Gal. iv. 21-31.

9 See vers. 28,31. 1

'" See Ps. xxxvii. 27 (in LXX. xxxvi. 27) ; i Pet.


i. 9, John


11; 3 John


" Dei de proximo arbitrum See Num. xli. 6-8; Dcut. xxxiv. 10.
12 .See Matt v. 17.
'■5 See Acts xv. 10.


64


ON MONOGAMY.


even amplified ; in order, to be sure, that our
righteousness may be able to redound above the
righteousness of the scribes and of the Phari-
sees.' If " righteousness " must, of course chas-
tity must too. If, then, forasmuch as there is in
the law a precept that a man is to take in mar-
riage the wife of his brother if he have died
without children,- for the purpose of raising up
seed to his brother ; and this may happen re-
peatedly to the same person, According to that
crafty question of the Sadducees ; 3 men for that
reason think that frequency of marriage is per-
mitted in other cases as well : it will be their
duty to understand first the reason of the pre-
cept itself; and thus they will come to know
that that reason, now ceasing, is among those
parts of the law which have been cancelled.
Necessary it was that there should be a succes-
sion to the marriage of a brother if he died child-
less : first, because that ancient benediction,
"Grow and multiply,"'* had still to run its
course ; secondly, because the sins of the fath-
ers used to be exacted even from the sons ; s
thirdly, because eunuchs and barren persons
used to be regarded as ignominious. And thus,
for fear that such as had died childless, not from
natural inability, but from being prematurely
overtaken by death, should be judged equally
accursed (with the other class) ; for this reason
a vicarious and (so to say) posthumous offspring
used to be supplied them. But (now), when
the " extremity of the times" has cancelled (the
command) " Grow and multiply," since the
apostle superinduces (another command), "It
remaineth, that both they who have wives so be
as if they have not," because " the time is com-
pressed;^ and "the sour grape" chewed by
"the fathers" has ceased "to set the sons' teeth
on edge," ^ for, " each one shall die in his own
sin ; " and " eunuchs " not only have lost igno-
miny, but have even deserved grace, being in-
vited into " the kingdoms of the heavens : "^ the
law of succeeding to the wife of a brother being
buried, its contrary has obtained — that of no^
succeeding to the wife of a brother. And thus,
as we have said before, what has ceased to be
valid, on the cessation of its reason, cannot fur-
nish a ground of argument to another. There-
fore a wife, when her husband is dead, will not
marry ; for if she marry, she will of course be
marrying (his) brother : for " all we are breth-
ren." 9 Again, the woman, if intending to marry.


* See Matt. v. 20.

2 Deut XXV. 5, 6.

3 See Malt. xxii. 23-33; Mark xii. 18-27; Luke xx. 26-38. Comp.
ad Ux., 1. i.

* Gen. i. 28. Comp. de Ex. Cast., c. vi.

5 See Ex. xx. 5 ; and therefore there must be sons begotten from
whom to exact them.

'' Comp. de Ex. Cast., c. vi.

7 See Jer. xxxi. 29, 30 (in LXX. xxxviii. 29, 30) ; Ezek. xviii.
1-4.

* Matt. xix. 12, often quoted.
9 Matt, xxiii. 8.


has to marry " in the Lord ; " '° that is, not to an
heathen, but to a brother, inasmuch as even the
ancient law forbids" marriage with members of
another tribe. Since, moreover, even in Levit-
icus there is a caution, " Whoever shall have
taken (his) brother's wife, (it) is uncleanness —
turpitude; without children shall (he) die ; " '^
beyond doubt, while the man is prohibited from
marrying a second time, the woman is pro-
hibited too, having no one to marry except a
brother. In what way, then, an agreement shall
be established between the apostle and the Law
(which he is not impugning in its entirety),
shall be shown when we shall have come to his
own epistle. Meantime, so far as pertains to the
law, the lines of argument drawn from it are
more suitable for us (than for our opponents).
In short, the same (law) prohibits priests from
marrying a second time. The daughter also of a
priest it bids, if widowed or repudiated, if she
have had no seed, to return into her father's home
and be nourished from his bread. '3 The reason
why (it is said), " If she have had no seed," is
not that if she have she may marry again — for
how much more will she abstain from marrying
if she have sons? — but that, if she have, she
may be " nourished " by her son rather than by
her father ; in order that the son, too, may carry
out the precept of God, " Honour father and
mother." '■* Us, moreover, Jesus, the Father's
Highest and Great Priest, "s clothing us from His
own store '^ — inasmuch as they " who are baptized
in Christ '7 have put on Christ" — has made
" priests to God His Father," '^ according to
John. ■ For the reason why He recalls that
young man who was hastening to his father's
obsequies,'? is that He may show that we are
called priests by Him ; (priests) whom the Law
used to forbid to be present at the sepulture of
parents :^° " Over every dead soul," it says, "the
priest shall not enter, and over his own father
and over his own mother he shall not be con-
taminated." " Does it follow that we too are
bound to observe this prohibition?" No, of
course. For our one Father, God, /i7'es, and our
mother, the Church ; and neither are we dead
who live to God, nor do we bury our dead, in-
asmuch as they too are living in Christ. At all


'° I Cor. vii. 39.

'■ " Adimit; " but the two MSS. extant of this treatise read "ad
mittit " = admits.

1- Lev. XX. 21, not exactly given.

'3 Lev. xxii. 13, where there is n
the Eng. ver. : in the LXX. there is.

'* Ex. XX. 12 in brief

15 Summus sacerdos et magnus patris,
jecture of Jos. Scaliger, " agnus patris,'
High Priest and Lamb of the Father."

16 De suo. Comp.de Bapt., c. xvii. adfiu.; de Cult. Fcm., 1. i.
c. v., 1. ii. c. ix.; de Ex. Cast., c. iii. med.; and for the ref see Rev.
iii. 18.

'7 Gal. iii. 27; where it is eis Xpitrro^, however.

>8 See Rev. i. 6.

'9 Matt. viii. 21, 22; Luke ix. 59, 60.

20 Lev. xxi. II.


nd to her


But Oehler notices a con-
/hen we must unite " the


ON MONOGAMY.


65


events, priests we are called by Christ ; debtors
to monogamy, in accordance with the pristine
Law of God, which prophesied at that time of
us in its own priests.

CHAP. VIII. FROM THE LAW TERTULLIAN COMES

TO THE GOSPEL. HE BEGINS WITH EXAMPLES
BEFORE PROCEEDING TO DOGMAS.

Turning now to the law, which is properly
ours — that is, to the Gospel — by what kind of
examples are we met, until we come to definite
dogmas? Behold, there immediately present
themselves to us, on the threshold as it were, the
two priestesses of Christian sanctity, Monogamy
and Continence : one modest, in Zechariah the
priest ; one absolute, in John the forerunner :
one appeasing God ; one preaching Christ : one
proclaiming a perfect priest; one exhibiting
"more than a prophet,'" — him, namely, who
has not only preached or personally pointed out,
but even baptized Christ. For who was more
worthily to perform the initiatory rite on the
body of the Lord, than flesh similar in kind to
that which conceived and gave birth to that
( body ) ? And indeed it was a virgin, about to
marry once for all after her delivery, who gave
birth to Christ, in order that each title of sanc-
tity might be fulfilled in Christ's parentage, by
means of a mother who was both virgin, and
wife of one husband. Again, when He is pre-
sented as an infant in the temple, who is it who
receives Him into his hands? who is the first to
recognise Him in spirit? A man "just and cir-
cumspect," and of course no digamist, (which is
plain) even (from this consideration), lest (other-
wise) Christ should presently be more worthily
preached by a woman, an aged widow, and " the
wife of one man ; " who, living devoted to the
temple, was (already) giving in her own person
a sufficient token what sort of persons ought to
be the adherents to the spiritual temple, — that
is, the Church. Such eye-witnesses the Lord in
infancy found ; no different ones had He in adult
age. Peter alone do I find — through (the men-
tion of) his " mother-in-law " ^ — to have been
married. Monogamist I am led to presume him
by consideration of the Church, which, built
upon him,' was destined to appoint every grade
of her Order from monogamists. The rest, while
I do not find them married, I must of necessity
understand to have been either eunuchs or con-
tinent. Nor indeed, if, among the Greeks, in
accordance with the carelessness of custom,
women and wives are classed under a common
name — however, there is a name proper to 7£'/Wi'
— shall we therefore so interpret Paul as if he
IcmonstrPtes the apostles to have had wives?"*


For if he were disputing about marriages, as he
does in the sequel, where the apostle could bet-
ter have named some particular example, it would
appear right for him to say, " For have we not
the power of leading about wives, like the other
apostles and Cephas?" But when he subjoins
those (expressions) which show his abstinence
from (insisting on) the supply of maintenance,
saying, " For have we not the power of eating
and drinking?" he does not demonstrate that
"wives" were led about by the apostles, whom
even such as have not still have the power of
eating and drinking; but simply " women," who
used to minister to them in the same way (as
they did) when accompanying the Lord.s But
further, if Christ reproves the scribes and Phari-
sees, sitting in the official chair of Moses, but
not doing what they taught,^ what kind of (sup-
position) is it that He Himself withal should
set upon His own official chair men who were
mindful rather to enjoin — (but) not likewise to
practise — sanctity of the flesh, which (sanctity)
He had in all ways recommended to their teach-
ing and practising? — first by His own example,
then by all other arguments ; while He tells
(them) that " the kingdom of heavens " is
"children's ; "7 while He associates with these
(children) others who, after marriage, remained
(or became) virgins ; "^ whfle He calls (them) to
(copy) the simplicity of the dove, a bird not
merely innocuous, but modest too, and whereof
one male knows one female ; while He denies
the Samaritan woman's (partner to be) a hus-
band, that He may show that manifold husbandry
is adultery ; ^ while, in the revelation of His own
glory. He prefers, from among so many saints
and prophets, to have with him Moses and Elias '°
— the one a monogamist, the other a voluntary
celibate (for Elias was nothing else than John,
who came " in the power and spirit of Elias " ") ;
while that "man gluttonous and toping," the
" frequenter of luncheons and suppers, in the
company of publicans and sinners," '^ sups once
for aU at a single marriage, '^ though, of course,
many were marrying (around Him) ; for He
willed to attend (marriages) only so often as
(He willed) them to be.

CHAP. IX. FROM EXAMPLES TERTULLIAN PASSES

TO DIRECT DOGMATIC TEACHINGS. HE BEGINS
WITH THE lord's TEACHING.

But grant that these argumentations may
be thought to be forced and founded on con-


' See Matt. xi. 9; Luke vii. 26.

2 See Mark i. 29. 30.

3 See Matt. xvi. 13-19. Comp. de Pu., c. xxi.
* See I Cor. ix. 1-5.


See Luke viii. 1-3; Matt, xxvii. 55, 56
Matt, xxiii. 1-3.

See Matt, xviii. 1-4, xix. 13-15 : Mark
Alios post nuptias pueros.


The reference seems to be to Ma


See John iv. 16-18.

See Matt. xvii. 1-8; Mark ix. 2-9; Luke ix. 28-36.

See Luke i. 17.

See Matt. xi. 19; Luke vii. 34.

See John ii. i-ii.


66


ON MONOGAMY.


jectures, if no dogmatic teachings have stood
parallel with them which the Lord uttered in
treating of divorce, which, permitted formerly.
He now prohibits, first because " from the
beginning it was not so," like plurality of
marriage ; secondly, because " What God hath
conjoined, man shall not separate," ' — for fear,
namely, that he contravene the Lord : for He
alone shall " separate " who has " conjoined "
(separate, moreover, not through the harshness
of divorce, which (harshness) He censures and
restrains, but through the debt of death) if, in-
deed, " one of two sparrows falleth not on the
ground without the Father's will." ^ Therefore,
if those whom God has conjoined man shall not
separate by divorce, it is equally congruous that
those whom God has separated by death man is
not to conjoin by marriage ; the joining of the
separation will be just as contrary to God's will
as would have been the separation of the con-
junction.

So far as regards the non-rt<?struction of the
will of God, and the ;rstruction of the law
of " the beginning." But another reason, too,
conspires; nay, not another, but (one) which
imposed the law of " the beginning," and moved
the will of God tO' prohibit divorce : the fact
that (he) who shall have dismissed his wife,
except on the ground of adultery, makes her
commit adultery ; and (he) who shall have mar-
ried a (woman) dismissed by her husband, of
course commits adultery.^ A divorced woman
caxinot even marry legitimately ; and if she com-
mit any such act without the name of marriage,
does it not fall under the category of adultery,
in that adultery is crime in the way of marriage ?
Such is God's verdict, within straiter limits than
men's, that universally, whether through marriage
or promiscuously, the admission of a second
man (to intercourse) is pronounced adultery by
Him. For let us see what marriage is in the
eye of God^; and thus we shall learn what adul-
tery equally is. Marriage is (this): when God
joins " two into one flesh ; " or else, finding
(them already) joined in the same flesh, has
given His seal to the conjunction. Adultery is
(this): when, the two having been — in whatso-
ever way — ^//i'joined, other — nay, rather alien
— flesh is mingled (with either): flesh concern-
ing which it cannot be affirmed, " This is flesh
out of my flesh, and this bone out of my bones."*
For this, once for all done and pronounced, as
from the beginning, so now too, cannot apply to
" other " flesh. Accordingly, it will be without
cause that you will say that God wills not a
divorced woman to be joined to another man


I See Matt. xix. 3-8, where, however, Tertullian's order is
reversed. Comp. with this chapter,. c. v. above.

- See Matt. x. 29. Comp. de Ex. Cast., c. i. ad Jin.

3 See Matt. v. 32.

* Gen. ii. 23, in reversed order again.


"while her husband liveth," as if He do will it
"when he is dead ; " s whereas if she is not
bound to him when dead, no more is she when
living. " Alike when divorce dissevers marriage
as when death does, she will not be bound to
him by whom the binding medium has been
broken off." To whom, then, will she be bound?
In the eye of God, it matters nought whether
she marry during her husband's life or after his
death. For it is not against him that she sins,
but against herself. " Any sin which a man may
have committed is external to the body ; but
(he) who commits adultery sins against his own
body." But — as we have previously laid down
above — whoever shall intermingle with himself
" other " flesh, over and above that pristine flesh
which God either conjoined into two or else
found (already) conjoined, commits adultery.
And the reason why He has abolished divorce,
which "was not from the beginning," is, that
He may strengthen that which " was from
the beginning" — the permanent conjunction,
(namely), of "two into one flesh:" for fear
that necessity or opportunity for a thi?-d union
of flesh may make an irruption (into His domin-
ion) ; permitting divorce to no cause but one
— if, (that is), the (evil) against which precau-
tion is taken chance to have occurred before-
hand. So true, moreover, is it that divorce " was
not from the beginning," that among the Romans
it is not till after the six hundredth year from
the building of the city that this kind of " hard-
heartedness " ^ is set down as having been com-
mitted. But they indulge in promiscuous adul-
teries, even without divorcing (their partners):
to tis, even if we do divorce them, e\en mar-
riage will not be lawful.

CHAP. X. — ST. Paul's teaching on the sub-
ject.

From this point I see that we are challenged
by an appeal to the apostle ; for the more easy
apprehension of whose meaning we must all the
more earnestly inculcate (the assertion), that a
woman is more bound when her husband is dead
not to admit (to marriage) another husband.
For let us reflect that divorce either is caused by
discord, or else causes discord ; whereas death
is an event resulting from the law of God, not
from an offence of man ; and that it is a debt
which all owe, even the unmarried. Therefore,
if a divorced woman, who has been separated
(from her husband) in soul as well as body,
through discord, anger, hatred, and the causes
of these — injury, or contumely, or whatsoever
cause of complaint — is bound to a personal
enemy, not to say a husband, how much more
will one who, neither by her own nor her hus-


5 Comp. Rom. vii. 1-3.

6 Comp. Watt. xix. 8; Mark x 5.


ON MONOGAMY


67


band's fault, but by an event resulting from the
Lord's law, has been — not separated from, but
left behind by — her consort, be his, even when '
dead, to whom, even when dead, she owes (the j
debt of) concord ? From him from whom she
has heard no (word of) divorce she does not
turn away ; with him she is, to whom she has
written no (document of) divorce ; him whom
she was unwilling to have lost, she retains. Sht
has within her the licence of the mind, which
represents to a man, in imaginary enjoyment, all
things which he has not. In short, I ask the
woman herself, " Tell me, sister, have you sent
your husband before you (to his rest) in peace?"
What will she answer? (Will she say^, " In dis-
cord?" In that case she is the more bound to
him with whom she has a cause (to plead) at
the bar of God. She who is bound (to another)
has not departed (from him). But (will she
say), " In peace?" In that case, she must ne-
cessarily persevere in that (peace) with him
whom she will no longer have the power to
divorce ; not that she would, even if she had
been able to divorce him, have been marriage-
able. Indeed, she prays for his soul, and re-
quests refreshment for him meanwhile, and
fellowship (with him) in the first resurrection;
and she offers (her sacrifice) on the anniver-
saries of his falling asleep. For, unless she does
these deeds, she has in the true sense divorced
him, so far as in her lies ; and indeed the more
niiquitously — inasmuch as (she did it) as far as
was in her power — because she had no power
(to do it) ; and with the more indignity, inas-
much as it is with more indignity if (her reason
for doing it is) because he did not deserve it.
Or else shall we, pray, cease to be after death,
according to (the teaching of) some Epicurus,
and not according to (that of) Christ? But if
we believe the resurrection of the dead, of course
we shall be bound to them with whom we are
destined to rise, to render an account the one
of the other. " But if ' in that age they will
neither marry nor be given in marriage, but will
be equal to angels,' ' is not the fact that there
will be no restitution of the conjugal relation a
reason why we shall not be bound to our de-
parted consorts?" Nay, but the more shall we
be bound (to them), because we are destined to
a better estate — destined (as we are) to rise
to a spiritual consortship, to recognise as well
our own selves as them who are ours. Else how
shall we sing thanks to God to eternity, if there
shall remain in us no sense and memory of this
debt ; if we shall be ;r-formed in substance, not
in consciousness? Consequently, we who shall be
with Gotl shall be together ; since we shall all be
with the one God — albeit the wages be various,^


albeit there be " many mansions " in the house
of the same Father ^ — having laboured for the
"one penny " ^ of the self-same hire, that is, of
eternal life ; in which (eternal life) God will still
less separate them whom He has conjoined, than
in this lesser life He forbids them to be sepa-
rated.

Since this is so, how will a woman have room
for another husband, who is, even to futurity,
in the possession of her own? (Moreover, we
speak to each sex, even if our discourse address
itself but to the one ; inasmuch as one discipline
is incumbent [on both].) She will have one
in spirit, one in flesh. This will be adultery, the
conscious affection of one woman for two men.
If the one has been disjoined from her flesh, but
remains in her heart — in that place where even
cogitation without carnal contact achieves be-
forehand both adultery by concupiscence, and
matrimony by volition — he is to this hour her
husband, possessing the very thing which is the
mean whereby he became so — her mind, name-
ly, in which withal, if another shall find a hab-
itation, this will be a crime. Besides, excluded
he IS not, if he has withdrawn from viler carnal
commerce. A more honourable husband is he,
in proportion as he is become more pure.

CHAP. XI. FURTHER REMARKS UPON ST. PAUL'S

TEACHING.

Grant, now, that you marry " in the Lord,"
in accordance with the law and the apostle — if,
notwithstanding, you care even about this — with
what face do you request (the solemnizing of) a
matrimony which is unlawful to those of whom
you request it ; of a monogamist bishop, of pres-
byters and deacons bound by the same solemn
engagement, of widows whose Order you have in
your own person refused? And they, plainly,
will give husbands and wives as they would mor-
sels of bread ; for this is their rendering of " To
every one who asketh thee thou shalt give ! " 5
And they will join you together in a virgin
church, the one betrothed of the one Christ !
And you will pray for your husbands, the new
and the old. Make your election, to which of
the twain you will play the adulteress. I think,
to both. But if you have any wisdom, be silent
on behalf of the dead one. Let your silence be
to him a divorce, already endorsed in the dotal
gifts of another. In this way you will earn the
new husband's favour, if you forget the old. You
ought to take more pains to please him for
whose sake you have not preferred to please
God ! Such (conduct) the Psychics will have
it the apostle approved, or else totally failed to
think about, when he wrote : " The woman is


' See Matt. xxii. 30; Mark xii. 25; Luke :
2 Comp. 1 Cor. iii. 8.


35. 36.


3 Comp John xiv. 2.

4 Matt. XX. 1-16.

5 See Matt. v. 42; Luke vi. 30. Comp. di Bapt., c. xvui.


68


ON MONOGAMY.


bound for such length of time as her husband
liveth ; but if he shall have died, she is free ;
whom she will let her marry, only in the Lord." '
For it is out of this passage that they draw their
defence of the licence of second marriage ; nay,
even of (marriages) to any amount, if of second
(marriage) : for that which has ceased to be once
for all, is open to any and every number. But
the sense in which the apostle did write will be
apparent, if first an agreement be come to that
he did not write it in the sense of which the
Psychics avail themselves. Such an agreement,
moreover, will be come to if one first recall to
mind those (passages) which are diverse from
the passage in question, when tried by the stand-
ard of doctrine, of volition, and of Paul's own
discipline. For, if he permits second nuptials,
which were not " from the beginning," how does
he affirm that all things are being re-collected to
the beginning in Christ?^ If he wills us to iter-
ate conjugal connections, how does he maintain
that "our seed is called " in the but once mar-
ried Isaac as its author? How does he make
monogamy the base of his disposition of the
whole Ecclesiastical Order, if this rule does not
antecedently hold good in the case of laics, from
whose ranks the Ecclesiastical Order proceeds ? ^
How does he call away from the enjoyment of
marriage such as are still in the married position,
saying that " the time is wound up," if he calls
back again into marriage such as through death
had escaped from marriage? If these (pas-
sages) are diverse from tliat one about which
the present question is, it will be agreed (as we
have said) that he did not write in that sense of
which the Psychics avail themselves ; inasmuch
as it is easier (of belief) that that one passage
should have some explanation agreeable with the
others, than that an aposUe should seem to have
taught (principles) mutually diverse. That ex-
planation we shall be able to discover in the
subject-matter itself. What was the subject-
matter which led the apostle to write such
(words) ? The inexperience of a new and just
rising Church, which he was rearing, to wit,
" with milk," not yet with the " solid food " '* of
stronger doctrine ; inexperience so great, that
that infancy of faith prevented them from yet
knowing what they were to do in regard of car-
nal and sexual necessity. The very phases them-
selves of this (inexperience) are intelligible from
(the aposde's) rescripts, when he says : s " But
concerning these (things) which ye write ; good
it is. for a man not to touch a woman ; but, on
account of fornications, let each one have his
own wife." He shows that there were who, hav-


■ I Cor. vii. 39, not rendered wiih very strict accuracy.

^ See c. V above.

3 See de Ex. Cast., c vii.

"* Comp. I Cor iii. 2 with Heb. v. 11-14.

5 I Cor. vii. I, 2.


ing been "apprehended by the faith" in (the
state of) marriage, were apprehensive that it
might not be lawful for them thenceforward to
enjoy their marriage, because they had believed
on the holy flesh of Christ. And yet it is " by
way of allowance " that he makes the concession,
" not by way of command ; " that is, indulging,
not enjoining, the practice. On the other hand,
lie " willed rather " that all should be what he
himself was. Similarly, too, in sending a rescript
on (the subject of) divorce, he demonstrates
that some had been thinking over that also,
chiefly because withal they did not suppose that
they were to persevere, after faith, in heathen
marriages." They sought counsel, further, " con-
cerning virgins" — for "precept of the Lord"
there was none — (and were told) that " it is
good for a man if he so remain permanendy ; "
("so"), of course, as he may have been found
by the faith. " Thou hast been bound to a wife,
seek not loosing ; thou hast been loosed from a
wife, seek not a wife." " But if thou shalt have
taken to (thyself) a wife, thou hast not sinned ; "
because to one who, before believing, had been
" loosed from a wife," she will not be counted a
second wife who, subsequently to believing, is
the first : for it is from (the time of our) behev-
ing that our life itself dates its origin. But here
he says that he " is sparing them ; " else " press-
ure of the flesh " would shortly follow, in con-
sequence of the straits of the times, which
shunned the encumbrances of marriage : yea,
rather solicitude must be felt about earning the
Lord's favour than a husband's. And thus he
recalls his permission. So, then, in the very
same passage in which he definitely rules that
" each one ought permanently to remain in that
calling in which he shall be called ; " adding,
" A woman is bound so long as her husband
liveth ; but if he shall have fallen asleep, she is
free : whom she shall wish let her marry, only in
the Lord," he hence also demonstrates that such
a woman is to be understood as has withal her-
self been "found" (by the faith) "loosed from
a husband," similarly as the husband " loosed
from a wife " — the " loosing " having taken
place through death, of course, not through di-
vorce ; inasmuch as to the divorced he would
grant no permission to marry, in the teeth of the
primary precept. And so " a woman, if she shall
have married, will not sin ; " because he will not
be reckoned a second husband who is, subse-
quently to her believing, the first, any more (than
a wife thus taken will be counted a second wife).
And so truly is this the case, that he Vierefore
adds, " only in the Lord ; " because the question
in agitation was about her who had had a heathen
(husband), and had believed subsequently to los-
ing him: for fear, to wit, that she might presume
herself able to marry a heathen even after believ-


ON MONOGAMY.


69


ing ; albeit not even this is an object of care to
thev Psychics. Let us plainly know that, in the
Greek original, it does not stand in the form
which (through the either crafty or simple alter-
ation of two syllables) has gone out into com-
mon use, " But if her husband shall have fallen
asleep," as if it were speaking of the future,
and thereby seemed to pertain to her who has
lost her husband when already in a believing
state. If this indeed had been so, licence let
loose without limit would have granted a (fresh)
husband as often as one had been lost, without
any such modesty in marrying as is congruous
even to heathens. But even if it had been so,
as if referring to future time, " If any (woman's)
husband shall have died," even the future would
just as much pertain to her whose husband shall
die before she believed. Take it which way you
will, provided you do not overturn the rest. For
since these (other passages) agree to the sense
(given above): "Thou hast been called (as) a
slave; care not:" "Thou hast been called in
uncircumcision ; be not circumcised : " " Thou
hast been called in circumcision ; become not
uncircumcised : " with which concurs, "Thou
hast been bound to a wife \ seek not loosing :
thou hast been loosed from a wife ; seek not a
wife," — manifest enough it is that these pas-
sages pertain to such as, finding themselves in a
new and recent " calling," were consulting (the
apostle) on the subject of those (circumstantial
conditions) in which they had been " appre-
hended " by the faith.

This will be the interpretation of that passage,
to be examined as to whether it be congruous
with the time and the occasion, and with the
examples and arguments preceding as well as
with the sentences and senses succeeding, and
primarily with the individual advice and practice
of the apostle himself : for nothing is so much
to be guarded as (the care) that no one be found
self-contradictory.

CHAP. XII. THE EXPLANATION OF THE ABOVE

PASSAGE OFFERED BY THE PSYCHICS CONSIDERED.

Listen, withal, to the very subtle argumentation
on the contrary side. " So true is it," say (our
opponents), "that the apostle has permitted the
iteration of marriage, that it is only such as are
in the Clerical Order that he has stringently
bound to the yoke of monogamy. For that
which he prescribes to certain (individuals) he
does not prescribe to all." Does it then follow,
too, that to bishops alone he does not prescribe
what he does enjoin upon all ; if what he does
prescribe to bishops he does not enjoin upon all ?
or is it therefore to all because to bishops ? and
therefore to bishops because to all ? For whence
is it that the bishops and clergy come ? Is it not
from all? If all are not bound to monogamy,


whence are monogamists (to he taken) into the
clerical rank ? Will some separate order of mo-
nogamists have to be instituted, from which to
make selection for the clerical body? (No) ;
but when we are extolling and inflating ourselves
in opposition to the clergy, then " we are all
one : " then " we are all priests, because He hath
made us priests to (His) God and Father."
When we are challenged to a thorough equaliza-
tion with the sacerdotal discipline, we lay down
the (priestly) fillets, and (still) are on a par !
The question in hand (when the apostle was
writing), was with reference to Ecclesiastical
Orders — what sort of men ought to be or-
dained. It was therefore fitting that all the
form of the common discipline should be set
forth on its fore-front, as an edict to be in a cer-
tain sense universally and carefully attended to,
that the laity might the better know that they
must themselves observe that order which was
indispensable to their overseers ; and that even
the office of honour itself might not flatter itself
in anything tending to licence, as if on the
ground of privilege of position. The Holy
Spirit foresaw that some would say, " All things
are lawful to bishops ; " just as that bishop of
Utina of yours feared not even the Scantinian
law. Why, how many digamists, too, preside in
your churches ; insulting the apostle, of course :
at all events, not blushing when these passages
are read under their presidency !

Come, now, you who think that an exceptional
law of monogamy is made with reference to
bishops, abandon withal your remaining discipli-
nary titles, which, together with monogamy, are
ascribed to bishops.' Refuse to be " irrepre-
hensible, sober, of good morals, orderly, hos-
pitable, easy to be taught; " nay, indeed, (be)
" given to wine, prompt with the hand to strike,
combative, money-loving, not ruling your house,
nor caring for your children's discipline," — no,
nor " courting good renown even from stran-
gers." For if bishops have a law of their own
teaching monogamy, the other (characteristics)
likewise, which will be the fitting concomitants
of monogamy, will have been written (exclu-
sively) for bishops. With laics, however, to
whom monogamy is not suitable, the other (char-
acteristics) also have nothing to do. (Thus),
Psychic, you have (if you please) evaded the
bonds of discipline in its entirety ! Be consis-
tent in prescribing, that " what is enjoined upon
certain (individuals) is not enjoined upon all ;"
or else, if the other (characteristics) indeed are
common, but monogamy is imposed ui)on bish-
ops alone, (tell me), pray, whether thcx alone
are to be pronounced Christians upon whom is
conferred the entirety of discipline?


Tim. iii. 1-7; Tit. i. 6-9.


70


ON MONOGAMY.


CHAP. XIII. — FURTHER OBJECTIONS FROM ST. PAUL
ANSWERED.

" But again, writing to Timotheus, he ' wills
the very young (women) to marry, bear chil-
dren, act the housewife.' " ' He is (here) di-
recting (his speech) to such as he denotes
above — " very young widows," who, after being
"apprehended" in widowhood, and (subse-
quently) wooed for some length of time, after
they have had Christ in their affections, " wish to
marry, having judgment, because they have re-
scinded the first faith," — that (faith), to wit, by
which they were " found " in widowhood, and,
aftel- professing it, do not persevere. For which
reason he " wills " them to " marry," for fear of
their subsequently rescinding the first faith of
professed widowhood ; not to sanction their mar-
rying as often as ever they may refuse to perse-
vere in a widowhood plied with temptation —
nay, rather, spent in indulgence.

" We read him withal writing to the Romans :
' But the woman who is under an husband, is bound
to her husband (while) living ; but if he shall
have died, she has been emancipated from the
law of the husband.' Doubtless, then, the hus-
band living, she will be thought to commit adul-
tery if she shall have been joined to a second
husband. If, however, the husband shall have
died, she has been freed from (his) law, (so)
that she is not an adulteress if made (wife) to
another husband." ^ But read the sequel as well,
in order that this sense, which flatters you, may
evade (your grasp). "And so," he says, "my
brethren, be ye too made dead to the law through
the body of Christ, that ye may be made (sub-
ject) to a second, — to Him, namely, who hath
risen from the dead, that we may bear fruit to
God. For when we were in the flesh, the pas-
sions of sin, which (passions) used to be effi-
ciently caused through the law, (wrought) in our
members unto the bearing of fruit to death ; but
now we have been emancipated from the law,
being dead (to that) in which we used to be
held,3 unto the serving of God in newness of
spirit, and not in oldness of letter." Therefore,
if he bids us " be made dead to the law through
the body of Christ," (which is the Church,'*
which consists in the spirit of newness,) not
" through the letter of oldness," (that is, of the
law,) — taking you away from the law, which
does not keep a wife, when her husband is dead,
from becoming (wife) to another husband — he
reduces you to (subjection to) the contrary con-
dition, that you are 7iot to marry when you have
lost your husband ; and in as far as you would
not be accounted an adulteress if you became


Rom. vii. 2, 3, not exactly rendered.

Comp. the marginal reading in the Eng. ver., P.om. vii. 6.

Comp. Eph. i. 23, and the references there.


(wife) to a second husband after the death of
your (first) husband, if you were still bound to
act in (subjection to) the law, in so far as a re-
sult of the diversity of (your) condition, he docs
prejudge you (guilty) of adultery if, after the
death of your husband, you do marry another :
inasmuch as you have now been made dead to
the law, it cannot be lawful for you, now that
you have withdrawn from that (law) in the eye
of which it was lawful for you.


CHAP. XIV. EVEN IF THE PERMISSION HAD BEEN

GIVEN BY ST. PAUL IN THE SENSE WHICH THE
PSYCHICS ALLEGE, IT WAS MERELY LIKE THE
MOSAIC PERMISSION OF DIVORCE A CONDESCEN-
SION TO HUMAN HARD-HEARTEDNESS.

Now, if the apostle had even absolutely per-
mitted marriage when one's partner has been
lost subsequently to (conversion to) the faith, he
would have done (it), just as (he did) the other
(actions) which he did adversely to the (strict)
letter of his own rule, to suit the circumstances
of the times : circumcising Timotheus 5 on ac-
count of " supposititious false brethren ; " and
leading certain " shaven men " into the temple ^
on account of the observant watchfulness of the
Jews — he who chastises the Galatians when they
desire to live in (observance of) the law.? But
so did circumstances require him to " become all
things to all, in order to gain all • " § " travailing
in birth with them until Christ should be formed
in them ; " ^ and "cherishing, as it were a nurse,"
the little ones of faith, by teaching them some
things " by way of indulgence, not by way of
command" — for it is one thing to indulge, an-
other to bid — permitting a temporary licence
of re-marriage on account of the " weakness of
the flesh," just as Moses of divorcing on account
of " the hardness of the heart."

And here, accordingly, we will render the sup-
plement of this (his) meaning. For if Christ
abrogated what Moses enjoined, because " from
the beginning (it) was not so ; " and (if) — this
being so — Christ will hot therefore be reputed
to have come from some other Power ; why may
not the Paraclete, too, have abrogated an indul-
gence which Paul granted — because second
marriage withal " was not from the beginning"
— without deserving on this account to be re-
garded with suspicion, as if he were an alien
spirit, provided only that the superinduction be
worthy of God and of Christ? If it was worthy
of God and of Christ to check " hard-hearted-
ness " when the time (for its indulgence) was


S Acts xvi. 3; see Gal. iii. iv.
* Comp. Acts xxi. 20-26.
7 See Gal. iii. iv.
^ See I Cor. ix. 22.
9 Gal. iv. 19.


ON MONOGAMY.


71


fully expired, why should it not be tnore worthy
both of God and of Christ to shake off " infirm-
ity of the flesh " when " the time " is already
more "wound up?" If it is just that marriage
be not severed, it is, of course, honourable too
that it be not iterated. In short, in the estima-
tion of the world, each is accounted a mark of
good discipline : one under the name of con-
cord; one, of modesty. "Hardness of heart"
reigned till Christ's time ; let " infirmity of the
flesh" (be content to) have reigned till the time
of tire Paraclete. The New Law abrogated
divorce — it had (somewhat) to abrogate ; the
New Prophecy (abrogates) second marriage,
(which is) no less a divorce of the former (mar-
riage). But the " hardness of heart" yielded to
Christ more readily than the " infirmity of the
flesh." The latter claims Paul in its own sup-
port more than the former Moses ; if, indeed, it
is claiming him in its support when it catches
at his indulgence, (but) refuses his prescript —
eluding his more deliberate opinions and his
constant "wills," not suffering us to render to
the apostle the (obedience) which he " pre-
fers."

And how long will this most shameless " in-
firmity " persevere in waging a war of extermi-
nation against the " better things ? " The time
for its indulgence was (the interval) until the
Paraclete began His operations, to whose coming
were deferred by the Lord (the things) which
in His day "could not be endured;" which it
is now no longer competent for any one to be
unable to endure, seeing that He through whom
the power of enduring is granted is not wanting.
How long shall we allege " the flesh," because
the Lord said, " the flesh is weak? " ' But He
has withal premised that " the Spirit is prompt,"
in order that the Spirit may vanquish the flesh

— that the weak may yield to the stronger. For
again He says, " Let him who is able to receive,
receive (it) ; " ^ that is, let him who is not able
go his way. That rich man did go his way who
had not " received " the precept of dividing his
substance to the needy, and was abandoned by
the Lord to his own opinion. ^ Nor will "harsh-
ness "be on this account imputed to Christ, on
the ground of the vicious action of each individ-
ual free-wiU. " Behold," saith He, " I have set
before thee good and evil." ^ Choose that which
is good : if you cannot, because you will not —
for that you can if you will He has shown,
because He has proposed each to your free-will

— you ought to depart from Him whose will
you do not.


' Matt. xxvi. 41.

2 Matt. xix. 12.

3 See Matt. xix. 16-26; Mark x. 17-27; T.uke xviii. 18-27.

•* See Deut. xxx. i, 15, 19, and xi. 26. Sec, too, dc Ex Cast.
c. ii.


CHAP. XV. UNFAIRNESS OF CHARGING THE DIS-
CIPLES OF THE NEW PROPHECY WITH HARSH-
NESS. THE CHARGE R.\THER TO BE RETORTED
UPON THE PSYCHICS.

What harshness, therefore, fs here on our part,
if we renounce (communion with) such as do
not the will of God? What heresy, if we judge
second marriage, as being unlawful, akin to
adultery? For what is adultery but unlawful
marriage ? The apostle sets a brand upon those
who were wont entirely to forbid marriage, who
were wont at the same time to lay an interdict
on meats which God has created.s We, how-
ever, no more do away with marriage if we ab-
jure its repetition, than we reprobate meats if
we fast oftener (than others). It is one thing
to do away with, another to regulate ; it is one
thing to lay down a law of not marrying, it is
another to fix a limit to marrying. To speak
plainly, if they who reproach us with harshness,
or esteem heresy (to exist) in this (our) cause,
foster the " infirmity of the flesh " to such a de-
gree as to think it must have support accorded
to it in frequency of marriage ; why do they in
another case neither accord it support nor foster
it with indulgence — when, (namely), torments
have reduced it to a denial (of the faith) ? For,
of course, that (infirmity) is more capable of ex-
cuse which has fallen in battle, than (that) which
(has fallen) in the bed-chamber; (that) which
has succumbed on the rack, than (that)
which (has succumbed) on the bridal bed ;
(that) which has yielded to cruelty, than (that)
which (has yielded) to appetite ; that which has
been overcome groaning, than (that) which (has
been overcome) in heat. But the former they
excommunicate, because it has not " endured
unto the end : " ^ the latter they prop up, as if
withal it has " endured unto the end." Propose
(the question) why each has not " endured unto
the end ; " and you will find the cause of that
(infirmity) to be more honourable which has
been unable to sustain savagery, than (of that)
which (has been unable to sustain) modesty.
And yet not even a bloodwrung — not to say an
immodest — defection does the "infirmity of the
flesh " excuse !

CHAP. XVI. WEAKNESS OF THE PLE.-VS URGED IN

DEFENCE OF SECOND MARRL-VGE.

But I smile when (the plea of) " infirmity of
the flesh " is advanced in opposition (to us : in-
firmity) which is (rather) to be called the height
of strength. Iteration of marriage is an affair
of strength : to rise again from the ease of con-
tinence to the works of the flesh, is (a thing re-
quiring) substantial reins. Such " infirmity " is


5 See I Tim. iv. i--^.

6 See Matt. xxiv. 13, and the references the


ON MONOGAMY.


equal to a third, and a fourth, and even (per-
haps) a seventh marriage; as (being a thing)
which increases its strength as often as its weak-
ness ; which will no longer have (the support of)
an apostle's authority, but of some Hermogenes _

— wont to marry more women than he paints, i gj^ -^^ judgment no longer an Isaac, our monog-
For in him matter is abundant : whence he pre- 1 ^mist father ; or a John, a noted voluntary
sumes that even the soul is material ; and there- I celibate ^ of Christ's ; or a Judith, daughter of


CHAP. XVII. HEATHEN EXAMPLES CRY SHAME

UPON THIS "INFIRMITY OF THE FLESH." 7

They will have plainly a specious privilege to
plead before Christ — the everlasting "infirmity
of the flesh ! " But upon this (infirmity) will


fore much more (than other men) he has 7w/
the Spirit from God, being no longer even a
Psychic, because even his psychic element is not
derived from God's afflatus ! What if a man al-
lege " indigence," so as to profess that his flesh
is 'openly prostituted, and given in marriage for
the sake of maintenance ; forgetting that there
is to be no careful thought about food and cloth-
ing?' He has God (to look to), the Foster-
father even of ravens, the Rearer even of flowers.
What if he plead the loneliness of his home?
as if one woman afforded company to a man
ever on the eve of flight ! He has, of course, a
widow (at hand), whom it will be lawful for him
to take. Not one such wife, but even a plurality,
it is permitted to have. What if a man thinks
on posterity, with thoughts like the eyes of Lot's
wife ; so that a man is to make the fact that
from his former marriage he has had no children
a reason for repeating marriage ? A Christian,
forsooth, will seek heirs, disinherited as he is
from the entire world ! He has " brethren ; "
he has the Church as his mother. The case is
different if men believe that, at the bar of Christ
as well (as of Rome), action is taken on the
principle of the Julian laws ; and imagine that
the unmarried and childless cannot receive their
portion in full, in accordance with the testament
of God. Let such (as thus think), then, marry
to the very end ; that in this confusion of flesh
they, like Sodom and Gomorrah, and the day of
the deluge, may be overtaken by the fated final
end of the world. A third saying let them add,
" Let us eat, and drink, a/u/ marry, for to-
morrow we shall die ; " ^ not reflecting that the
" woe" (denounced) " on such as are with child,
and are giving suck," 3 will fall far more heavily
and bitterly in the " universal shaking " ^ of the
entire world 5 than it did in the devastation of
one fraction of Judaea. Let them accumulate
by their iterated marriages fruits right seasona-
ble for the last times — breasts heaving, and
wombs qualmish, and infants whimpering. Let
them prepare for Antichrist (children) upon
whom he may more passionately (than Pharaoh)
spend his savagery. He will lead to them mur-
derous midwives.*'


Merari ; or so many other examples of saints.
Heathens are wont to be destined our judges.
There will arise a queen of Carthage, and give
sentence upon the Christians, who, refugee as
she was, living on alien soil, and at that very
time the originator of so mighty a state, whereas
she ought unasked to have craved royal nuptials,
yet, for fear she should experience a second
marriage, preferred on the contrary rather to
" burn " than to "marry." Her assessor will be
the Roman matron who, having — albeit it was
through noctural violence, nevertheless — known
another man, washed away with blood the stain
of her flesh, that she might avenge upon her .
own person (the honour of) monogamy. There
have been, too, who preferred to die for their
husbands rather than marry after their husbands'
death. To idols, at all events, both monogamy
and widowhood serve as apparitors. On Fortuna
Muliebris, as on Mother ]\Latuta, none but a once
wedded woman hangs the wreath. Once for all
do the Pontifex Maximus and the wife of a
Flamen marry. The priestesses of Ceres, even
during the lifetime and with the consent of their
husbands, are widowed by amicable separation.
There are, too, who may judge us on the ground
of absolute continence : the virgins of Vesta, and
of the Achaian Juno, and of the Scythian Diana,
and of the Pythian Apollo. On the ground of con-
tinence the priests likewise of the famous Eg>'p-
tian bull will judge the " infirmity " of Christians.
Blush, O flesh, who hast " put on " 9 Christ ! Suf-
fice it thee once for all to marry, whereto " from
the beginning" thou wast created, whereto by
" the end " thou art being recalled ! Return at
least to the former Adam, if to the last thou canst
not ! Once for all did he taste of the tree ; once
for all felt concupiscence ; once for all veiled his
shame ; once for all blushed in the presence of
God ; once for all concealed his guilty hue ; once
for all was exiled from the paradise of holiness ; ■°
once for all thenceforward married. If you were
"in him,"" you have your norm ; if you have
passed over " into Christ," '^ you will be bound to
be (yet) better. Exhibit (to us) a third Adam,
and him a digamist ; and then you will be able
to be what, between the two, you cannot.


1 See Matt. vi. 25-34.

2 See I Cor. xv. 32.

3 Matt. xxiv. 19; Luke xxi. 23^ Comp ad Ux., 1. i. c.
■* Concussione. Comp. Hag. ii. 6, 7; Heb. xii. 26, 27.
5 Mundi.

'' Comp. Ex. i. 8-16.


7 Spado.

8 Comp. ad Ux., 1. i. cc.

9 See Rom. xiii._i4; Gal
10 Or " chastity."

" Comp. I Cor. xv. 22, iv tw ' S.hi
12 See Rom. vi. 3.


ii. ; and dc Ex. Cast, c.

7-


ELUCIDATIONS. 73


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(About 160 years having elapsed, pp. 59, 61.)

If the First Epistle to the Corinthians was written a.d. 57, and if our author speaks with
designed precision, and not in round numbers, the date of this treatise should be a.d. 217, — a
date which I should prefer to accept. Bishop Kaye,' however, instances capp. 7 and 9 in the
Ad Nationes as proving his disposition to give his numbers in loose rhetoric, and not with arith-
metical accuracy. Pamelius, on the other hand, gives a.d. 213.

On the general subject Kaye bids us read cap. 3, with cap. 14, to grasp the argument of
our enthusiast.- In few words, our author holds that St. Paul condescends to human infirmity in
permitting any marriage whatever, pointing to a better way.^ The apostle himself says, " The
time is short ; " but a hundred and sixty years have passed since then, and why may not the
Spirit of truth and righteousness now, after so long a time, be given to animate the adult Church
to that which is pronounced the better way in Scripture itself ?

Our author seems struggling here, according to my view, with his own rule of prescription.
He would free the doctrine from the charge of novelty by pointing it out in the Scripture of
a hundred and sixty years before. But how instinctively the Church ruled against this sophistry,
condemning in advance that whole system of " development " which a modern Tertullian
defends on grounds quite as specious, under a Montanistic subjection that makes a Priscilla of
the Roman pontiff. Let me commend the reader to the remarks upon Tertullian of the "judi-
cious Hooker," in book ii. capp. v. 5, 6 ; also book iv. cap. vii. 4, 5, and elsewhere.

II.

(Abrogated indulgence (comp. capp. 2 and 3), p. 70.)

Poor Tertullian is at war with himself in all the works which he indites against Catholic
orthodoxy. In the tract De Exhort. Castitatis he gives one construction to i Cor. ix. 5, which
in this he explains away ; + and now he patches up his conclusion by referring to his Montanistic
" Paraclete." In fighting Marcion, how thoroughly he agrees with Clement of Alexandria as to
the sanctity of marriage. In the second epistle to his wife, how beautiful his tribute to the married
state, blessed by the Church, and enjoyed in chastity. But here 5 how fanatically he would make
out that marriage is but tolerated adultery ! From Tertullian himself we may prove the marriage
of the clergy, and that {de Exhort. Cast., last chapter) abstinence was voluntary and exceptional,
however praiseworthy. Also, if he here urges that (cap. 12) even laymen should abstain from
second marriages, he allows the liberty of the clergy to marry once. He admits St. Peter's
marriage. Eusebius proves the marriage of St. Jude. Concerning " the grave dignity " of a
single marriage, we may concede that Tertullian proves his point, but no further.

In England the principles of the Monogamia were revived by the eccentric ^^'histon (ciria
A.D. 1750), and attracted considerable attention among the orthodox, — a fact pleasantly satirized
by Goldsmith in his Vicar of Wakcfieht.

On the general subject comp. Chrysost., tom. iii. p. 226 : " Laus Maximi, et quales ducendae
sint uxores."

I p. 40, Kaye's Tertullian. 2 P. 24, Kaye's Tertullian.

3 Comp. Bacon, Essays, No. viii.. Of Marriage and Single Life.

* Comp. Ex. Cast., cip. viii. p. 55, supra, with the Monogam., cap. viii. p. 65, supra.
S Comp. Apparel of Women, ii. cap. ix. p. 23, supra.


VII.
ON MODESTY;


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]


Modesty, the flower of manners, the honour
of our bodies, the grace of the sexes, the integ-
rity of the blood, the guarantee of our race, the
basis of sanctity, the pre-indication of every
good disposition ; rare though it is, and not
easily perfected, and scarce ever retained in per-
petuity, will yet up to a certain point linger in
the world, if nature shall have laid the prelimi-
nary groundwork of it, discipline persuaded to
it, censorial rigour curbed its excesses — on the
hypothesis, that is, that every mental good
quaUty is the result either of birth, or else of
training, or else of external compulsion.

But as the conquering power of things evil is
on the increase — which is the characteristic of
the last times ^ — things good are now not al-
lowed either to be born, so corrupted are the
seminal principles ; or to be trained, so deserted
are studies ; nor to be enforced, so disarmed are
the laws. In fact, (the modesty) of which we
are now beginning (to treat) is by this time
grown so obsolete, that it is not the abjuration
but the moderation of the appetites which mod-
esty is believed to be ; and he is held to be
chaste enough who has not been too chaste. But
let the world's ^ modesty see to itself, together
with the world ■* itself : together with its inherent
nature, if it was wont to originate in birth ; its
study, if in training ; its servitude, if in com-
pulsion : except that it had been even more
unhappy if it had remained only to prove fruit-
less, in that it had not been in God's household
that its activities had been exercised. I should
prefer no good to a vain good : what profits it
that that should exist whose existence profits
not? It is our own good things whose position


' [Written not earlier than a.d. 208; probably very much later.
See Bp. Kaye's very important remarks on this treatise, p. 224.]

2 Comp. 2 Tim. iii. 1-5; Matt. xxiv. 12.

3 Sajculi.
■♦ Sa;culo.

74


is now sinking ; it is the system of Christian
modesty which is being shaken to its foundation
— (Christian modesty), which derives its all
from heaven ; its nature, " through the laver of
regeneration ; " 5 its discipline, through the in-
strumentality of preaching ; its censorial rigour,
through the judgments which each Testament
exhibits ; and is subject to a more constant ex-
ternal compulsion, arising from the apprehension
or the desire of the eternal fire or kingdom.^

In opposition to this (modesty), could I not
have acted the dissembler? I hear that there
has even been an edict set forth, and a peremp-
tory one too. The Pontifex Maximus 7 — that is,
the bishop of bishops ^ — issues an edict : " I
remit, to such as have discharged (the require-
ments of) repentance, the sins both of adultery
and of fornication." O edict, on which cannot
be inscribed, " Good deed ! " And where shall
this liberality be posted up ? On the very spot,
I suppose, on the very gates of the sensual ap-
petites, beneath the very titles of the sensual
appetites. There is the place for promulgating
such repentance, where the delinquency itself
shall haunt. There is the place to read the
pardon, where entrance shall be made under
the hope thereof. But it is in the church that this
(edict) is read, and in the church that it is
pronounced ; and (the church) is a virgin !
Far, far from Christ's betrothed be such a
proclamation ! She, the true, the modest, the
saintly, shall be free from stain even of her ears.
She has none to whom to make such a promise ;
and if she have had, she does not make it ; since


s Tit. iii. 5.

^ Comp. Matt. XXV. 46.

7 [This is irony; a heathen epithet applied to Victor (or his suc-
cessor) , ironically, because he seemed ambitious of superiority over
other bishops.]

8 Zephyrinus (de Genoude) : Zephyrinus or (his predecessor) Vic-
tor. J. B. Lightfoot, Ep. ad Phil., 221, 222, ed. i, iS63. [See also
Robertson, Ch. Hist., p. ;2i. S.j


ON MODESTY.


75


even the earthly temple of God can sooner have
been called by the Lord a " den of robbers," '
than of adulterers and fornicators.

This too, therefore, shall be a count in my
indictment against the Psychics ; against the
fellowship of sentiment also which I myself
formerly maintained with them ; in order that
they may the more cast this in my teeth for a
mark of fickleness. Repudiation of fellowship
is never a pre-indication of sin. As if it were
not easier to err with the majority, when it is in
the company of the few that truth is loved !
But, however, a profitable fickleness shall no
more be a disgrace to me, than I should wish a
hurtful one to be an ornament. I blush not at
an error which I have ceased to hold, because I
am delighted at having ceased to hold it, because
I recognise myself to be better and more modest.
No one blushes at his own improvement. Even
in Christ, knowledge had its stages of growth ; ^
through which stages the apostle, too, passed.
"When I was a child," he says, "as a child I
spake, as a child I understood ; but when I be-
came a man, those (things) which had been the
child's I abandoned: "3 so truly did he turn
away from his early opinions : nor did he sin by
becoming an emulator not of ancestral but of
Christian traditions,-* wishing even the prae-cision
of them who advised the retention of circum-
cision.5 And would that the same fate might
befall those, too, who obtruncate the pure and
true integrity of the flesh ; amputating not the
extremest superficies, but the inmost image of
modesty itself, while they promise pardon to
adulterers and fornicators, in the teeth of the
primary discipline of the Christian Name ; a dis-
cipline to which heathendom itself bears such
emphatic witness, that it strives to punish that
discipline in the persons of our females rather
by defilements of the flesh than tortures ; wish-
ing to wrest from them that which they hold
dearer than life ! But now this glory is being
extinguished, and that by means of those who
ought with all the more constancy to refuse con-
cession of any pardon to defilements of this
kind, that they make the fear of succumbing to
adultery and fornication their reason for marry-
ing as often as they please — since " better it is
to marry than to burn." ^' No doubt it is for
continence sake that incontinence is necessary —
the " burning " will be extinguished by " fires ! "
Why, then, do they withal grant indulgence, under
the name of repentance, to crimes for w^hich
they furnish remedies by their law of multinup-
tialism ? For remedies will be idle while crimes


are indulged, and crimes will remain if remedies
are idle. And so, either way, they trifle with
solicitude and negligence ; by taking emptiest
precaution against (crimes) to which they grant
quarter, and granting absurdest quarter to
(crimes) against which they take precaution :
whereas either precaution is not to be taken
where quarter is given, or quarter not given
where precaution is taken ; for they take pre-
caution, as if they were unwilling that something
should be committed ; but grant indulgence, as
if they were willing it should be committed :
whereas, if they be unwilling it should be com-
mitted, they ought not to grant indulgence ; if
they be willing to grant indulgence, they ought
not to take precaution. For, again, adultery and
fornication will not be ranked at the same time
among the moderate and among the greatest
sins, so that each course may be equally open
with regard to them — the solicitude which takes
precaution, and the security which grants indul-
gence. But since they are such as to hold the
culminating place among crimes, there is no
room at once for their indulgence as if they
were moderate, and for their precaution as if
they were greatest. But by us precaution is thus
; also taken against the greatest, or, (if you will),
'. ]iighest (crimes, viz.,) in that it is not permitted,
j after believing, to know even a second marriage,
j differentiated though it be, to be sure, from the
i work of adultery and fornication by the nuptial
and dotal tablets : and accordingly, with the
I utmost strictness, we excommunicate digamists,
I as bringing infamy upon the Paraclete by the
; irregularity of their discipline. The self-same
liminal limit we fix for adulterers also and forni-
cators ; dooming them to pour forth tears bar-
ren of peace, and to regain from the Church
no ampler return than the publication of their
disgrace.


CHAP. II. GOD JUST AS WELL AS MERCIFUL ; AC-
CORDINGLY, MERCY MUST NOT BE INDISCRLMI-
NATE.

" But," say they, " God is ' good,' and ' most
good,' 7 and ' pitiful-hearted,' and *a pitier,' and
' alnmdant in pitififl-heartedness,' ^ which He
holds ' dearer than all sacrifice,' 9 ' not thinking
the sinner's death of so much worth as his re-
pentance,' ■" ' a Saviour of all men, most of all of
believers.' " And so it will be becoming for ' the
sons of (}od ' '^ too to be 'pitiful-hearted ' '^ and
' peacemakers ; "4 « giving in their turn just as


Matt. xxi. 13: Mark xi. 17; Luke xix. 46; Jer. vii. 11.

See Luke ii. 52.

1 Cor. xiii. 11, one clause omitted.


Cor. vii. 9, repeatedly quoted.


7 See Matt. xix. 17; Mark x. 18; Luke xviii. 19.

8 See Ex. xxxiv. 6, 7.

9 Hos. vi. 6; Mic. vi. 8; Matt. ix. 13, xii. 7.
'° Ezek. xviii. 23, 32, xxxiii. 11.

"' I Tim. iv. 10.
'2 I John iii. i, 2.
" Luke vi. ->,t.
14 MatL V. 9.


1^


ON MODESTY.


Christ withal hath given to us ; ' ' ' not judging,
that we be not judged.' - For ' to his own lord
a man standeth or falleth ; who art thou, to judge
another's servant ? ' ^ ' Remit, and remission shall
be made to thee.'"-* Such and so great futili-
ties of theirs wherewith they flatter God and
pander to themselves, effeminating rather than
invigorating discipline, with how cogent and con-
trary (arguments) are we for our part able to
rebut, — (arguments) which set before us warn-
ingly the " severity " 5 of God, and provoke our
own constancy ? Because, albeit God is by na-
ture good, still He is " just " ^ too. For, from
the nature of the case, just as He knows how
to " heal," so does He withal know how to
" smite ; " 7 " making peace," but withal " creat-
ing evils ; " ^ preferring repentance, but withal
commanding Jeremiah not to pray for the aver-
sion of ills on behalf of the sinful People, —
" since, if they sliall have fasted," saith He, " I
will not listen to their entreaty." 9 And again :
"And pray not thou unto (me) on behalf of the
People, and request not on their behalf in prayer
and supplication, since I will not listen to (them)
in the time wherein they shall have invoked
me, in the time of their affliction." '° And further,
above, the same preferrer of mercy above sacri-
fice (says) : "And pray not thou unto (me) on
behalf of this People, and request not that they
may obtain mercy, and approach not on their
behalf unto me, since I will not listen to
(them) " " — of course when they sue for mercy,
when out of repentance they weep and fast, and
when they offer their self-affliction to God. For
God is "jealous," '^ and is One who is not con-
temptuously derided '^ — derided, namely, by
such as flatter His goodness — and who, albeit
"patient," '^ yet threatens, through Isaiah, an end
of (His) patience. "I have held my peace;
shall I withal always hold my peace and endure ?
I have been quiet as (a woman) in birth-throes ;
I will arise, and will make (them) to grow arid." '5
For " a fire shall proceed before His face, and
shall utterly burn His enemies ; " '^ striking down
not the body only, but the souls too, into hell.' 7
Besides, the Lord Himself demonstrates the


' Comp. Matt. x. 8; but the reference seems to be to Eph. iv. 32,
where the Vulgate reads almost as TertuUian does, " donantes in-
vicem, sicut et Deus in Christo donavit vobis."

2 Matt. vii. i; Luke vi. 37.

3 Comp. Rom. xiv. 4.
■* Comp. Luke vi. 37.
s See Rom. xi. 22.

6 Comp. Isa. xlv. 21 ; Rom. iii. 26.

7 Comp. Job V. 18; Deut. xxxii. -xa.

8 Isa. .xlv. 7.

9 Jer. xiv. 11, 12, vii. 16, xi. 14.
10 Jer. xi 14.

" Jer. vii. 16.

]- Comp. Ex. .XX. 5, xxxiv. 14; Deut. iv. 24, v. 9, vi. 15; Josh.
XXIV. 19; Nahum i. 2.
" Gal. vi. 7.

'* Comp. Rom. xv. 5; Ps. vii. 12 (in LXX.).
'S Isa. xlii. 14.
'*■ Comp. Ps. xcvii. 3.
'^ Comp. Matt. X. 28; Luke xii. 4, 5.


manner in which He threatens such as judge :
" For with what judgment ye judge, judgment
shall be given on you." '** Thus He has not pro-
hibited judging, but taught (how to do it).
Whence the apostle withal judges, and that in a
case of fornication, '9 that " such a man must be
surrendered to Satan for the destruction of the
flesh ; " ^° chiding them likewise because " breth-
ren " were not "judged at the bar of the saints : " ^'
for he goes on and says, " To what (purpose is
it) for me to judge those who are without?"
" But you remit, in order that remission may be
granted you by God." The sins which are (thus)
cleansed are such as a man may have committed
against his brother, not against God. We pro-
fess, in short, in our prayer, that we will grant
remission to our debtors ; ^^ but it is not becom-
ing to distend further, on the ground of the
authority of such Scriptures, the cable of con-
tention with alternate pull into diverse directions ;
so that one (Scripture) may seem to draw tight,
another to relax, the reins of discipline — in un-
certainty, as it were, — and the latter to debase
the remedial aid of repentance through lenity,
the former to refuse it through austerity. Fur-
ther : the authority of Scripture will stand within
its own limits, without reciprocal opposition.
The remedial aid of repentance is determined
by its own conditions, without unlimited conces-
sion ; and the causes of it themselves are ante-
riorly distinguished without confusion in the
proposition. We agree that the causes of re-
pentance are sins. Thes-e we divide into two
issues : some will be remissible, some irremissi-
ble : in accordance wherewith it will be doubtful
to no one that some deserve chastisement, some
condemnation. Every sin is dischargeable either
by pardon or else by penalty : by pardon as the
result of chastisement, by penalty as the result
of condemnation. Touching this difference, we
have not only already premised certain antitheti-
cal passages of the Scriptures, on one hand re-
taining, on the other remitting, sins ; ^^ but John,
too, will teach us : " If any knoweth his brother
to be sinning a sin not unto death, he shall re-
quest, and hte shall be given to him ; " because
he is not " sinning unto death," this will be re-
missible. "(There) is a sin unto death ; not for
this do I say that any is to request " ^-^ — this will
be irremissible. So, where there is the effica-
cious power of "making request," there likewise
is that of remission : where there is no (effica-
cious power) of " making request," there equafly
is none of remission either. According to this


18 Matt. vii. 2; Luke vi. 37.

'9 Or rather incest, as appears by i Cor. v.

"° 1 Cor. V. 5.

21 See I Cor. vi. 1-6, v. 12.

22 Luke xi. 4.

23 Comp. John xx. 23.

24 I John v. 16, not quite verbatim.


ON MODESTY


11


difference of sins, the condition of repentance
also is discriminated. Tliere will be a condition
which may possibly obtain pardon, — in the case,
namely, of a remissible sin : there will be a con-
dition which can by no means obtain it, — in the
case, namely, of an irremissible sin. And it re-
mains to examine specially, with regard to the
position of adultery and fornication, to which
class of sins they ought to be assigned.


CHAP. III. AN OBJECTION ANTICIPATED BEFORE

THE DISCUSSION ABOVE PROMISED IS COM- ,
MENCED.

But before doing this, I will make short work [
with an answer which meets us from the oppo-
site side, in reference to that species of repent-
ance which we are just defining as being without i
pardon. " Why, if," say they, " there is a re- '
pentance which lacks pardon, it immediately
follows that such repentance must withal be
wholly unpractised by you. For nothing is to
be done in vain. Now repentance will be prac-
tised in vain, if it is without pardon. But aU\
repentance is to be practised. Therefore let |
(us allow that) all obtains pardon, that it may
not be practised in vain ; because it will not be
to be practised, if it be practised in vain. Now,
in vain it is practised, if it shall lack pardon." i
Justly, then, do they allege (this argument) |
against us ; since they have usurpingly kept in
their own power the fruit of this as of other
repentance — that is, pardon ; for, so far as they
are concerned, at whose hands (repentance)
obtains man''s peace, (it is in vain). As regards
us, however, who remember that the Lord alone I
concedes (the pardon of) sins, (and of course \
of mortal oriQS,) it will nothQ practised in vain.
For (the repentance) being referred back to the
Lord, and thenceforward lying prostrate before
Him, will by this very fact the rather avail to
win pardon, that it gains it by entreaty f?-om
God alone, that it believes not that man's peace
is adequate to its guilt, that as far as regards the I
Church it prefers the blush of shame to the privi- '
lege of communion. For before her doors it
stands, and by the example of its own stigma
admonishes all others, and calls at the same
time to its own aid the brethren's tears, and
returns with an even richer merchandise — their
compassion, namely — than their communion.
And if it reaps not the harvest of peace here,
yet it sows the seed of it with the Lord ; nor
does it lose, but prepares, its fruit. It will not
fail of emolument if it do not fail in duty. Thus,
neither is such repentance vain, nor such disci-
pline harsh. Both honour God. The former, by
laying no flattering unction to itself, will more
readily win success ; the latter, by assuming noth-
ing to itself, will more fully aid.


CHAP. IV. ADULTERY AND FORNICATION SYNON^Y-

MOUS.

Having defined the distinction (between the
kinds) of repentance, we are by this time, then,
able to return to the assessment of the sins —
whether they be such as can obtain pardon at
the hand of men. In the first place, (as for the
fact) that we call adultery likewise fornication,
usage requires (us so to do). "Faith," withal,
has a familiar acquaintance with sundry appella-
tions. So, in every one of our little works, we
carefully guard usage. Besides, if I shall say
" adulterium," and if " stuprum," the indictment
of contamination of the flesh will be one and
the same. For it makes no difference whether
a man assault another's bride or widow, provided
it be not his own " female ; " just as there is no
difference made by places — whether it be in
chambers or in towers that modesty is massacred.
Every homicide, even outside a wood, is banditry.
So, too, whoever enjoys any other than nuptial
intercourse, in whatever place, and in the person
of whatever woman, makes himself guilty of
adultery and fornication. Accordingly, among
us, secret connections as well — connections, that
is, not first professed in presence of the Church
— nm risk of being judged akin to adultery and
fornication ; nor must we let them, if thereafter
woven together by the covering of marriage,
elude the charge. But all the other frenzies of
passions — impious both toward the bodies and
toward the sexes — beyond the laws of nature,
we banish not only from the threshold, but from
all shelter of the Church, because they are not
sins, but monstrosities.


CHAP. V. — OF THE PROHIBITION OF ADULTERY IN
THE DECALOGUE.

Of how deep guilt, then, adultery — which is
likewise a matter of fornication, in accordance
with its criminal function — is to be accounted,
the Law of God first comes to hand to show us ;
if it is true, (as it is), that after interdicting the
superstitious service of alien gods, and the mak-
ing of idols themselves, after commending (to
religious observance) the veneration of the Sab-
bath, after commanding a religious regard toward
parents second (only to that) toward God, (that
Law) laid, as the next substratum in strengthen-
ing and fortifying such counts, no other precept
than "Thou shalt not commit adultery." For
after spiritual chastity and sanctity followed cor-
poreal integrity. And this (the Law) accord-
ingly fortified, by immediately prohibiting its
foe, adultery. Understand, consequently, what
kind of sin (that must be), the repression of
which (the Law) ordained next to (that of)
idolatry. Nothing that is a second is remote
from the first ; nothing is so close to the first as


7S


ON MODESTY.


1


' the second. That which results from the first is
(in a sense) another first. And so adultery is
bordering on idolatry. For idolatry withal, often
cast as a reproach upon the People under the
name of adultery and fornication, will be alike
conjoined therewith in fiUe as in following — will
be alike co-heir therewith in condemnation as in
co-ordination. Yet further: premising "Thou
shalt not commit adultery," (the Law) adjoins,
"Thou shalt not kill." It honoured adultery,
of course, to which it gives the precedence over
murder, in the very fore-front of the most holy
law, among the primary counts of the celestial
edict, marking it with the inscription of the very
principal sins. From its place you may discern
the measure, from its rank the station, from its
neighbourhood the merit, of each thing. Even
evil has a dignity, consisting in being stationed
at the summit, or else in- the centre, of the
superlatively bad. I behold a certain pomp
and circumstance of adultery : on the one side,
Idolatry goes before and leads the way ; on the
other, Murder follows in company. Worthily,
without doubt, has she taken her seat between
the two most conspicuous eminences of mis-
deeds, and has completely filled the vacant
space, as it were, in their midst, with an equal
majesty of crime. Enclosed by such flanks,
encircled and supported by such ribs, who shall
dislocate her from the corporate mass of cohe-
rencies, from the bond of neighbour crimes,
from the embrace of kindred wickednesses, so
as to set apart her alone for the enjoyment of
repentance ? Will not on one side Idolatry, on
the other Murder, detain her, and (if they have
any voice) reclaim: "This is our wedge, this
our compacting power? By (the standard of)
Idolatry we are measured ; by her disjunctive
intervention we are conjoined ; to her, outjutting
from our midst, we are united ; the Divine Scrip-
ture has made us concorporate ; the very letters
are our glue ; herself can' no longer exist with-
out us. ' Many and many a time do I, Idolatry,
subminister occasion to Adultery ; witness my
groves and my mounts, and the living waters,
and the very temples in cities, what mighty
agents we are for overthrowing modesty.' ' I
also. Murder, sometimes exert myself on behalf
of Adultery. To omit tragedies, witness nowa-
days the poisoners, witness the magicians, how
many seductions I avenge, how many rivalries
I revenge ; how many guards, how many in-
formers, how many accomplices, I make away
with. Witness the midwives likewise, how many
adulterous conceptions are slaughtered.' Even
among Christians there is no adultery without
us. Wherever the business of the unclean spirit
is, there are idolatries ; wherever a man, by being
polluted, is slain, there too is murder. There-
fore the remedial aids of repentance will not be


suitable to ^/tem, or else they will likewise be to
us. We either detain Adultery, or else follow
her." These words the sins themselves do speak.
If the sins are deficient in speech, hard by (the
door of the church) stands an idolater, hard by
stands a murderer ; in their midst stands, too, an
adulterer. Alike, as the duty of repentance bids,
they sit in sackcloth and bristle in ashes ; with
the self-same weeping they groan ; with the self-
same prayers they make their circuits ; with the
self-same knees they supplicate ; the self-same
mother they invoke. What doest thou, gendest
and humanest Discipline? Either to a// these
will it be thy duty so to be, for " blessed are the
peacemakers ; " • or else, if not to a//, it will be
thy duty to range thyself on our side. Dost
thou once for all condemn the idolater and the
murderer, but take the adulterer out from their
midst? — (the adulterer), the successor of the
idolater, the predecessor of the murderer, the
colleague of each ? It is " an accepting of per-
son : " ^ the more pitiable repentances thou hast
left (unpitied) behind !

CHAP. VI. EXAMPLES OF SUCH OFFENCES UNDER

THE OLD DISPENSATION NO PATTERN FOR THE
DISCIPLES OF THE NEW. BUT EVEN THE OLD
HAS EX.'^MPLES OF VENGEANCE UPON SUCH OF-
FENCES,

Plainly, if you show by what patronages of
heavenly precedents and precepts it is that you
open to adultery alone — and therein to fornica-
tion also — the gate of repentance, at this very
line our hostile encounter will forthwith cross
swords. Yet I must necessarily prescribe you a
law, not to stretch out your hand after the old
things,^ not to look backwards : ■* for " the old
things are passed away," s according to Isaiah ;
and " a renewing hath been renewed," '^ accord-
ing to Jeremiah ; and "forgetful of former things,
we are reaching forward," 7 according to the
apostle ; and " the law and the prophets (were)
until John," ** according to the Lord. For even
if we are just now beginning with the Law in
demonstrating (the nature of) adultery, it is
justly with that phase of the law which Christ
has "not dissolved, but fulfilled. "9 For it is the
" burdens " of the law which were "until John,"
not the remedial virtues. It is the " yokes " of
" works " that have been rejected, not those


' Matt. v._9.

2 Job xxxii. 21, Lev. xix. 15, and the references there.

3 Comp. Isa. xliii. 18.
* Comp. Luke ix. 62.

5 There is no passage, so far as I am aware, in Isaiah containing
this distinct assertion. We have almost the exact words in Rev, xxi.
4. The reference may be to Isa. xlii. 9; but there the Eng. ver.
reads, "are come to pass," and the LXX, have to. dn-' dp\>)! i6ou
r/Katri.

6 Comp. Jer. iv. 3 in LXX.

7 Comp. Phil. iii. 13.

8 Comp. Matt. xi. 13; Luke xvi. 16,

9 See Malt, v, 17,


I


ON MODESTY.


79


of disciplines.' " Liberty in Christ " ^ has done
no injury to innocence. The law of piety,
sanctity, humanity, truth, chastity, justice, mercy,
benevolence, modesty, remains in its entirety ;
in which law "blessed (is) the man who shall
meditate by day and by night." ^ About that
(law) the same David (says) again: "The law
of the Lord (is) unblameable,-* converting souls;
the statutes of the Lord (are) direct, delighting
hearts ; the precept of the Lord far-shining, en-
lightening eyes." Thus, too, the apostle : " And
so the law indeed is holy, and the precept holy
and most good " s — " Thou shalt not commit
adultery," of course. But he had withal said
above : " Are we, then, making void the law
through faith ? Far be it ; but we are establish-
ing the law"^ — forsooth in those (points) which,
being even now interdicted by the New Testa-
ment, are prohibited by an even more emphatic
precept : instead of, " Thou shalt not commit
adultery," " Whoever shall have seen with a view
to concupiscence, hath already committed adul-
tery in his own heart ; " 7 and instead of, " Thou
shalt not kill," "Whoever shall have said to his
brother, Racha, shaU be in danger of hell." '^
Ask (yourself) whether the law of not commit-
ting adultery be still in force, to which has been
added that of not indulging concupiscence.
Besides, if any precedents (taken from the Old
Dispensation) shall favour you in (the secrecy
of) your bosom, they shall not be set in opposi-
tion to this discipline which we are maintaining.
For it is in \-ain that an additional law has been
reared, condemning the origin even of sins —
that is, concupiscences and wills — no less than
the actual deeds ; if the fact that pardon was of
old in some cases conceded to adultery is to be
a reason why it shall be conceded at the present
day. " What will be the reward attaching to the
restrictions imposed upon the more fully devel-
oped discipline of the present day, except that
the elder (discipline) may be made the agent
for granting indulgence to your prostitution?"!
In that case, you will grant pardon to the idolater
too, and to every apostate, because we find the
People itself, so often guilty of these crimes, as
often reinstated in their former privileges. You
will maintain communion, too, with the mur- 1
derer : because Ahab, by deprecation, washed i
away (the guilt of) Naboth's blood ;'' and David, i
by confession, purged Uriah's slaughter, together ;
with its cause — adultery. ■° That done, you will


' See Acts xv. lo.

2 See Gal. ii. 4, v. i, 13.

3 Ps. i. I, briefly.

*■ Ps. xix. y. " perfect," Eng. ver. In LXX. it is xviii. 8.
S Rom. vii. 12, not literally.
^ Rom. iii. 31.
' Matt. V. 27, 28.

8 Matt. V. 21,22.

9 See I Kings xxi. fin LXX, 3 Kings xx.).
*o See 2 Sam. xi., xii. 1-13.


condone incests, too, for Lot's sake ; " and forni-
cations combined with incest, for Judah's sake ; '*
and base marriages with prostitutes, for Hosea's
sake ; '^ and not only the frequent repetition of
marriage, but its simultaneous plurality, for our
fathers' sakes : for, of course, it is meet that
there should also be a perfect ecjuality of grace
in regard of a// deeds to which indulgence was
in days bygone granted, if on the ground of some
pristine precedent pardon is claimed for adultery.
We, too, indeed have precedents in the self-same
antiquity on the side of our opinion, — (prece-
dents) of judgment not merely not waived, but
even summarily executed upon fornication. And
of course it is a sufficient one, that so vast a
number — (the number) of 24,000 — of the Peo-
ple, when they committed fornication with the
daughters of Madian, fell in one plague.'-* But,
with an eye to the glory of Christ, I prefer to
derive (my) discipline from Christ. Grant that
the pristine days may have had — if the Psychics
please — even a right of (indulging) every im-
modesty ; grant that, before Christ, the flesh may
have disported itself, nay, may have perished be-
fore its Lord went to seek and bring it back :
not yet was it worthy of the gift of salvation ; not
yet apt for the office of sanctity. It was still,
up to that time, accounted as being in Adam,
with its own vicious nature, easily indulging con-
cupiscence after whatever it had seen to be " at-
tractive to the sight," 's and looking back at the
lower things, and checking its itching with fig-
leaves.'^ Universally inherent was the virus of
lust — the dregs which are formed out of milk
contain it — (dregs) fitted (for so doing), in
that even the waters themselves had not yet
been bathed. But when the Word of God de-
scended into flesh, — (flesh) not unsealed even
by marriage, — and " the Word was made flesh," '?
— (flesh) never to be unsealed by marriage, —
which was to find its way to the tree not of
incontinence, but of endurance ; which was to
taste from that tree not anything sweet, but
something bitter ; which was to pertain not to
the infernal regions, but to heaven ; which was
to be precinct not with the leaves of lascivi-
ousness, but the flowers of holiness ; "'^ which
was to impart to the waters its own purities —
thenceforth, whatever flesh (is) " in Christ " '9
has lost its pristine soils, is now a thing different,
emerges in a new state, no longer (generated)
of the slime of natural seed, nor of the grime of
concupiscence, but of "pure water" and a " clean


" See Gen. xix. 30-38.

'- See Gen. xxxviii.

'3 See Hos. i. 2, 3, iii. 1-3.

'■» See Num. xxv. 1-9; i Cor. x 8.

'5 See Gen. iii. 6; and comp. i John ii. 16.

"1 See Gen. iii. 7.

'' John i. 14.

" Or, " chastity."

'9 Comp. 3 Cor. v. 17.


8o


ON MODESTY.


Spirit." And, accordingly, why excuse it on the
ground of pristine precedent? It did not bear
the names of " body of Christ," ' of " members
of Christ,"^ of "temple of God," ^ at the time
when it used to obtain pardon for adultery. And
thus if, from the moment when it changed its
condition, and " having been baptized into Christ
put on Christ," ■♦ and was " redeemed with a
great price" — "the blood," to wit, "of the
Lord and Lamb " s — you take hold of any one
precedent (be it precept, or law, or sentence,)
of indulgence granted, or to be granted, to
adultery and fornication, — you have likewise at
our hands a definition of the time from which
the age of the question dates.

CHAP. VII. —OF THE PARABLES OF THE LOST EWE
AND THE LOST DRACHMA.

You shall have leave to begin with the para-
bles, where you have the lost ewe re-sought by
the Lord, and carried back on His shoulders.*^
Let the very paintings upon your cups come for-
ward to show whether even in them the figurative
meaning of that sheep will shine through (the
outward semblance, to teach) whether a Chris-
tian or heathen sinner be the object it aims at
in the matter of restoration. For we put in a
demurrer arising out of the teaching of nature,
out of the law of ear and tongue, out of the
soundness of the mental faculty, to the effect
that such answers are always given as are called
forth (by the question, — answers), that is, to
the (questions) which call them forth. That
which was calling forth (an answer in the present
case) was, I take it, the fact that the Pharisees
were muttering in indignation at the Lord's ad-
mitting to His society heathen publicans and
sinners, and communicating with them in food.
When, in reply to this, the Lord had figured the
restoration of the lost ewe, to whom else is it
credible that he configured it but to the lost
heathen, about whom the question was then in
hand, — not about a Christian, who up to that
time had no existence? Else, what kind of
(hypothesis) is it that the Lord, like a quibbler
in answering, omitting the present subject-matter
which it was His duty to refute, should spend
His labour about one yet future ? " But a ' sheep '
properly means a Christian, 7 and the Lord's
' flock ' is the people of the Church,^ and the
* good shepherd ' is Christ ; ^ and hence in the
' sheep ' we must understand a Christian who has
erred from the Church's ' flock.' " In that case,
you make the Lord to have given no answer to


19.


' I Cor. xii. 27.

2 lb. and vi. 15,

3 I Cor. iii. i6, \
* Gal. iii. 27.

5 Comp. I Cor. vi. 20, and the references there.

6 Luke XV. 3-7.

' Comp. John x. 27.

8 Comp. Acts XX. 28.

9 Comp. John X. II,


the Pharisees' muttering, but to your presump-
tion. And yet you will be bound so to defend
that presumption, as to deny that the (points)
which you think applicable to Christians are
referable to a heathen. Tell me, is not all man-
kind one flock of God ? Is not the same God
both Lord and Shepherd of the universal na-
tions? '° Who more " perishes " from God than
the heathen, so long as he "errs?" Who is
more "re-sought" by God than the heathen,
when he is recalled by Christ? In fact, it is
among heathens that this order finds antecedent
place ; if, that is. Christians are not otherwise
made out of heathens than by being first " lost,"
and " re-sought " by God, and " carried back "
by Christ. So likewise ought this order to be
kept, that we may interpret any such (figure)
with reference to those in whom it finds prior
place. But you, I take it, would wish this : that
He should represent the ewe as lost not from a
flock, but from an ark or a chest ! In like man-
ner, albeit He calls the remaining number of the
heathens "righteous," it does not follow that He
shows them to be Christians ; dealing as He is
with yeius, and at that very moment refuting
them, because they were indignant at the hope
of the heathens. But in order to express, in
opposition to the Pharisees' envy. His own grace
and goodwill even in regard of one heathen, He
preferred the salvation 'of one sinner by repent-
ance to theirs by righteousness ; or else, pray,
were the Jews not "righteous," and such as "had
no need of repentance," having, as they had, as
pilotages of discipline and instruments of fear,
"the Law and the Prophets?" He set them
therefore in the parable — and if not such as
they were, yet such as they ought to have been
— that they migh blush the more when they
heard that repentance was necessary to others,
and not to themselves.

Similarly, the parable of the drachma," as being
called forth out of the same subject-matter, we
equally interpret with reference to a heathen ;
albeit it had been "lost" in a house, as it were in
the church ; albeit "found" by aid of a "lamp,"
as it were by aid of God's word,'^ Nay, but this
whole world is the one house of all ; in which
world it is more the heathen, who is found in
darkness, whom the grace of God enlightens,
than the Christian, who is already in God's light.'3
Finally, it is one " straying " which is ascribed to
the ewe and the drachma : (and this is an evi-
dence in my favour) ; for if the parables had
been composed with a view to a Chi-istian sin-
ner, after the loss of his faith, a second loss and
restoration of them would have been noted.


'0 Comp. Rom. iii. 29.
" Luke XV. 8-10.

'- Comp. Ps. cxix, 105 (in LXX. cxviii. 105).
'3 Comp. I John i. 5-7, ii. 8; also Rom. xiii. 12, 13; i Thess v.
4.5-


ON MODESTY.


8i


I will now withdraw for a short time from this
position ; in order that I may, even by withdraw-
ing, the more recommend it, when I shall have
succeeded even thus also in confuting the pre-
sumption of the opposite side. I admit that the
sinner portrayed in each parable is one who is
already a Christian ; yet not that on this account
must he be affirmed to be such an one as can be
restored, through repentance, from the crime of
adultery and fornication. For although he be
said to " have perished," there will be the kind
of perdition to treat of; inasmuch as the "ewe"
" perished " not by dying, but by straying ; and I
the " drachma " not by being destroyed, but by
being hidden. In this sense, a thing which is
safe may be said to " have perished." There-
fore the believer, too, "perishes," by lapsing out
of (the right path) into a public exhibition of
charioteering frenzy, or gladiatorial gore, or
scenic foulness, or athletic vanity ; or else if he
has lent the aid of any special "arts of curiosity"
to sports, to the conviviaUties of heathen solem-
nity, to official exigence, to the ministry of
another's idolatry ; if he has impaled himself
upon some word of ambiguous denial, or else of
blasphemy. For some such cause he has been
driven outside the flock ; or even himself, per-
haps, by anger, by pride, by jealousy, (or) — as,
in fact, often happens — by disdaining to submit
to chastisement, has broken away (from it). He
ought to be re-sought and recalled. That which
can be recovered does not "perish," unless it per-
sist in remaining outside. You will well interpret
the parable by recalling the sinner tuhile he is
still living. But, for the adulterer and fornicator,
who is there who has not pronounced him to
be dead immediately upon commission of the
crime ? With what face will you restore to the
flock one who is dead, on the authority of that
parable which recalls a sheep not dead ?

Finally, if you are mindful of the prophets,
when they are chiding the shepherds, there is a
word — I think it is Ezekiel's : " Shepherds, be-
hold, ye devour the milk, and clothe you with
the fleeces : what is strong ye have slain ; what
is weak ye have not tended ; what is shat-
tered ye have not bound ; what has been driven
out ye have not brought back ; what has per-
ished ye have not re-sought."' Pray, does he
withal upbraid them at all concerning that which
is dead, that they have taken no care to restore
that too to the flock ? Plainly, he makes it an ad-
ditional reproach that they have caused the sheep
to perish, and to be eaten up by the beasts of
the field j nor can they either " perish mortally,"
or be " eaten up," if they are left remaining. " Is
it not possible — (granting) that ewes which
have been mortally lost, and eaten up, are re-


' See Ezek. xxxiv. 1-4.


covered — that (in accordance also with the
example of the drachma (lost and found again)
even within the house of God, the Church) there
may be some sins of a moderate character, pro-
portionable to the small size and the weight of
a drachma, which, lurking in the same Church,
and by and by in the same discovered, forthwith
are brought to an end in the same with the joy
of amendment?" But of adultery and fornica-
tion it is not a drachma, but a talent, (which is
the measure) ; and for searching them out there
is need not of the javelin-light of a lamp, but of
the spear-like ray of the entire sun. No sooner
has (such a) man made his appearance than he
is expelled from the Church ; nor does he remain
there ; nor does he cause joy to the Church which
discovers him, but grief; nor does he invite the
congratulation of her neighbours, but the fellow-
ship in sadness of the surrounding fraternities.

By comparison, even in this way, of this our
interpretation with theirs, the arguments of both
the ewe and the drachma will all the more refer
to the heathen, that they cannot possibly apply to
the Christian guilty of the sin for the sake of
which they are wrested into a forced application
to the Christian on the opposite side.

CHAP. VIII. OF THE PRODIGAL SON.

But, however, the majority of interpreters of
the parables are deceived by the self-same result
as is of very frequent occurrence in the case of
embroidering garments with purple. When you
think that you have judiciously harmonized the
proportions of the hues, and believe yourself to
have succeeded in skilfully giving vividness to
their mutual combination ; presently, when each
body (of colour) and (the various) lights are
fully developed, the convicted diversity will ex-
pose all the error. In the self-same darkness,
accordingly, with regard to the parable "of the two
sons also, they are led by some figures (occurring
in it), which harmonize in hue with the present
(state of things), to wander out of the path of
the true light of that comparison which the sub-
ject-matter of the parable presents. For they
set down, as represented in the two sons, two
peoples — the elder the Jewish, the younger the
Christian : for they cannot in the sequel arrange
for the Christian sinner, in the person of the
younger son, to obtain pardon, unless in the per-
son of the elder they first portray the Jewish.
Now, if I shall succeed in showing that the Jew-
ish fails to suit the comparison of the elder son,
the consequence of course will be, that the Chris-
tian will not be admissible (as represented) by
the joint figure of the younger son. For although
the Jew withal be called " a son," and an " elder
one," inasmuch as he had priority in adoption ;^


* See Ex. iv. 22; Rom.


82


ON MODESTY.


although, too, he envy the Christian the recon-
cihation of God the Father, — a point which the
opposite side most eagerly catches at, — still it
will be no speech of a Jew to the Father : " Be-
hold, in how many years do I serve Thee, and Thy
precept have I never transgressed." For when
has the Jew not been a transgressor of the law ;
hearing with the ear, and not hearing ; ' holding
in hatred him who reprove th in the gates,^ and
in scorn holy speech P^ So, too, it will be no
speech of the Father to the Jew : " Thou art
always with Me, and all Mine are thine." For
the Jews are pronounced " apostate sons, be-
gotten indeed and raised on high, but who have
not understood the Lord, and who have quite
forsaken the Lord, and have provoked unto
anger the Holy One of Israel." ■♦ That all things,
plainly, were conceded to the Jew, we shall admit ;
but he has likewise had every more savoury mor-
sel torn from his tliroat,' not to say the very land
of paternal promise. And accordingly the Jew
at the present day, no less than the younger son,
having squandered God's substance, is a beggar
in alien territory, serving even until now its
princes, that is, the princes of this world. ^ Seek,
therefore, the Christians some other as their
brother ; for the Jew the parable does not ad-
mit. Much more aptly would they have matched
the Christian with the elder, and the Jew with
the younger son, " according to the analogy of
faith," 7 if the order of each people as intimated
from Rebecca's womb ^ permitted the inversion :
only that (in that case) the concluding para-
graph would oppose them ; for it will be fitting
for the Christian to rejoice, and not to grieve,
at the restoration of Israel, if it be true, (as it
is), that the whole of our hope is intimately
united with the remaining expectation of Ihirael.^
Thus, even if some (features in the parable) are
favourable, yet by others of a contrary signifi-
cance the thorough carrying out of this compari-
son is destroyed ; although (albeit all points be
capable of corresponding with mirror-like accu-
racy) there be one cardinal danger in interpre-
tations — the danger lest the felicity of our
comparisons be tempered with a different aim
from that which the subject-matter of each par-
ticular parable has bidden us (temper it). For
we remember (to have seen) actors withal, while
accommodating allegorical gestures to their dit-
ties, giving expression to such as are far different
from the immediate plot, and scene, and charac-
ter, and yet with the utmost congruity. But


Comp. Isa. vi. 9.

Comp. Isa. xxix. 21.

Comp. Jer. xx. 7, 8.

Comp. Isa. i 2-4.
ft ^^^F^' '^,''^'''- 3°;. 31 (in LXX. it is Ixxvii. 30, 31),
ft /->„ « II 1- Comp. I Cor. ii. 6.


6 Or "age" — saeciili

7 Comp. Rom. xii. 6.
^ Comp. Rom. ix. lo-i
9 Comp. Rom. xi. 11-31


; Gen. XXV. 21-24.


away with extraordinary ingenuity, for it has
nothing to do with our subject. Thus heretics,
too, apply the self-same parables where they list,
and exclude them (in other cases) — not where
they ought — with the utmost aptitude. Why
the utmost aptitude? Because from the very
beginning they have moulded together the very
subject-matters of their doctrines in accordance
with the opportune incidences of the parables.
Loosed as they are from the constraints of the
rule of truth, they have had leisure, of course,
to search into and put together those things of
which the parables seem (to be symbolical).

CHAP. IX. CERTAIN GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF

PARABOLIC INTERPRETATION. THESE APPLIED
TO THE PARABLES NOW UNDER CONSIDERATION,
ESPECIALLY TO THAT OF THE PRODIGAL SON.

We, however, who do not make the parables
the sources whence we devise our subject-mat-
ters, but the subject-matters the sources whence
we interpret the parables, do not labour hard,
either, to twist all things (into shape) in the ex-
position, while we take care to avoid all contra-
dictions. Why " an hundred sheep? " and why,
to be sure, " ten drachmas? " And what is that
"besom?" Necessary it was that He who was
desiring to express the extreme pleasure which
the salvation of one sinner gives to God, should
name some special quantity of a numerical whole
from which to describe that "one " had perished.
Necessary it was that the style of one engaged in
searching for a " drachma " in a " house," should
be apdy fitted with the helpful accompaniment
of a "besom" as well as of a "lamp." For
curious niceties of this kind not only render
some things suspected, but, by the subtlety of
forced explanations, generally lead away from
the truth. There are, moreover, some points
which are just simply introduced with a view to
the structure and disposition and texture of the
parable, in order that they may be worked up
throvighout to the end for which the typical
example is being provided. Now, of course
the (parable of) the two sons will point to the
same end as (those of) the drachma and the
ewe: for it has the self- same cause (to call it
forth) as those to which it coheres, and the self-
same " muttering," of course, of the Pharisees at
the intercourse between the Lord and heathens.
Or else, if any doubts that in the land of Judea,
subjugated as it had been long since by the hand
of Pompey and of Lucullus, the publicans were
heathens, let him read Deuteronomy : " There
shall be no tribute-weigher of the sons of Israel." '°
Nor would the name of publicans have been so
execrable in the eyes of the Lord, unless as being


I


1° Oehler refers to Deut. xxiii, 19; but the ref. is not satisfactory.


ON MODESTY.


a " strange " ' name, — a (name) of such as put
up the pathways of the very sky, and earth, and
sea, for sale. Moreover, when (the writer) ad-
joins "sinners" to "pubhcans,"^ it does not
follow that he shows them to have been Jews,
albeit some may possibly have been so ; but by
placing on a par the one genus of heathens —
some sinners by office, that is, publicans ; some
by nature, that is, not publicans — he has drawn
a distinction between them. Besides, the Lord
would not have been censured for partaking of
food with Jews, but with heathens, from whose
board the Jewish discipline excludes (its dis-
ciples).^

Now we must proceed, in the case of the prod-
igal son, to consider first that which is more use-
ful ; for no adjustment of examples, albeit in the
most nicely-poised balance, shall be admitted if
it shall prove to be most hurtful to salvation.
But the whole system of salvation, as it is com-
prised in the maintenance of discipline, we see
is being subverted by that interpretation which
is affected by the opposite side. For if it is a
Christian who, after wandering far from his
Father, squanders, by living heathenishly, the
" substance " received ixoxQ. God his Father, —
(the substance), of course, of baptism — (the
substance), of course, of the Holy Spirit, and
(in consequence) of eternal hope ; if, stripped
of his mental " goods," he has even handed his
service over to the prince of the world "* — who
else but the devil? — and by him being ap-
pointed over the business of " feeding swine "

— of tending unclean spirits, to wit — has recov-
ered his senses so as to return to his Father,

— the result will be, that, not adulterers and
fornicators, but idolaters, and blasphemers, and
renegades, and every class of apostates, will by
this parable make satisfaction to the Father ;
and in this way (it may) rather (be said that)
the whole " substance " of the sacrament is most
truly wasted away. For who will fear to squan-
der what he has the power of afterwards re-
covering? Who will be careful to preserve to
perpetuity what he will be able to lose not to
perpetuity? Security in sin is likewise an appe-
tite for it. Therefore the apostate withal will
recover his former "garment," the robe of the
Holy Spirit; and a renewal of the "ring," the
sign and seal of baptism ; and Christ will again
be " slaughtered ; " s and he will recline on that
couch from which such as are imworthily clad
are wont to be lifted by the torturers, and cast


' Extraneum. Comp. such phrases as "j^rrtw^c children," Ps.
cxliv. 7, II (cxliii. 7, 11, in LXX.), and Hos. v. 7; " strange ^pi^"
etc.

2 See Luke xv. i, 2; Matt. ix. 10, 11, xi. 19; Mark ii. 15, 16;
Luke V. 29, 30.

3 See Acts x. 28, xi. 3.

^ Saeculi. Comp. i Cor. ii. 8; 2 Cor. iv. 4.

5 Besides the reference to Luke xv. 23, there may be a reference
to Heb. vi. 6.


away into darkness,^ — much more such as have
been stripped. It is therefore a further step if it
is not expedient, (any more than reasonable) , that
the story of the prodigal son should apply to a
Chrisdan. Wherefore, if the image of a "son"
is not entirely suitable to a Jew either, our inter-
pretation shall be simply governed with an eye
to the object the Lord had in view. The Lord
had come, of course, to save that which " had
perished ; " 7 "a Physician " necessary to " the
sick" "more than to the whole." ^ This fact
He was in the habit both of typifying in parables
and preaching in direct statements. Who among
men " perishes," who falls from health, but he
who knows not the Lord ? Who is " safe and
sound," but he who knows the Lord? These
two classes — " brothers " by birth — this parable
also will signify. See whether the heathen have
in God the Father the "substance" of origin,
and wisdom, and natural power of Godward rec-
ognition ; by means of which power the apostle
withal notes that "in the wisdom of God, the
world through wisdom knew not God," 9 — (wis-
dom) which, of course, it had received origi-
nally from God. This (" substance "), accord-
ingly, he " squandered ; " having been cast by
his moral habits far from the Lord, amid the
errors and allurements and appetites of the
world,'° where, compelled by hunger after truth,"
he handed himself over to the prince of this age.
He set him over " swine," to feed that flock
familiar to demons,'^ where he would not be mas-
ter of a sui)ply of vital food, and at the same
time would see others (engaged) in a divine
work, having abundance of heavenly bread.
He remembers his Father, God ; he returns to
Him when he has been satisfied ; he receives
again the prisdne " garment," — the condition,
to wit, which Adam by transgression had lost.
The " ring " also he is then wont to receive for
the first time, wherewith, after being interro-
gated,'^ he publicly seals the agreement of faith,
and thus thenceforward feeds upon the " fat-
ness " of the Lord's body, — the Eucharist, to
wit. This will be the prodigal son, who never in
days bygone was thrifty ; who was from the first
prodigal, because not from the first a Christian.
Him withal, returning from the world to the
Father's embraces, the Pharisees mourned over,
in the persons of the " publicans and sinners."
And accordingly to this point alone the elder
brother's envy is adapted : not because the Jews
were innocent, and ol)edient to Ciod, but because
they envied the nation salvation ; being plainly


6 See Malt. xxii. 11-14.

7 See Matt, xviii 11.

8 Matt. ix. 12; Mark ix. 17; Luke v. 21.

9 I Cor. i. 21.
1° Saeculi.

" Amos viii. 11.

12 See Matt. viii. 30-34; Mark v. 11-14; Luke viii. 32, 33.

i^ Comp. I Pel. iii. 21; and Hooker, Eccl. Pol., v. 63, 3.


84


ON MODESTY.


they who ought to have been " ever with " the
Father. And of course it is immediately over
the first calling of the Christian that the Jew
groans, not over his second restoration : for the
former reflects its rays even upon the heathen ;
but the latter, which takes place in the churches,
is not known even to the Jews. I think that I
have advanced interpretations more consonant
with the subject-matter of the parables, and the
congruity of things, and the preservation of dis-
ciplines. But if the view with which the oppo-
site party is eager to mould the ewe, and the
drachma, and the voluptuousness of the son to
the shape of the Christian sinner, is that they
may endow adultery and fornication with (the
gift of) repentance ; it will be fitting either that
all other crimes equally capital should be con-
ceded remissible, or else that their peers, adultery
and fornication, should be retained inconcessi-
ble.

But it is more (to the point) that it is not
lawful to draw conclusions about anything else
than the subject which was immediately in hand.
In short, if it were lawful to transfer the parables
to other ends (than they were originally intended
for), it would be rather to martyrdom that we
would direct the hope drawn from those now in
question ; for that is the only thing which, after
all his substance has been squandered, will be
able to restore the son ; and will joyfully pro-
claim that the drachma has been found, albeit
among all (rubbish) on a dungheap ; and will
carry back into the flock on the shoulders of the
Lord Himself the ewe, fugitive though she have
been over all that is rough and rugged. But we
prefer, if it must be so, to be less wise in the
Scriptures, than to be wise against them. We
are as much bound to keep the sense of the Lord
as Y{\% precept. Transgression in interpretation
is not lighter than in conversation.

CHAP. X. — REPENTANCE MORE COMPETENT TO
HEATHENS THAN TO CHRISTIANS.

When, therefore, the yoke which forbade the
discussion of these parables with a view to the
heathens has been shaken off, and the necessity
once for all discerned or admitted of not inter-
preting otherwise than is (suitable to) the sub-
ject-matter of the proposition ; they contend in
the next place, that the official proclamation of
repentance is not even applicable to heathens,
since their sins are not amenable to it, imputable
as they are to ignorance, which nature alone
renders culpable before God. Hence the reme-
dies are unintelligible to such to whom the perils
themselves are unintelligible : whereas the prin-
ciple of repentance finds there its corresponding
place where sin is committed with conscience
and will, where both the fault and the favour are
intelligible ; that he who mourns, he who pros-


trates himself, is he who knows both what he has
lost and what he will recover if he makes to God
the offering of his repentance — to God who, of
course, offers that repentance rather to sons than
to strangers.

Was that, then, the reason why Jonah thought
not repentance necessary to the heathen Nin-
evites, when he tergiversated in the duty of
preaching? or did he rather, foreseeing the
mercy of God poured forth even upon strangers,
fear that that mercy would, as it were, destroy
(the credit of) his proclamation? and accord-
ingly, for the sake of a profane city, not yet pos-
sessed of a knowledge of God, still sinning in
ignorance, did the prophet well-nigh perish ? '
except that he suffered a typical example of the
Lord's passion, which was to redeem heathens
as well (as others) on their repentance. It is
enough for me that even John, when " strewing
the Lord's ways," ^ was the herald of repentance
no less to such as were on military service and to
publicans, than to the sons of Abraham. ^ The
Lord Himself presumed repentance on the part
of the Sidonians and Tyrians if they had seen the
evidences of His " miracles."-*

Nay, but I will even contend that repentance
is more competent to natural sinners than to
voluntary. For he will merit its fruit who has
not yet used more than he who has already
withal abused it ; and remedies will be more
effective on their first application than when out-
worn. No doubt the Lord is " kind " to " the
unthankful," s rather than to the ignorant ! and
" merciful " to the " reprobates " sooner than to
such as have yet had no probation ! so that in- .
suits offered to His clemency do not rather incur
His anger than His caresses! and He does not
more willingly impart to strangers that (clem-
ency) which, in the case of His own sons, He
has lost, seeing that He has thus adopted the
Gentiles while the Jews make sport of His pa-
tience ! But what the Psychics mean is this —
that God, the Judge of righteousness, prefers the
repentance to the death of that sinner who has
preferred death to repentance ! If this is so, it
is by sinning that we merit favour.

Come, you rope-walker upon modesty, and
chastity, and every kind of sexual sanctity, who,
by the instrumentaUty of a discipline of this
nature remote from the path of truth, mount
with uncertain footstep upon a most slender
thread, balancing flesh with spirit, moderating
your animal principle by faith, tempering your
eye by fear ; why are you thus wholly engaged
in a single step ? Go on, if you succeed in find-
ing power and will, while you are so secure, and


1 Comp. Jonah i. iv.

2 See Luke i. 76.

3 Pee Luke iii. 8, 12, 14.

* Matt. xi. 21; Luke x. 13.
^ Comp. Luke vi. 35.


ON MODESTY.


85


I as it were upon solid ground. For if any waver-
j ing of the flesh, any distraction of the mind, any
wandering of the eye, shall chance to shake you
I down from your equipoise, " God is good." To
j His own (children), not to heathens, He opens
His bosom : a second repentance will await you ;
you will again, from being an adulterer, be a
Christian ! These (pleas) you (will urge) to
me, most benignant interpreter of God. But I
would yield my ground to you, if the scripture
of " the Shepherd," ' which is the only one which
favours adulterers, had deserved to find a place
in the Divine canon ; if it had not been habitu-
ally judged by every council of Churches (even
of your own) among apocryphal and false (writ-
ings) ; itself adulterous, and hence a patroness
of its comrades ; from which in other respects,
too, you derive initiation ; to which, perchance,
that " Shepherd ' will play the patron whom you
depict upon your (sacramental) chalice, (depict,
I say, as) himself withal a prostitutor of the
Christian sacrament, (and hence) worthily both
the idol of drunkenness, and the brize of adul-
tery by which the chalice will quickly be followed,
(a chalice) from which you sip nothing more
readily than (the flavour of) the " ewe " of (your)
second repentance ! I, however, imbibe the
Scriptures of that Shepherd who cannot be bro-
ken. Him John forthwith offers -me, together
with the laver and duty of repentance ; (and
offers Him as) saying, " Bear worthy fruits of
repentance : and say not. We have Abraham
(as our) father" — for fear, to wit, lest they
should again take flattering unctions for delin-
quency from the grace shown to the fathers —
" for God is able from these stones to raise sons
to Abraham." Thus it follows that we too
(must judge) such as "sin no more" (as)
" bearing worthy fruits of repentance." For
what more ripens as the fruit of repentance than
the achievement of emendation? But even if
pardon is rather the " fruit of repentance," even
pardon cannot co-exist without the cessation
from sin. So is the cessation from sin the root
of pardon, that pardon may be the fruit of
repentance.

CHAP. XI. FROM PARABLES TERTULLIAN COMES

TO CONSIDER DEFINITE ACTS OF THE LORD.

From the side of its pertinence to the Gospel,
the question of the parables indeed has by this
time been disposed of. If, however, the Lord,
by His deeds withal, issued any such proclama-
tion in favour of sinners ; as when He permitted
contact even with his own body to the " woman,
a sinner," — washing, as she did. His feet with
tears, and wiping them with her hair, and inaug-
urating His sepulture with ointment ; as when


i.e., the " Shepherd " of Hermas. See de Or.


to the Samaritaness — not an adulteress by her
now sixth marriage, but a prostitute — He showed
(what He did show readily to any one) who He
was ; ^ — no benefit is hence conferred upon our
adversaries, even if it had been to such as were
already Christians that He (in these several
cases) granted pardon. For we now affirm :
This is lawful to the Lord alone : may the power
of His indulgence be operative at the present
day ! ^ At those times, however, in which He
lived on earth we lay this down definitively, that
it is no prejudgment against us if pardon used
to be conferred on sinners — even Jewish ones.
For Christian discipline dates from the renewing
of the Testament,-* and (as we have premised)
from th-e redemption of flesh — that is, the
Lord's passion. None was perfect before the
discovery of the order of faith ; none a Christian
before the resumption of Christ to heaven ; none
holy before the manifestation of the Holy Spirit
from heaven, the Determiner of discipline it-
self.

CHAP. XII. OF THE VERDICT OF THE APOSTLES,

ASSEiSIBLED IN COUNCIL, UPON THE SUBJECT OF
ADULTERY.

Accordingly, these who have received " anoth-
er Paraclete " in and through the apostles, —
(a Paraclete) whom, not recognising Him even
in His special prophets, they no longer possess
in the apostles either ; — come, now, let them,
even from the apostolic instrument, teach us the
possibility that the stains of a flesh which after
baptism has been repolluted, can by repentance
be washed away. Do we not, in the apostles
also, recognise the form of the Old Law with
regard to the demonstration of adultery, h%vv
great (a crime) it is ; lest perchance it be es-
teemed more trivial in the new stage of disci-
plines than in the old? When first the Gospel
thundered and shook the old system to its base,
when dispute was being held on the question
of retaining or not the Law ; this is the first
rule which the apostles, on the authority of the
Holy Spirit, send out to those who were already
beginning to be gathered to their side out of the
nations: "It has seemed (good)," say they,
"to the Holy Spirit and to us to cast upon you
no ampler weight than (that) of those (things)
from which it is necessary that abstinence be
observed ; from sacrifices, and from fornications,
and from blood : 5 by abstaining from wliich ye
act rightly, the Holy Spirit carrying you." Suf-
ficient it is, that in this place withal there has been
preserved to adultery and fornication the post
of their own honour between idolatry and mur-


2 John iv. 1-25.

3 Comp. c. iii. above.

^ Comp. Matt. xxvi. 28, Mark xiv. 24, Luke xxii.

5 See Acts xv. 28, 29.


86


ON MODESTY.


der : for the interdict upon " blood " we shall
understand to be (an interdict) much more upon
hitman blood. Well, then, in what light do the
apostles will those crimes to appear which alone
they select, in the way of careful guarding against,
from the pristine Law? which alone they pre-
scribe as necessarily to be abstained from ? Not
that they permit others ; but that these alone they
put in the foremost rank, of course as not remissi-
ble ; (they,) who, for the heathens' sake, made
the other burdens of the law remissible. Why,
then, do they release our neck from so heavy a
yoke, except to place forever upon those (necks)
these compendia of discipline? Why do they
indulgently relax so many bonds, except that
they may wholly bind us in perpetuity to such
as are more necessary? They loosed us from
the more numerous, that we might be bound up
to abstinence from the more noxious. The mat-
ter has been settled by compensation : we have
gained much, in order that we may render some-
what. But the compensation is not revocable ;
if, that is, it will be revoked by iteration — (it-
eration) of adultery, of course, and blood and
idolatry : for it will follow that the (burden of)
the whole law will be incurred, if the condition
of pardon shall be violated. But it is not lightly
that the Holy Spirit has come to an agreement
with us — coming to this agreement even without
our asking ; whence He is the more to be hon-
oured. His engagement none but an ungrateful
man will dissolve. In that event. He will neither
accept back what He has discarded, nor discard
what He has retained. Of the latest Testament
the condition is ever immutable ; and, of course,
the public recitation of that decree,' and the
c(|unsel embodied therein, will cease (only) with
the world.^ He has definitely enough refused
pardon to those crimes the careful avoidance
whereof He selectively enjoined ; He has claimed
whatever He has not inferentially conceded.
Hence it is that there is no restoration of peace
granted by the Churches to "idolatry" or to
"blood." From which final decision of theirs
that the apostles should have departed, is (I
think) not lawful to believe ; or else, if some
find it possible to believe so, they will be bound
to prove it.

CHAP. XIII. OF ST. PAUL, AND THE PERSON WHOM

HE URGES THE CORINTHIANS TO FORGIVE.

We know plainly at this point, too, the suspi-
cions which they raise. For, in fact, they sus-
pect the Apostle Paul of having, in the second
(Epistle) to the Corinthians, granted pardon to
the self-same fornicator whom in the first he has
publicly sentenced to be " surrendered to Satan,


' See Acts XV. 30 and xvi. 4.
^ Saeculo.


for the destruction of the flesh, "^ — impious heir
as he was to his father's wedlock ; as if he sub-
sequently erased his own words, writing : " But
if any hath wholly saddened, he hath not wholly
saddened me, but in part, lest I burden you all.
Sufficient is such a chiding which is given by
many ; so that, on the contrary, ye should pre-
fer to forgive and console, lest, perhaps, by more
abundant sadness, such an one be devoured.
For which reason, I pray you, confirm toward
him affection. For to this end withal have I
written, that I may learn a proof of you, that in
all (things) ye are obedient to me. But if ye
shall have forgiven any, so (do) I ; for I, too, if
I have forgiven ought, have forgiven in the per-
son of Christ, lest we be overreached by Satan,
since we are not ignorant of his injections."'*
What (reference) is understood here to the for-
nicator? what to the contaminator of his father's
bed ?5 what to the Christian who had overstepped
the shamelessness of heathens? — since, of course,
he would have absolved by a special pardon one
whom he had condemned by a special anger.
He is more obscure in his pity than in his indig-
nation. He is more open in his austerity than
in his lenity. And yet, (generally), anger is more
readily indirect than indulgence. Things of a
sadder are more wont to hesitate than tilings of
a more joyous cast. Of course the question
in hand concerned some moderate indulgence ;
which (moderation in the indulgence) was now,
if ever, to be divined, when it is usual for all the
greatest indulgences not to be granted without
public proclamation, so far (are they from being
grantecl) without particularization. Why, do you
yourself, when introducing into the church, for
the purpose of melting the brotherhood by his
prayers, the repentant adulterer, lead into the
midst and prostrate him, all in haircloth and
ashes, a compound of disgrace and horror, be-
fore the widows, before the elders, suing for the
tears of all, licking the footprints of all, clasping
the knees of all ? And do you, good shepherd
and blessed father that you are, to bring about
the (desired) end of the man, grace your ha-
rangue with all the allurements of mercy in your
power, and under the parable of the " ewe " go
in quest of your goats ?'^ do you, for fear lest
your "ewe " again take a leap out from the flock
— as if that were no more lawful for the future
which was not even once lawful — fill all the rest
likewise full of apprehension at the very moment
of granting indulgence ? And would the apostle
so carelessly have granted indulgence to the
atrocious licentiousness of fornication burdened
with incest, as not at least to have exacted from


3 See I Cor. y. 5.

■* See 2 Cor. ii. 5-11.

5 Comp. Gen. xlix. 4.

'' Comp. Matt. XXV. 32, 33.


ON MODESTY.


87


the criminal even this legally estabHshed garb
of repentance which you ought to have learned
from him? as to have uttered no commination
on the past? no allocution touching the future?
Nay, more ; he goes further, and beseeches that
they "would confirm toward him affection," as
if he were making satisfaction to him, not as if
he were granting an indulgence ! And yet I
hear (him speak of) "affection," not " commun-
ion ; " as (he writes) withal to the Thessalonians :
" But if any obey not our word through the epis-
tle, him mark ; and associate not with him, that
he may feel awed ; not regarding (him) as an
enemy, but rebuking as a brother." ' Accord-
ingly, he could have said that to a fornicator,
too, " affection " only was conceded, not " com-
munion " as well ; to an incestuous man, how-
ever, not even " affection ; " whom he would, to
be sure, have bidden to be banished from their
midst' — much more, of course, from their mind.
" But he was apprehensive lest they should be
' overreached by Satan ' with regard to the loss
of that person whom himself had cast forth to
Satan ; or else lest, ' by abundance of mourning,
he should be devoured ' whom he had sentenced
to ' destruction of the flesh.' " Here they go so
far as to interpret " destruction of the flesh " of
the office of repentance ; in that by fasts, and
squalor, and every species of neglect and stu-
dious ill-treatment devoted to the extermination
of the flesh, it seems to make satisfaction to God ;
so that they argue that that fornicator — that in-
cestucflis person rather — having been delivered
by the apostle to Satan, not with a view to " per-
dition," but with a view to " emendation," on
the hypothesis that subsequently he would, on
account of the "destruction" (that is, the gen-
eral affliction) " of the flesh," attain pardon,
therefore did actually attain it. Plainly, the self-
same apostle delivered to Satan Hymenceus and
Alexander, " that they might be emended into
not blaspheming," 3 as he writes to his Timo-
theus. " But withal himself says that ' a stake ^
was given him, an angel of Satan,' by which he
was to be buffeted, lest he should exalt him-
self." If they touch upon this (instance) withal,
in order to lead us to understand that such as
were "delivered to Satan" by him (were so
delivered) with a view to emendation, not to
perdition ; what similarity is there between blas-
phemy and incest, and a soul entirely free from
these, — nay, rather elated from no other source
than the highest sanctity and all innocence ;
which (elation of soul) was being restrained in
the apostle by " buffets," if you will, by means
(as they say) of pain in the ear or head? In-


' 2 Thess. iii. 14, 15.

2 Comp. I Cor. v. 2.

3 I Tim. i. 20.

* 2 Cor. xii. 7-10.


cest, however, and blasphemy, deserved to have
delivered the entire persons of men to Satan
himself for a possession, not to " an angel " of
his. And (there is yet another point) : for about
this it makes a difference, nay, rather withal in
regard to this it is of the utmost consequence,
that we find those men delivered by the apostle
to Satan, but to the apostle himself an angel of
Satan given. Lastly, when Paul is praying the
Lord for its removal, what does he hear? " Hold
my grace sufficient ; for virtue is perfected in
infirmity." 5 This they who are surrendered to
Satan cannot hear. Moreover, if the crime of
Hymenteus and Alexander — blasphemy, to wit
— is irremissible in this and in the future age,^
of course the apostle would not, in opposition to
the determinate decision of the Lord, have given
to Satan, under a hope of pardon, men already
sunken from the faith into blasphemy ; whence,
too, he pronounced them " shipwrecked with
regard to faith," ^ having no longer the solace of
the ship, the Church. For to those who, after
believing, have struck upon (the rock of) blas-
phemy, pardon is denied ; on the other hand,
heathens and heretics are daily emerging ojit of
blasphemy. But even if he did say, " I deliv-
ered them to Satan, that they might receive the
discipline of not blaspheming," he said it of
the rest, who, by their deliverance to Satan — that
is, their projection outside the Church — had to
be trained in the knowledge that there must be
no blaspheming. So, therefore, the incestuous
fornicator, too, he delivered, not with a view to
emendation, but with a view to perdition, to Sa-
tan, to whom he had already, by sinning above
an heathen, gone over ; that they might learn
there must be no fornicating. Finally, he says,
"for the destri/ction of the flesh," not its "tor-
ture"— condemning the actual substance through
which he had fallen out (of the faith), which sub-
stance had already perished immediately on the
loss of baptism — "in order that the spirit," he
says, " may be saved in the day of the Lord."
And (here, again, is a difficulty) : for let this
point be inquired into, whether the man's own
spirit will be saved. In that case, a spirit pol-
luted with so great a wickedness will be saved ;
the object of the perdition of the flesh being,
that the spirit may be saved in penalty. In that
case, the interpretation which is contrary to ours
will recognise a penalty without the flesh, if we
lose the resurrection of the flesh. It remains,
therefore, that his meaning was, that that spirit
which is accounted to exist /;/ the Church must
be presented " saved," that is, untainted by the
contagion of impurities in the day of the Lord,
by the ejection of the incestuous fornicator ; if,


5 2 Cor. xii 9, not very exactly rendered
* /Evo. Comp. iMatt. xii. 32.
7 I Tim. i. 19.


88


ON MODESTY.


that is, he subjoins : " Know ye not, that a little
leaven spoileth the savour of the whole lump?'' '
And yet incestuous fornication was not a little,
but a large, leaven.

CHAP. XIV. THE SAME SUBJECT' CONTINUED.

And — these intervening points having accord-
ingly been got rid of — I return to the second
of Corinthians ; in order to prove that this say-
ing also of the apostle, "Sufficient to such a man
be this rebuke which (is administered) by many,"
is not suitable to the person of the fornicator.
For if he had sentenced him " to be surrendered
to Satan for the destrucrion of the flesh," of
course he had condevmed rather than rebuked
him. Some other, then, it was to whom he
willed the "rebuke " to be sufficient ; if, that is,
the fornicator had incurred not " rebuke " from
his sentence, but " condemnation." For I offer
you withal, for your investigation, this very ques-
tion : AVhether there were in the first Epistle
others, too, who "wholly saddened" the apostle
by "acting disorderly,"^ and "were wholly sad-
dened " by him, through incurring (his) " re-
buke," according to the sense of the second
Epistle ; of whom some particular one may in
that (second Epistle) have received pardon.
Direct we, moreover, our attention to the entire
first Epistle, written (that I may so say) as a
whole, not with ink, but with gall ; swelling, in-
dignant, disdainful, coraminatory, invidious, and
shaped through (a series of) individual charges,
with an eye to certain individuals who were, as
it were, the proprietors of those charges ? For
so had schisms, and emulations, and discussions,
and presumptions, and elations, and contentions
required, that they should be laden with invidi-
ousness, and rebuffed with curt reproof, and filed
down by haughtiness, and deterred by austerity.
And what kind of invidiousness is the pungency
of humility? "To God I give thanks that I
have baptized none of you, except Crispus and
Gains, lest any say that I have baptized in mine
own name." 3 " For neither did I judge to know
anything among you but Jesus Christ, and Him
crucified." ■♦ And, "(I think) God hath selected
us the apostles (as) hindmost, like men ap-
pointed to fight with wild beasts ; since we have
been made a spectacle to this world, both to
angels and to men : " And, " We have been
made the offscourings of this world, the refuse
of all : " And, "Am I not free ? am I not an apos-
tle ? have I not seen Christ Jesus our Lord ? " s
With what kind of superciliousness, on the con-
trary, was he compelled to declare, " But to me

1 I Cor. V. 6, where Tertullian appears to have used 6oAoi, not

2 Comp. 2 Thess. iii. 6, ii.

3 I Cor. i. 14, 15; but the Greek is, eis to i^Cov ovo^a..
^ 1 Cor. ii. 2.

5 I Cor. ix. I.


it is of small moment that I be interrogated by
you, or by a human court-day ; for neither am I
conscious to myself (of any guilt) ; " and, " My
glory none shall make empty.'"' "Know ye not
that we are to judge angels?" 7 Again, of how
open censure (does) the free expression (find
utterance), how manifest the edge of the spirit-
ual sword, (in words like these) : "Ye are already
enriched ! ye are already satiated ! ye are already
reigning ! " ^ and, " If any thinks himself to
know, he knoweth not yet how it behoves him
to know ! " 9 Is he not even then " smiting
some one's face," '° in saying, " For who maketh
thee to differ ? What, moreover, hast thou which
thou hast not received ? Why gloriest thou as
if thou have not received? " " Is he not withal
" smiting them upon the mouth," '^ (in saying) :
"But some, in (their) conscience, even until
now eat (it) as if (it were) an idol-sacrifice.
But, so sinning, by shocking the weak consciences
of the brethren thoroughly, they will sin against
Christ." '3 By this time, indeed, (he mentions
individuals) by name : "Or have we not a power
of eating, and of drinking, and of leading about
women, just as the other apostles withal, and the
bretiiren of the Lord, and Cephas?" and, "If
others attain to (a share) in power over you,
(may) not we rather?" In like manner he
pricks them, too, with an individualizing pen :
" Wherefore, let ////// who thinketh himself to be
standing, see lest he fall ;" and, "If <-;//!' seemcth
to be contentious, we have not such a custom,
nor (has) the Church of the Lord." Wii)h such
a final clause (as the following), wound up with
a malediction, " If any loveth not the Lord
Jesus, be he anathema maranatha," he is, of
course, striking some particular individual
through.

But I will rather take my stand at that point
where the apostle is more fervent, where the
fornicator himself has troubled others also. "As
if I be not about to come unto you, some are
inflated. But I will come with more speed, if
the Lord shall have permitted, and will learn
not the speech of those who are inflated, but
the power. For the kingdom of God is not in
speech, but in power. And what will ye ? shall I
come unto you in a rod, or in a spirit of lenity?"
For what was to succeed? "There is heard
among you generally fornication, and such for-
nication as (is) not (heard) even among the
Gentiles, that one should have his own father's
wife. And are ye inflated, and have ye not
rather mourned, that he who hath committed


*> Comp. I Cor. ix. 15.

7 I Cor. vi. 3.

8 I Cor iv. 8, inaccurately.

9 I Cor. viii. 2, inaccurately.
'" See 2 Cor. xi. 20.

" 1 Cor. iv. 7, with some words omitted.

'- Comp. Acts xxiii. 2.

■3 I Cor. viii. 7, 12, inaccurately.


ON MODESTY.


89


such a deed may be taken away from the midst
of you?" I^c>f\\vhom were they to "mourn?"
Of course, for one dead. To whom were they
to mourn? Of course, to the Lord, in order
that in some way or other he may be " taken
away from the midst of them ; " not, of course,
in order that he may be put outside the Church.
For a thing would not have been requested of
God which came within the official province of
the president (of the Church) ; but (what would
be requested of Him was), that through death
— not only this death common to all, but one
specially appropriate to that very flesh which was
already a corpse, a tomb leprous with irremedia-
ble uncleanness — he might more fully (than by
simple excommunication) incur the penalty of
being " taken away " from the Church. And
accordingly, in so far as it was meantime possi-
ble for him to be " taken away," he " adjudged
such an one to be surrendered to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh." For it followed that
flesh which was being cast forth to the devil
should be accursed, in order that it might be
discarded from the sacrament of blessing, never
to return into the camp of the Church.

And thus we see in this place the apostle's
severity divided, against one who was " inflated,"
and one who was " incestuous : " (we see the
apostle) armed against the one with "a rod,"
against the other with a sentence, — a " rod,"
which he was threatening ; a sentence, which he
was executing : the former (we see) still bran-
dishing, the latter instaritaneously hurtling ; (the
one) wherewith he was rebuking, and (the
other) wherewith he was condemning. And cer-
tain it is, that forthwith thereafter the rebuked
one indeed trembled beneath the menace of the
upUfted rod, but the condemned perished under
the instant infliction of the penalty. Immedi-
ately the former retreated fearing the blow, the
latter paying the penalty. When a letter of
the self-same apostle is sent a second time to
the Corinthians, pardon is granted plainly ; but
it is uncertain /o wliom, because neither person
nor cause is advertised. I will compare the
cases with the senses. If the " incestuous "
man is set before us, on the same platform will
be the " inflated " man too. Surely the analogy
of the case is sufficiently maintained, when the
" inflated " is rebuked, but the " incestuous "
is condenmed. To the "inflated" pardon is
granted, but after rebuke ; to the " incestuous "
no pardon seems to have been granted, as under
condemnation. If it was to him for whom it
was feared that he might be " devoured by
mourning " that pardon was being granted, the
" rebuked " one was still in danger of being de-
voured, losing heart on account of the commina-
tion, and mourning on account of the relnike.
The "condemned" one, however, was perma-


nently accounted as already devoured, alike by
his fault and by his sentence ; (accounted, that
is, as one) who had not to " mourn," but to
suffer that which, before suffering it, he might
have mourned. If the reason why pardon was
being granted was " lest we should be defrauded
by Satan," the loss against which precaution was
being taken had to do with that which had not
yet perished. No precaution is taken in the
case of a thing finally despatched, but in the case
of a thing still safe. But the condemned one

— condemned, too, to the possession of Satan —
had already perished from the Church at the
moment when he had committed such a deed,
not to say withal at the moment of being for-
sworn by the Church itself. How should (the
Church) fear to suffer a fraudulent loss of him
whom she had already lost on his ereption, and
whom, after condemnation, she could not have
held? Lastly, to what will it be becoming for
a judge to grant indulgence ? to that which by a
formal pronouncement he has decisively settled,
or to that which by an interlocutory sentence he
has left in suspense? And, of course, (I am
speaking of) that judge who is not wont " to re-
build those things which he has destroyed, lest
he be held a transgressor." '

Come, now, if he had not " whoUy saddened "
so many persons in the first Epistle ; if he had
" rebuked " none, had " terrified " ^ none ; if he
had " smitten" the incestuous man alone ; if, for
his cause, he had sent none into panic, had
struck (no) "inflated" one with consternation,

— would it not be better for you to suspect, and
more believing for you to argue, that rather some
one far different had been in the same predica-
ment at that time among the Corinthians ; so
that, rebuked, and terrified, and already wounded
with mourning, he therefore — the moderate na-
ture of his fault permitting it — subsequently
received pardon, than that you should interpret
that (pardon as granted) to an incestuous forni-
cator? For this you had been bound to read,
even if not in an Epistle, yet impressed upon the
very character of the apostle, by (his) modesty
more clearly than by the instrumentality of a
pen : not to steep, to wit, Paul, the " apostle of
Christ," 3 the •" teacher of the nations in faith
and verity," "♦ the " vessel of election," 5 the
founder of Churches, the censor of discipline,
(in the guilt of) levity so great as that he should
either have condemned rashly one whom he was
presently to absolve, or else rashly al~)soh-ed one
whom he had not rashly condemned, albeit on
the ground of that fornication which is the result
of simple immodesty, not to say on the ground


1 Comp. Gal. ii. i8.

2 Comp. 2 Cor. X. 9.

3 Comp. Kom. i. i, and the besinnings of his Epp. fassiin.
' '■ ii. 7.


5 Ai


• 15-


90


ON MODESTY.


of incestuous nuptials and impious voluptuous-
ness and parricidal lust, — (lust) which he had
refused to compare even with (the lusts of) the
nations, for fear it should be set down to the
account of custom; (lust) on which he would
sit in judgment though absent, for fear the cul-
prit should " gain the time ; " ' (lust) which he
had condemned after calling to his aid even
" the Lord's power," for fear the sentence should
seem human. Therefore he has trifled both
with his own " spirit," ^ and with " the angel
of the Church," ^ and with " the power of the
Lord," if he rescinded what by their counsel he
had formally pronounced.

CHAP. XV. THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.

If you hammer out the sequel of that Episde
to illustrate the meaning of the apostle, neither
will that sequel be found to square with the ob-
literation of incest ; lest even here the aposde
be put to the blush by the incongruity of his
later meanings. For what kind (of hypothesis)
is it, that the very moment after making a largess
of restoration to the privileges of ecclesiastical
peace to an incestuous fornicator, he should
forthwith have proceeded to accumulate exhor-
tations about turning away from impurities, about
pruning away of blemishes, about exhortations
to deeds of sanctity, as if he had decreed noth-
ing of a contrary nature just before? Compare,
in short, (and see) whether it be his province
to say, " Wherefore, having this ministration, in
accordance with (the fact) that we have obtained
mercy, we faint not ; but renounce the secret
things of disgrace,"-* who has just released from
condemnation one manifestly convicted of, not
"disgrace " merely, but crime too : whether it be
his province, again, to excuse a conspicuous
immodesty, who, among the counts of his own
labours, after " straits and pressures," after " fasts
and vigils," has named " chastity " also : s whether
it be, once more, his province to receive back
into communion whatsoever reprobates, who
writes, " For what society (is there) between
righteousness and iniquity? what communion,
moreover, between light and darkness ? what con-
sonance between Christ and Belial ? or what part
for a believer with an unbeliever ? ' or what agree-
ment between the temple of God and idols?"
Will he not deserve to hear constandy (the re-
ply) ; "And in what manner do you make a
separation between things which, in the former
part of your Episde, by restitution of the incestu-
ous one, you have joined ? For by his restoration
to concorporate unity with the Church, righteous-
ness is made to have fellowship with iniquity.


' Comp. Dan. ii. 8.

2 Comp. I Cor. V. 3.

3 Comp. Rev i. 20, i
* 2 Cor. iv. I, 2.

S /i. vi. 5, 6.


8, 12, 18, :


darkness has communion with light, Belial is
consonant with Christ, and believer shares the
sacraments with unbeliever. And idols may see
to themselves : the very vitiator of the temple
of God is converted into a temple of God : for
here, too, he says, ' For ye are a temple of the
living God. For He saith. That I will dwell in
you, and will walk in (you), and will be their
God, and they shall be to Me a people. Where-
fore depart from the midst of them, be separate,
and touch not the unclean.' "^ This (thread of
discourse) also you spin out, O aposde, when at
the very moment you yourself are offering your
hand to so huge a whirlpool of impurities ; nay,
you superadd yet further, ' Having therefore this
promise, beloved, cleanse we ourselves out from
every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting
chastity in God's fear.' " 7 I pray you, had he
who fixes such (exhortations) in our minds
been recalling some notorious fornicator into the
Church ? or is his reason for writing it, to pre-
vent himself from appearing to you in the present
day to have so recalled him? These (words of
his) will be in duty bound alike to serve as a
prescriptive rule for the foregone, and a prejudg-
ment for the following, (parts of the F]pisde).
For in saying, toward the end of the Epistle,
" Lest, when I shall have come, God humble
me, and I bewail many of those who have for-
merly sinned, and have not repented of the
impurity which they have committed, the forni-
cation, and the vileness," ^ he did not, of course,
determine that they were to be received back
(by him I'utc? the Church) if they should have
entered (the path of) repentance, whom he was
to find in the Church, but that they were to be
bewailed, and indubitably ejected, that they
might lose (the benefit of) repentance. And,
besides, it is not congruous that he, who had
above asserted that there was no communion
between light and darkness, righteousness and
iniquity, should in this place have been indicat-
ing somewhat touching communion. But all
such are ignorant of the apostle as understand
anything in a sense contrary to the nature and
design of the man himself, contrary to the norm
and rule of his docrines ; so as to presume that
he, a teacher of every sanctity, even by his own
example, an execrator and expiator of every im-
purity, and universally consistent with himself in
these points, restored ecclesiastical privileges to
an incestuous person sooner than to some more
mild offender.

CHAP. XVI. — GENERAL CONSISTENCY OF THE
APOSTLE.

Necessary it is, therefore, that the (character
of the) aposde should be continuously pointed


* 2 Cor. vi. 1 6-1 8.

' 2 Cor. vii. I, not accurately given.

^ 2 Cor. xii, 21, again inexactly given.


ON MODESTY.


91


out to them ; whom I will maintain to be such
in the second of Corinthians withal, as I know
(him to be) in all his letters. (He it is) who
even in the first (Epistle) was the first of all
(the apostles) to dedicate the temple of God :
" Know ye not that ye are the temple of God,
and that in you the Lord dwells? " ' — who like-
wise, for the consecrating and purifying (of)
that temple, wrote the law pertaining to the
temple-keepers : " If any shall have marred the
temple of God, him shall God mar ; for the tem-
ple of God is holy, which (temple) are ye." ^
Come, now; who in the world has (ever) redin-
tegrated one who has been " marred " by God
(that is, delivered to Satan with a view to de-
struction of the flesh), after subjoining for that
reason, "Let none seduce himself;"^ that is,
let none presume that one " marred " by God
can possibly be redintegrated anew? Just as,
again, among all other crimes — nay, even be-
fore all others — when affirming that " adul-
terers, and fornicators, and effeminates, and co-
habitors with males, will not attain the kingdom
of God," he premised, " Do not err " •* — to wit,
if you think they will attain it. But to them
from whom " the kingdom " is taken away, of
course the life which exists in the kingdom is
not permitted either. Moreover, by superadd-
ing, " But such indeed ye have been ; but ye
have received ablution, but ye have been sancti-
fied, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
in the Spirit of our God ; " 5 in as far as he puts
on the paid side of the account such sins before
baptism, in so far after baptism he determines
them irremissible, if it is true, (as it is), that
they are not allowed to "receive ablution " anew.
Recognise, too, in what follows, Paul (in the
character of) an immoveable column of disci-
pline and its rules : " Meats for the belly, and
the belly for meats : God maketh a full end both
of the one and of the others ; but the body (is)
not for fornication, but for God : " ^ for " Let Us
make man," said God, " (conformable) to Our
image and likeness." "And God made man;
(conformable) to the image and likeness of God
made He him." 7 "The Lord for the body:"
yes ; for " the Word was made flesh." *^ " More-
over, God both raised up the Lord, and will raise
up us through His own power ; " 9 on account,
to wit, of the union of our body with Him. And
accordingly, " Know ye not your bodies (to be)
meml)ers of Christ?" because Christ, too, is
God's temple. " Overturn this temple, and I


Cor. iii. 16, inexactly.


3 Ver.

< I Co
5 Ver.


17, not quite correctly.


inexactly.


7 Coiiip. C.en.

8 John i. T4.

9 I Cor. vi. 14


will in three days' space resuscitate it." '° " Tak-
ing away the members of Christ, shall I make
(them) members of an harlot? Know ye not,
that whoever is agglutinated to an harlot is made
one body? (for the two shall be (made) into
one flesh) : but whoever is agglutinated to the
Lord is one spirit? Flee fornication." " If revo-
cable by pardon, in what sense am I to flee it,
to turn adulterer anew? I shall gain nothing if
I do flee it : I shall be " one body," to which
by communion I shall be agglutinated. " Every
sin which a human being may have committed
is extraneous to the body ; but whoever forni-
cateth, sinneth against his own body." '^ And,
for fear you should fly to that statement for a
licence to fornication, on the ground that you
will be sinning against a thing which is yours,
not the Lord's, he takes you away from yourself,
and awards you, according to his previous dispo-
sition, to Christ : " And ye are not your own ; "
immediately opposing (thereto), "for bought ye
are with a price" — the blood, to wit, of the
Lord : '3 " glorify and extol the Lord in your
body." '4 See whether he who gives this in-
junction be likely to have pardoned one who
has disgraced the Lord, and who has cast Him
down from (the empire of) his body, and this
indeed through incest. If you wish to imbibe
to the utmost all knowledge of the apostle, in
order to understand with what an axe of censor-
ship he lops, and eradicates, and extirpates,
every forest of lusts, for fear of permitting aught
to regain strength and sprout again ; behold him
desiring souls to keep a fast from the legitimate
fruit of nature — the apple, I mean, of mar-
riage : " But with regard to what ye wrote, good
it is for a man to have no contact with a woman ;
but, on account of fornication, let each one have
his own wife : let husband to wife, and wife to
husband, render what is due." '5 Who but must
know that it was against his will that he relaxed
the bond of this "good," in order to prevent
fornication? But if he either has granted, or
does grant, indulgence to fornication, of course
he has frustrated the design of his own remedy,
and will be bound forthwith to put the curb upon
the nuptials of continence, if the fornication for
the sake of which those nuptials are permitted
shall cease to be feared. For (a fornication)
which has indulgence granted it will not be
feared. And yet he professes that he has
granted the use of marriage " by way of indul-
gence, not of command." ''' For he " luills " all
to be on a level with himself. But when things


1° John ii. 19.

" I Cor. vi. 15-17.

12 I Cor. vi. i8.

'3 Comp. I Pet. i. 19: and c. vi. above, ad Jin.

'■• I Cor. vi. 19, 20, not exactly.

15 I Cor. vii. 1-3.

« lb., ver. 6.


92


ON MODESTY.


lawful are (only) granted by way of indulgence,
who hope for things unlawful? "To the un-
married " also, " and widows," he says, " It is
good, by his example, to persevere " (in their
present state) ; " but if they were too weak, to
marry ; because it is preferable to marry than
to burn." ' With what fires, I pray you, is it
preferable to "burn" — (the fires) of concupis-
cence, or (the fires) of penalty? Nay, but if
fornication is pardonable, it will not be an ob-
ject of concupiscence. But it is more (the man-
ner) of an aposde to take forethought for the
fires of penalty. Wherefore, if it is penalty
which " burns," it follows that fornication, which
penalty awaits, is not pardonable. Meantime
withal, while prohibiting divorce, he uses the
Lord's precept against adultery as an instrument
for providing, in place of divorce, either perse-
verance in widowhood, or else a reconciliation
of peace : inasmuch as " whoever shall have dis-
missed a wife (for any cause) except the cause
of adultery, maketh her commit adultery ; and
he who marrieth one dismissed by a husband
committeth adultery." ^ What powerful reme-
dies does the Holy Spirit furnish, to prevent, to
wit, the commission anew of that which He wills
not should anew be pardoned !

Now, if in all cases he says it is best for a
man thus to be ; " Thou art joined to a wife,
seek not loosing " (that you may give no occasion
to adultery) ; " thou art loosed from a wife, seek
not a wife," that you may reserve an opportunity
for yourself: "but withal, if thou shalt have
iiiarried a wife, and if a virgin shall have mar-
ried, she sinneth not ; pressure, however, of the
flesh such shall have," — even here he is grant-
ing a permission by way of " sparing them." 3
On the other hand, he lays it down that " the
time is wound up," in order that even " they
who have wives may be as if they had them
not." " For the fashion of this world is pass-
ing away," — (this world) no longer, to wit, re-
quiring (the command), "Grow and multiply."
Thus he wills us to pass our life " without
anxiety," because " the unmarried care about
the Lord, how they may please God ; the mar-
ried, however, muse about the world,^ how they
may please their spouse." s xiius he pronounces
that the " preserver of a virgin " doeth " better "
than her "giver in marriage."^ Thus, too, he
discriminatingly judges her to be more blessed,
who, after losing her husband subsequently to
her entrance into the faith, lovingly embraces
the opportunity of widowhood.? Thus he com-


' I Cor. vii. 8, g.

2 Matt. V. 32.

3 I Cor. vii. 26-28, constantly quoted in previous treatises.
■♦ Mundo.

5 Vers. 32, 33, loosely.

6 I Cor. vii. 38.
"> Vers. 39, 40.


mends as Divine all these counsels of continence :
" I think," ** he says. " I too have the Spirit of
God." 9

Who is this your most audacious asserter of all
immodesty, plainly a "most faithful" advocate of
the adulterous, and fornicators, and incestuous,
in whose honour he has undertaken this cause
against the Holy Spirit, so that he recites a false
testimony from (the writings of) His apostle?
No such indulgence granted Paul, who endeav-
ours to obliterate "necessity of the flesh" wholly
from (the list of) even honourable pretexts (for
marriage unions). He does grant " indulgence,"
I aUow; — not to adulteries, but to nuptials.
He does "spare," I allow; — marriages, not
harlotries. He tries to avoid giving pardon
even to nature, for fear he may flatter guilt. He
is studious to put restraints upon the union which
is heir to blessing, for fear that which is heir to
curse be excused. This (one possibility) was
left him — to purge the flesh from (natural)
dregs, for (cleanse it) from (foul) stains he can-
not. But this is the usual way with perverse
and ignorant heretics ; yes, and by this time
even with Psychics universally : to arm them-
selves with the opportune support of some one
ambiguous passage, in opposition to the disci-
plined host of sentences of the entire document.

CHAP. XVII. CONSISTENCY OF THE APOSTLE IN HIS

OTHER EPISTLES.

Challenge me to front the apostolic line of
battle ; look at his Epistles : they all keep guard
in defence of modesty, of chastity, of sanctity ;
they all aim their missiles against the interests
of luxury, and lasciviousness, and lust. What, in
short, does he write to the Thessalonians withal ?
" For our consolation '° (originated) not of se-
duction, nor of impurity:" and, "This is the
will of God, your sanctification, that ye abstain
from fornication ; that each one know how to
possess his vessel in sanctification and honour,
not in the lust of concupiscence, as (do) the
nations which are ignorant of God."" What do
the Galatians read ? " Manifest are the works
of the flesh." What are these? Among the
first he has set " fornication, impurity, lascivious-
ness : " "(concerning) which I foretell you, as I
have foretold, that whoever do such acts are not
to attain by inheritance the kingdom of God," '^
The Romans, moreover, — what learning is more
impressed upon them than that there must
be no derehction of the Lord after believing?
"What, then, say we? Do we persevere in sin,
in order that grace may superabound ? Far be


8 Puto: Gr. 5o/ci.

9 Ver. 40 ad fin.

'° I Thess. ii. 3, omitting the last clause.
II I Thess. iv. 3-5.
'- Gal. V. 19-21.


ON MODESTY.


93


it. We, who are dead to sin, how shall we live
in it still ? Are ye ignorant that we who have
been baptized in Christ have been baptized into
His death? Buried with Him, then, we have
been, through the baptism into the death, in
order that, as Christ hath risen again from the
dead, so we too may walk in newness of life. For
if we have been buried together in the likeness
of His death, why, we shall be (in that) of (His) j
resurrection too ; knowing this, that our old man
hath been crucified together with Him. But if
we died with Christ, we believe that we shall
live, too, with Him ; knowing that Christ, having
been raised from the dead, no more dieth, (that)
death no more hath domination over Him. For
in that He died to sin, He died once for all ;
but in that He liveth, to God He liveth. Thus,
too, repute ye yourselves dead indeed to sin, but
living to God through Christ Jesus." ' There-
fore, Christ being once for all dead, none who,
subsequently to Christ, has died, can live again
to sin, and especially to so heinous a sin. Else,
if fornication and adultery may by possibility be
anew admissible, Christ withal will be able anew
to die. Moreover, the apostle is urgent in pro-
hibiting " sin from reigning in our mortal body," ^
whose " infirmity of the flesh " he knew. " For
as ye have tendered your members to servile
impurity and iniquity, so too now tender them
servants to righteousness unto holiness." For
even if he has affirmed that " good dwelleth not
in his flesh," ^ yet (he means) according to "the
law of the letter," ■* in which he " was : " but
according to "the law of the Spirit," 5 to which
he annexes us, he frees us from the " infirmity
of the flesh." " For the law," he says, " of the
Spirit of life hath manumitted thee from the law
of sin and of death." ^ For albeit he may ap- '
pear to be partly disputing from the standpoint
of Judaism, yet it is to us that he is directing :
the integrity and plenitude of the rules of disci-
pline,— (us), for whose sake soever, labouring
(as we were) in the law, "God hath sent, through
flesh. His own Son, in similitude of flesh of sin ; '
and, because of sin, hath condemned sin in the '
flesh ; in order that the righteousness of the law,"
he says, " might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
according to flesh, but according to (the) Spirit.
For they who walk according to flesh are sensible
as to those things which are the flesh's, and they
who (walk) according to (the) Spirit those which
(are) the Spirit's." ^ Moreover, he has affirmed
the "sense of the flesh" to be "death ;"** hence,


' Rom. vi. i-ii.
2 Ver. 12.
^ See Rom. vii, i8.

* This c.\act expression does not occur; but comp. s Cor. iii. 6.
5 Comp. the last reference and Rom. viii. 2.
*> Rom. viii. 2, omitting ei' Xptarui 'iTjaoO, and substituting (unless
a be a misprint) " te " for jue.
' Rom. viii. 3-s.
8 Ver. 6.


too, " enmity," and enmity toward God ; 9 and
that " they who are in the flesh," that is, in the
sense of the flesh, " cannot please God : " '° and,
" If ye live according to flesh," he says, " it will
come to pass that ye die."" But what do we
understand " the sense of the flesh " and " the
life of the flesh" (to mean), except whatever "it
shames (one) to pronounce?'"^ for the other
(works) of the flesh even an apostle would have
named. '3 Similarly, too, (when writing) to the
Ephesians, while recalling past (deeds), he warns
(them) concerning the future: "In which we
too had our conversation, doing the concupis-
cences and pleasures of the flesh." '■♦ Branding,
in fine, such as had denied themselves — Chris-
tians, to wit — on the score of having " delivered
themselves up to the working of every impurity," '5
" But ye," he says, " not so have learnt Christ."
And again he says thus : " Let him who was wont
to steal, steal no more." '^ But, similarly, let him
who was wont to commit adultery hitherto, not
commit adultery ; and he who was wont to forni-
cate hitherto, not fornicate : for he would have
added these (admonitions) too, had he been in the
habit of extending pardon to such, or at all willed
it to be extended — (he) who, not willing pollu-
tion to be contracted even by a word, says, " Let
no base speech proceed out of your mouth." '7
Again : " But let fornication and every impurity
not be even named among you, as becometh
saints,"'^ — so far is it from being excused, —
" knowing this, that every fornicator or impure
(person) hath not God's kingdom. Let none
seduce you with empty words : on this account
cometh the wrath of God upon the sons of un-
belief." '9 Who " seduces with empty words "
but he who states in a public harangue that
adultery is remissible? not seeing into the fact
that its very foundations have been dug out by
the apostle, when he puts restraints upon drunk-
ennesses and revellings, as withal here : " And be
not inebriated with wine, in which is voluptuous-
ness." '° He demonstrates, too, to the Colossians
what "members" they are to "mortify" upon
earth : " fornication, impurity, lust, evil concu-
piscence," and "base talk."^'

Yield up, by this time, to so many and such
sentences, the one (passage) to which you cling.
Paucity is cast into the shade by multitude,
doubt by certainty, obscurity by plainness. Even
if, for certain, the apostle had granted pardon


9 Ver. 7.

10 Ver. 8.

" Ver. 12.

'2 See Eph. v. 12.

» As he did to the Galatians: see Gal. v. 19-21.

'■* Eph, ii. 3, briefly, and not literally.

'S Eph. iv. 17-20.

16 Ver. 28.

■7 Ver. 29 ad init.

'8 Eph. v. 3.

■9 Vers. 5, 6, not accurately.
20 Ver. 18.

2' See Col. iii. 5, 8.


94


ON MODESTY.


of fornication to that Corinthian, it would be
another instance of his once for all contravening
his own practice to meet the requirement of the
time. He circumcised Timotheus alone, and
yet did away with circumcision.'

CHAP. XVIII. ANSWER TO A PSYCHICAL OBJECTION.

"But these (passages)," says (our opponent),
" will pertain to the interdiction of all immod-
esty, and the enforcing of all modesty, yet with-
out prejudice to the place of pardon ; which
(pardon) is not forthwith quite denied when
sins are condemned, since the time of the pardon
is concurrent with the condemnation which it
excludes."

This piece of shrewdness on the part of the
Psychics was (naturally) sequent ; and accord-
ingly we have reserved for this place the cautions
which, even in the times of antiquity, were
openly taken with a view to the refusing of ec-
clesiastical communion to cases of this kind.

For even in the Proverbs, which we call
Parcemi^, Solomon specially (treats) of the
adulterer (as being) nowhere admissible to expi-
ation. "But the adulterer," he says, "through
indigence of senses acquireth perdidon to his
own soul ; sustaineth dolors and disgraces. His
ignominy, moreover, shall not be wiped away
for the age. For indignation, full of jealousy,
will not spare the man in the day of judgment." ^
If you think this said about a heathen, at all .
events about believers you have already heard
(it said) through Isaiah : " Go out from the ,
midst of them, and be separate, and touch not j
the impure." ^ You have at the very outset of
the Psalms, "Blessed the man who hath not
gone astray in the counsel of the impious, nor
stood in the way of sinners, and sat in the state-
chair of pestilence ; "4 whose voice,5 withal, (is
heard) subsequently : " I have not sat with the
conclave of vanity ; and with them who act in-
iquitously will I not enter " — this (has to do)
with " the church " of such as act ill — " and
with the impious will I not sit ; " ^ and, " I will
wash with the innocent mine hands, and Thine
altar will I surround. Lord"? — as being "a
host in himself" — inasmuch as indeed " With
an holy (man), holy Thou wilt be ; and with an
innocent man, innocent Thou wilt be ; and with
an elect, elect Thou wilt be ; and with a per-
verse, perverse Thou wilt be." ^ And elsewhere :
" But to the sinner saith the Lord, Why expound-
est thou my righteous acts, and takest up my
testament through thy mouth ? If thou sawest a


1 Comp. Acts xvi. 1-3 with Gal. v. 2-6, and similar passages.

2 Prov. VI. 32-34.

3 Isa. lii. II, quoted in 2 Cor. vi. 17.
t Ps. i. I in LXX.

s I.e., the voice of this "blessed man," this true " Asher."

6 Ps. XXVI. 4, 5 (in LXX. XXV. 4, 5).

7 Ps. XXVI. (xxv. in LXX.) 6, not quite exactly.

8 Ps. xviii. 25, 26 (in LXX. Ps. xviii. 26, 27), nearly.


thief, thou rannest with him ; and with adulter-
ers thy portion thou madest." 9 Deriving his
instructions, therefore, from hence, the apostle
too says : " I wrote to you in the Epistle, not to
be mingled up with fornicators : not, of course,
with the fornicators of this world" — and so
forth — " else it behoved you to go out from the
world. But now I write to you, if any is named
a brother among you, (being) a fornicator, or
an idolater" (for what so intimately joined?),
"or a defrauder " (for what so near akin?), and
so on, " with such to take no food even," ■° not
to say the Eucharist : because, to wit, withal " a
little leaven spoileth the flavour of the whole
lump." " Again to Timotheus : " Lay hands on
no one hastily, nor communicate with others'
sins." " Again to the Ephesians : " Be not,
then, partners with them : for ye were at one
time darkness." '3 And yet more earnestly :
" Communicate not with the unfruitful works of
darkness ; nay rather withal convict them. For
(the things) which are done by them in secrecy
it is disgraceful even to utter." '4 What more
disgraceful than immodesties? If, moreover,
even from a " brother " who " walketh idly " 's he
warns the Thessalonians to withdraw themselves,
how much more withal from a fornicator ! For
these are the deliberate judgments of Christ,
" loving the Church," who " hath delivered Him-
self up for her, that He may sanctify her (purify-
ing her utterly by the laver of water) in the
word, that He may present the Church to Him-
self glorious, not having stain or wrinkle " — of
course a/ter the laver— "but (that) she may
be holy and without reproach ; " "" thereafter, to
wit, being " without wrinkle " as a virgin, '• with- J|
out stain" (of fornication) as a spouse, "with-
out disgrace" (of vileness), as having been
"utterly purified."

What if, even here, you should conceive to
reply that communion is indeed denied to sin-
ners, very especially such as had been " polluted
by the flesh," '7 but (only) for the present ; to be
restored, to wit, as the result of penitential suing :
in accordance with that clemency of God which
prefers a sinner's repentance to his death ? '** —
for this fundamental ground of your opinion
must be universally attacked. We say, accord-
ingly, that if it had been competent to the Divine
clemency to have guaranteed the demonstration
of itself even to the post-baptismally lapsed, the
apostle would have said thus : " Communicate
not with the works of darkness, un/ess they shall


9 Ps. 1. (xlix. in LXX.) i6, 18.

'° I Cor. V. 9-1 1.

>■ Ver. 6.

'2 I Tim. V. 22.

"3 Eph. V. 7,8 ad inii.

'•> Vers. II, 12.

'5 2 Thess. iii. 6.

'* Eph. V. 26, 27.

'7 Comp. Jude 23 adjfin.

'* Comp. Ezek. xxxiii. 11, etc.; and see cc. ii., x., xxii.


ON MODESTY.


95


have repented;'''' and, "With such take not food
even, unless after they shall have wiped, 7vith
rolling at their feet, the shoes of the brethren ; "
and, "Him who shall have marred the temple of
God, shall God mar, unless he shall have shakeji
off from his head in the church the ashes of all
hearths r For it had been his duty, in the case
of those things which he had condemned, to
have equally determined the extent to which he
had (and that conditionally) condemned them,
— whether he had condemned them with a tem-
porary and conditional, and not a perpetual,
severity. However, since in all Epistles he both
prohibits such a character, (so sinning) after be-
lieving, from being admitted (to the society of
believers) ; and, if admitted, detrudes him from
communion, without hope of any condition or
time ; he sides more with our opinion, pointing
out that the repentance which the Lord prefers
is that which before believing, before baptism, is
esteemed better than the death of the sinner, —
(the sinner, I say,) once for all to be washed
through the grace of Christ, who once for all has
suffered death for our sins. For this (rule), even
in his own person, the apostle has laid down.
For, when affirming that Christ came for this
end, that He might save sinners,' of whom him-
self had been the "first," what does he add?
"And I obtained mercy, because I did (so) ig-
norantly in unbelief." ^ Thus that clemency of
God, preferring the repentance of a sinner to his
death, looks at such as are ignorant still, and
still unbelieving, for the sake of whose liberation
Christ came ; not (at such) as already know God,
and have learnt the sacrament of the faith. But
if the clemency of God is applicable to such as
are ignorant still, and unbelieving, of course it
follows that repentance invites clemency to itself;
without prejudice to that species of repentance
after believing, which either, for lighter sins, will
be able to obtain pardon from the bishop, or
else, for greater and irremissible ones, from God
only.3

CH.AP. XIX. OBJECTIOXS FROM THE REVELATION

AND THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN REFUTED.

But how far (are we to treat) of Paul ; since
even John appears to give some secret counte-
nance to the opposite side? as if in the Apoca-
lypse he has manifestly assigned to fornication
the auxiliary aid of repentance, where, to the
angel of the Thyatirenes, the Spirit sends a mes-
sage that He " hath against him that he kept
(in communion) the woman Jezebel, who calleth
herself a prophet, and teacheth,'* and seduceth
my servants unto fornicating and eating of idol-


sacrifices. And I gave her bounteously a space
of time, that she might enter upon repentance ;
nor is she willing to enter upon it on the count
of fornication. Behold, I will give her into a
bed, and her adulterers with herself into greatest
pressure, unless they shall have repented of her
works." 5 I am content with the fact that, be-
tween apostles, there is a common agreement in
rules of faith and of discipline. For, "Whether
(it be) I," says (Paul), "or they, thus we
preach."^ Accordingly, it is material to the in-
terest of the whole sacrament to believe nothing
conceded by John, which has been flatly refused
by Paul. This harmony of the Holy Spirit who-
ever observes, shall by Him be conducted into
His meanings. For (the angel of the Thyatirene
Church) was secretly introducing into the Church,
and urging justly to repentance, an heretical
woman, who had taken upon herself to teach
what she had learnt from the Nicolaitans. For
who has a doubt that an heretic, deceived by (a
spurious baptismal) rite, upon discovering his
mischance, and ex])iating it by repentance, both
attains pardon and is restored to the bosom of
the Church ? Whence even among us, as being
on a par with an heathen, nay even more than
heathen, an heretic likewise, (such an one) is
purged through the baptism of truth from each
] character,7 and admitted (to the Church). Or
; else, if you are certain that that woman had, after
: a living faith, subsequently expired, and turned
heretic, in order that you may claim pardon as
the result of repentance, not as it wer3 for an
heretical, but as it were for a believing, sinner :
let her, I grant, repent ; but with the view of
ceasing from adultery, not however in the pros-
pect of restoration (to Church-fellowship) as
well. For this will be a repentance which we,
too, acknowledge to be due much more (than
you do) ; but which we reserve, for pardon, to
God.«

In short, this Apocalypse, in its later passages,
has assigned "the infamous and fornicators," as
well as " the cowardly, and unbelie\'ing, and
murderers, and sorcerers, and idolaters," who
have been guilty of any such crime while pro-
fessing the faith, to "the lake of fire," ^ without
any conditional condemnation. For it will not
appear to savour of (a bearing upon) heathens,
since it has (just) pronounced with regard to
believers, " They wlio shall have conquered shall
have this inheritance ; and I will be to them a
God, and they to me for sons ; " and so has
subjoined : " But to the cowardly, and unbeliev-
ing, and infamous, and fornicators, and murder-
ers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, (shall be) a


' See I Tim. i. 15.

2 I Tim. i. 13, 16.

3 See cc. iii. and xi., above.

* Or, " saith and teacheth that she is a prophet."


s Rev. ii. 18, 20-22.

* I Cor. XV. II.

7 i.e., of .'teat/ten and heretic.

6 See the end of the foregoing chapter.

9 Rev. xxi. 8.


96


ON MODESTY.


share in the lake of fire and sulphur, which
(lake) is the second death," Thus, too, again :
" Blessed they who act according to the precepts,
that they may have power over tlie tree of life,
and over the gates, for entering into the holy
city. Dogs, sorcerers, fornicators, murderers,
out ! " ■ — of course, such as do not act accord-
ing to the precepts ; for to be sent out is the por-
tion of those %vho have been within. Moreover,
"What have I to do to judge them who are
without?"" had preceded (the sentences now
in question).

From the Epistle also of John they forthwith
cull (a proof). It is said : "The blood of His
Son purifieth us utterly from every sin." 3 Always
then, and in every form, we will sin, if always
and from every sin He utterly purifies us ; or
else, if not always, not again after believing ;
and if not from sin, not again from fornication.
But what is the point whence (John) has started?
He had predicated "God" to be "Light," and
that " darkness is not in Him," and that " we lie
if we say that we have communion with Him,
and walk in darkness." '^ "If, however," he
says, " we walk in the light, we shall have com-
munion with Him, and the blood of Jesus Christ
our Lord purifieth us utterly from every sin." s
Walking, then, in the light, do we sin? and, sin-
ning in the light, shall we be utterly purified ? ,
By no means. For he who sins is not in the
light, but in darkness. Whence, too, he points [
out the mode in which we shall be utterly puri- j
fied from sin — (by) "walking in the light," in
which sin cannot be committed. Accordingly,
the sense in which he says we " are utterly puri-
fiied " is, not in so far as we sin, but in so far as
we do not sin. For, " walking in the light," but
not having communion with darkness, we shall
act as they that are " utterly purified ; " sin not
being quite laid down, but not being wittingly
committed. For this is the virtue of the Lord's
blood, that such as it has already purified from
sin, and thenceforward has set " in the light," it
renders thenceforward pure, if they shall con-
tinue to persevere walking in the light. " But
he subjoins," you say, " ' If we say that we have
not sin, we are seducing ourselves, and the truth
is not in us. If we confess our sins, faithful and
just is He to remit them to us, and utterly purify
us from every unrighteousness.' " ^ Does he say
"from impurity?" (No) : or else, if that is so,
then (He " utterly purifies " us) from " idolatry"
too. But there is a difference in the sense. For
see yet again: "If we say," he says, "that we
have not sinned, we make Him a liar, and His


' Rev. xxii. 14, 15.

2 I Cor. V. 12 ad init.

3 I John i. 7 ad fin.
* Vers. 5, 6.

5 Ver 8, incorrectly.

6 I John i. 8, 9,


word is not in us." ^ All the more fully : "Little
children, these things have I written to you, lest
ye sin ; and if ye shall have sinned, an Advocate
we have with God the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous ; and He is the propitiation for our
sins."** "According to these words," you say,
" it will be admitted both that we sin, and that
we have pardon." What, then, will become
(of your theory), when, proceeding (with the
Epistle), I find something different? For he
affirms that we do not sin at all ; and to this
end he treats at large, that he may make no
such concession ; setting forth that sins have
been once for all deleted by Christ, not subse-
quently to obtain pardon ; in which statement
the sense requires us (to apply the statement)
to an admonition to chastity. " Every one," he
says, " who hath this hope, maketh himself
chaste, because He too is chaste. Every one
who doeth sin, doeth withal iniquity ; 9 and sin
is iniquity.'" And ye know that He hath been
manifested to take away sins" — henceforth, of
course, to be no more incurred, if it is true, (as
it is,) that he subjoins, " Every one who abideth «.
in Him sinneth not ; every one who sinneth 11
neither hath seen nor knoweth Him. Little ■
children, let none seduce you. Every one who I
doeth righteousness is righteous, as He withal is II
righteous. He who doeth sin is of the devil,
inasmuch as the devil sinneth from the begin-
ning. For unto this end was manifested the
Son of God, to undo the works of the devil : "
for He has "undone" them withal, by setting
man free through baptism, the " handwriting of
death " having been " made a gift of" to him : "
and accordingly, " he who is being born of God
doeth not sin, because the seed of God abideth
in him ; and he cannot sin, because he hath
been born of God. Herein are manifest the
sons of God and the sons of the devil." '^ Where-
in? except it be (thus) : the former by not sin-
ning, from the time that they were born from
God ; the latter by sinning, because they are
from the devil, just as if they never were born
from God ? But if he says, " He who is not
righteous is not of God," '^ how shall he who is
not modest again become (a son) of God, who
has already ceased to be so ?

" It is therefore nearly equivalent to saying
that John has forgotten himself; asserting, in
the former part of his Episde, that we are not
without sin, but now prescribing that we do not
sin at all : and in the one case flattering us some-
what with hope of pardon, but in the other as-


7 I John i. 9.

8 I John ii. I, 2.

9 Iniquitatem = dvofii'ai'.

•° Iniquitas; ovo/iti'a = " lawlessness.'
" Sec Col. ii. 13, 14.
'- I John iii. 3-10.
'■5 I John iii. 10.


ON MODESTY.


97


serting with all stringency, that whoever may
have sinned are no sons of God." But away
with (the thought) : for not even we ourselves
forget the distinction between sins, which was
the starting-point of our digression. And (a
right distinction it was) ; for John has here sanc-
tioned it ; in that there are some sins of daily
committal, to which we all are liable : for who
will be free from the accident of either being
angry unjustly, and retaining his anger beyond
sunset ; ' or else even using manual violence ;
or else carelessly speaking evil; or else rashly
swearing ; or else forfeiting his plighted word ;
or else lying, from bashfulness or "necessity?"
In businesses, in official duties, in trade, in food,
in sight, in hearing, by how great temptations
are we plied ! So that, if there were no pardon
for such sins as these, salvation would be unat-
tainable to any. Of these, then, there will be
pardon, through the successful Suppliant of the
Father, Christ. But there are, too, the con-
traries of these ; as the graver and destructive
ones, such as are incapable of pardon — murder,
idolatry, fraud, apostasy, blasphemy; (and), of
course, too, adultery and fornication; and if
there be any other " violation of the temple of
God."' For these Christ will no more be the
successful Pleader : these will not at all be in-
curred by one who has been born of God, who
will cease to be the son of God if he do incur them.
Thus John's rule of diver-sity will be estab-
hshed ; arranging as he does a distinction of
sins, while he now admits and now denies that
the 'sons of God sin. For (in making these
assertions) he was looking forward to the final
clause of his letter, and for that (final clause)
he was laying his preliminary bases ; intending
to say, in the end, more manifestly : " If any
knoweth his brother to be sinning a sin not unto
death, he shall make request, and the Lord shall
give life to him who sinneth not unto death.
For there is a sin unto death : not concerning
that do I say that one should make request." ^
He, too, (as I have been), was mindful that
Jeremiah had been prohibited by God to dep-
recate (Him) on behalf of a people which was
committing mortal sins. " Every unrighteousness
is sin ; and there is a sin unto death. ^ But we
know that every one who hath been born of God
sinneth not"-* — to wit, the sin which is unto
death. Thus there is no course left for you, but
either to deny that adultery and fornication are
mortal sins ; or else to confess them irremissible,
for which it is not permitted even to make suc-
cessful intercession.


CHAP. XX. FROM APOSTOLIC TEACHING TERTUL-

LIAN TURNS TO THAT OF COMPANIONS OF THE
APOSTLES, AND OF THE LAW.

The discipline, therefore, of the apostles prop-
erty (so called), indeed, instructs and determi-
nately directs, as a principal point, the overseer
of all sanctity as regards the temple of God to
the universal eradication of every sacrilegious,
outrage upon modesty, without any mention of
restoration. I wish, however, redundantly to
superadd the testimony likewise of one partic-
ular comrade of the apostles, — (a testimony)
aptly suited for confirming, by most proximate
right, the discipline of his masters. For there
is extant withal an Epistle to the Hebrews under
the name of Barnabas — a man sufficiently ac-
credited by God, as being one whom Paul has
stationed next to himself in the uninterrupted
observance of abstinence: "Or else, I alone
and Barnabas, have not we the power of work-
ing ?" 5 And, of course, the Epistle of Barnabas
is more generally received among the Churches
than that apocryphal "Shepherd" of adulterers.
Warning, accordingly, the disciples to omit all first
principles, and strive rather after perfection, and
not lay again the foundations of repentance from
the works of the dead, he says : " For impossible
it is that they who have once been illuminated,
and have tasted the heavenly gift, and have par-
ticipated in the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the
word of God and found it sweet, when they shall
— their age already setting — have fallen away,
should be again recalled unto repentance, cruci-
fying again for themselves the Son of God, and
dishonouring Him." ^ " For the earth which hath
drunk the rain often descending upon it, and
hath borne grass apt for them on whose account
it is tilled withal, attaineth God's blessing ; but
if it bring forth thorns, it is reprobate, and
nighest to cursing, whose end is (doomed) unto
utter burning." 7 He who learnt this/ww apos-
tles, and taught it with apostles, never knew of
any " second repentance " promised by apostles
to the adulterer and fornicator.

For excellently was he wont to interpret the
law and keep its figures even in (the dispensa-
tion of) the Truth itself. It was with a reference,
in short, to this species of discipline that the
caution was taken in the case of the leper:
" But if the speckled appearance shall have be-
come efflorescent over "the skin, and shall have
covered the whole skin from the head even unto
the feet through all the visible surface, then the
priest, when he shall have seen, shall utterly
cleanse him : since he hath wholly turned into
white he is clean. But on the day that there


z I ^oiin^v^e. But TertuUian has rendered aXr^lv and kpmrivhy
the one word postidare. See Trench, N. T. Synonyms, pp. 169-

^^^3^So Oehler ; but it appears that a " non " must have been omitted.
4 Vers. 17. i3.


I Cor. ix. 6; but our copies read, toO m (pydi^rOa
Comp. Heb. vi. i, 4-6.
Vers. 7, 3.


ON MODESTY.


shall have been seen in such an one quick colour, |
he is defiled." • (The Law) would have the man |
who is wholly turned from the pristine habit of i
the llesh to the whiteness of faith — which (faith) j
is esteemed a defect and blemish in (the eyes
of) the world ^ — and is wholly made new, to be
understood to be "clean;" as being no longer
" speckled," no longer dappled with the pristine
and the new (intermixt). If, however, after the
reversal (of the sentence of uncleanness), ought
of the old nature shall have revived with its ten-
dencies, that which was beginning to be thought
utterly dead to sin in his flesh must again be
judged unclean, and must no more be expiated
by the priest. Thus adultery, sprouting again
from the pristine stock, and wholly blemishing the
unity of the new colour from which it had been
excluded, is a defect that admits of no cleansing.
Again, in the case of a house : if any spots and
cavities in the party-walls had been reported to
the priest, before he entered to inspect that house
he bids all (its contents) be taken away from it ;
thus the belongings of the house would not be
unclean. Then the priest, if, upon entering, he
had found greenish or reddish cavities, and their
appearance to the sight deeper down within the
body of the party-wall, was to go out to the gate,
and separate the house for a period within seven
days. Then, upon returning on the seventh day,
if he should have perceived the taint to have
become diffused in the party-walls, he was to
order those stones in which the taint of the lep-
rosy had been to be extracted and cast away
©utside the city into an unclean place ; and
other stones, poHshed and sound, to be taken
and replaced in the stead of the first, and the
house to be plastered with other mortar.^ For,
in coming to the High Priest of the Father —
Christ — all impediments must first be taken
away, in the space of a week, that the house
which remains, the flesh and the soul, may be
clean ; and when the Word of God has entered
it, and has found "stains of red and green,"
forthwith must the deadly and sanguinary pas-
sions "be extracted" and "cast away" out of
doors — for the Apocalypse withal has set
"death" upon a "green horse," but a "warrior"
upon a "red"-* — and in their stead must be
under-strewn stones pohshed and apt for con-
junction, and firm, — such as are made (by God)
into (sons) of Abraham,? — that thus the man
may be fit for God. But if, after the recovery
and reformation, the priest again perceived in
the same house ought of the pristine disorders
and blemishes, he pronounced it unclean, and
bade the timbers, and the stones, and all the


1 See Lev. xiii. 12-14 (in LXX.).

2 Ssculo.

3 See Lev. xiv. 33-42.
* See Rev vi. 4, 8

5 Comp. Matt. iii. 9; Luke iii 8


Structure of it, to be pulled down, and cast away
into an unclean place.^ This will be the man
— flesh and soul — who, subsequently to refor-
mation, after baptism and the entrance of the
priests, again resumes the scabs and stains of
the flesh, and "is cast away outside the city into
an unclean place," — "surrendered," to wit, " to
Satan for the destruction of the flesh," — and is
no more rebuilt in the Church after his ruin.
So, too, with regard to lying with a female slave,
who had been betrothed to an husband, but not
yet redeemed, not yet set free : "provision," says
(the Law), shall be made for her, and she shall
not die, because she was not yet manumitted for
him for whom she was being kept.^ For flesh
not yet manumitted to Christ, for whom it was
being kept,''^ used to be contaminated with im-
punity : so now, after manumission, it no more
receives pardon.

CHAP. XXL — OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN DIS-
CIPLINE AND POWER, AND OF THE POWER OF
THE KEYS.

If the apostles understood these (figurative
meanings of the Law) better, of course they were
more careful (with regard to them than even
apostolic men). But I will descend even to
this point of contest now, making a separation
between the doctrine of apostles and \ht\x power.
Discipline governs a man, power sets a seal upon
him ; apart from the fact that power is the Spirit,
but the Spirit is God. What, moreover, used
(the Spirit) to teach? That there must be no
communicating with the works of darkness.^ Ob-
serve what He bids. Who, moreover, was able
to forgive sins ? This is His alone prerogative :
for " who remitteth sins but God alone? " ■° and,
of course, (who but He can remit) mortal sins,
such as have been committed against Himself,"
and against His temple ? For, as far as you are
concerned, such as are chargeable with offence
against you personally, you are commanded, in
the person of Peter, to forgive even seventy times
sevenfold.'^ And so, if it were agreed that even
the blessed apostles had granted any such indul-
gence (to any crime) the pardon of which (comes)
from God, not from man, it would be compe-
tent (for them) to have done so, not in the ex-
ercise of discipline, but of power. For they both
raised the dead,'^ which God alone (can do),
and restored the debilitated to their integrity,"*
which none but Christ (can do) ; nay, they in-
flicted plagues too, which Christ would not do.


I


6 Lev xiv. 43-45-

7 See Lev xix. 20.

8 Comp. 2 Cor. xi. 2.

9 Eph, V. II, See ch. xviii. above,
1° Mark ii. 7; Luke v. 21.

II Comp. Ps. li. 4 (in LXX. Ps, 1. 6).
'2 Matt xviii. 22.
13 Comp. Acts ix 36-43, XX. 9-12.
I* Comp. Acts iii. i-ii, v. 13-16.


ON MODESTY.


99


For it did not beseem Him to be severe who
had come to suffer. Smitten were both Ananias '
and Elymas ^ — Ananias with death, Elymas with
blindness — in order that by this very fact it
might be proved that Christ had had the power
of doing even such (miracles). So, too, had the
prophets (of old) granted to the repentant the
pardon of murder, and therewith of adultery, in-
asmuch as they gave, at the same time, manifest
proofs o{ severity. ''• Exhibit therefore even now
to me,-* apostohc sir, prophetic evidences, that I
may recognise your divine virtue, and vindicate
to yourself the poiuer of remitting such sins ! If,
however, you have had the functions of disci-
pline alone allotted you, and (the duty) of pre-
siding not imperially, but ministerially ; s who or
how great are you, that you should grant indul-
gence, who, by exhibiting neither the prophetic
nor the apostolic character, lack that virtue whose
property it is to indulge ?

" But," you say, " the Church has the power
of forgiving sins." This I acknowledge and ad-
judge more (than you ; I) who have the Para-
clete Himself in the persons of the new prophets,
saying, " The Church has the power to forgive
sins ; but I will not do it, lest they commit oth-
ers withal." " What if a pseudo-prophetic spirit
has made that declaration? " Nay, but it would
have been more the part of a subverter on the
one hand to commend himself on the score of
clemency, and on the other to influence all oth-
ers to sin. Or if, again, (the pseudo-prophetic
spirit) has been eager to affect this (sentiment)
in accordance with " the Spirit of truth," ^ it fol-
lows that " the Spirit of truth " has indeed the
power of indulgently granting pardon to forni-
cators, but wills not to do it if it involve evil to
'the majority.

I now inquire into your opinion, (to see) from
what source you usurp this right to "the Church."

If, because the Lord has said to Peter, " Upon
this rock will I build My Church," ^ " to thee
have I given the keys of the heavenly king-
dom ;" ^ or, " Whatsoever thou shalt have bound
or loosed in earth, shall be bound or loosed in
the heavens," 9 you therefore presume that the
power of binding and loosing has derived to you,
that is, to every Church akin to "Peter, what sort
of man are you, subverting and wholly changing
the manifest intention of the Lord, conferring
(as that intention did) this (gift) personally
upon Peter? " On thee,'" He says, " will I build
My Church ; " and, " I will give to thee the keys,"


1 Acts V. 1-6.

2 Acts xiii. 6-12.

3 Comp. 2 Sam. xii. 1-14, etc.

'• Kaye suggests " apostolica et prophetica" — "apostolic and
prophetic evidences; " which is very probable.
5 Comp. I Pet. V. 1-4.
^ Comp. John xv. 26.
7 Matt. xvi. 18.

' Matt. xvi. 19 ad itu't., incorrectly.
9 Matt. xvi. 19.


not to the Church ; and, " Whatsoever thou shalt
have loosed or bound" not what /"/;<?)' shall have
loosed or bound. For so withal the result teaches.
In (Peter; himself the Church was reared ; that
is, through (Peter) himself; (Peter) himself
essayed the key; you see K//;a/ (key) : "Men
of Israel, let what I say sink into your ears :
Jesus the Nazarene, a man destined by God for
you," and so forth. '° (Peter) himself, therefore,
was the first to unbar, in Christ's baptism, the
entrance to the heavenly kingdom, in which
(kingdom) are " loosed " the sins that were be-
foretime " bound ; " and those which have not
been " loosed " are " bound," in accordance with
true salvation ; and Ananias he " bound " with
the bond of death, and the weak in his feet he
"absolved" from his defect of health. More-
over, in that dispute about the observance or
non-observance of the Law, Peter was the first of
all to be endued with the Spirit, and, after mak-
ing preface touching the calling of the nations,
to say, " And now why are ye tempting the Lord,
concerning the imposition upon the brethren of
a yoke which neither we nor our fathers were
able to support? But however, through the
grace of Jesus we beheve that we shall be saved
in the same way as they." ■' This sentence both
" loosed " those parts of the law which were
abandoned, and " bound " those which were re-
served. Hence the power of loosing and of
binding committed to Peter had nothing to do
with the capital sins of believers ; and if the Lord
had given him a precept that he must grant
pardon to a brother sinning against him even
" seventy times sevenfold," of course He would
have commanded him to "bind" — that is, to
"retain"'^ — nothing subsequently, unless per-
chance such (sins) as one may have committed
against the Lord, not against a brother. For the
forgiveness of (sins) committed in the case of a
man is a prejudgment against the remission of
sins against God.

What, now, (has this to do) with the Church,
and your (church), indeed, Psychic? For, in
accordance with the person of Peter, it is to
spiritual men that this power will correspond-
enriy appertain, either to an apostle or else to
a prophet. For the very Church itself is, prop-
erly and principally, the Spirit Himself, in whom
is the Trinity of the One Divinity — Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit.'^ (The Spirit) combines that
Church which the Lord has made to consist in
" three." And thus, from that time forward,"*
every number (of persons) who may have com-
bined together into this faith is accounted "a
Church," from the Author and Consecrator (of


JO Acts ii. 22 et seqq.
" See Acts xv 7-1 1.
'- Comp. John xx. 23.
» See de Or., c. ii.
'* See Matt, xviii. 20.


ON MODESTY.


the Church). And accordingly " the Church,"
it is true, will forgive sins : but (it will be) the
Church of the Spirit, by means of a spiritual
man ; not the Church which consists of a num-
ber of bishops. For the right and arbitrament
is the Lord's, not the servant's ; God's Himself,
not the priest's.

CHAP. XXII. — OF MARTYRS, AND THEIR INTERCES-
SION ON BEHALF OF SCANDALOUS OFFENDERS.

But you go so far as to lavish this " power "
upon martyrs withal ! No sooner has any one,
acting on a preconceived arrangement, put on
the bonds — (bonds), moreover, which, in the
nominal custody now in vogue,' are soft ones —
than adulterers beset him, fornicators gain access
to him ; instantly prayers echo around him ; in-
stantly pools of tears (from the eyes) of all the
polluted surround him ; nor are there any who
are more diligent in purchasing entrance into the
prison than they who have lost (the fellowship
of) the Church ! Men and women are violated
in the darkness with which the habitual indul-
gence of lusts has plainly familiarized them ; and
they seek peace at the hands of those who are
risking their own ! Others betake them to the
mines, and return, in the character of communi-
cants, from thence, where by this time another
" martyrdom " is necessary for sins committed
offer " martyrdom." " Well, who on earth and
in the flesh is faultless ? " What " martyr " (con-
tinues to be) an inhabitant of the world ^ suppli
eating? pence in hand? subject to physician and
usurer? Suppose, now, (your "martyr") be-
neath the glaive, with head already steadily
poised ; suppose him on the cross, with body
already outstretched ; suppose him at the stake,
with the lion already let loose ; suppose him on
the axle, with the fire already heaped ; in the
very certainty, I say, and possession of martyr-
dom : who permits 7nan to condone (offences)
which are to be reserved for God, by whom
those (offences) have been condemned vvithout
discharge, which not even apostles (so far as
I know) —martyrs withal themselves — have
judged condonable ? In short, Paul had already
" fought with beasts at Ephesus," when he de-
creed "destruction" to the incestuous person.3
Let it suffice to the martyr to have purged his
own snis : it is the part of ingratitude or of pride
to lavish upon others also what one has obtained
at a high price.+ Who has redeemed another's
death by his own, but the Son of God alone?
For even in His very passion He set the robber
free.5 For to this end had He come, that, being


Himself pure from sin,'' and in all respects holy,7
He might undergo death on behalf of sinners.**
Similarly, you who emulate Him in condoning
sins, if you yourself have done no sin, plainly suf-
fer in my stead. If, however, you are a sinner,
how will the oil of your puny torch be able to
suffice for you and for me ? 9

I have, even now, a test whereby to prove (the
presence of) Christ (in you). If Christ is in
the martyr for this reason, that the martyr may
absolve adulterers and fornicators, let Him tell
publicly the secrets of the heart, that He may
thus concede (pardon to) sins; and He is
Christ. For thus it was that the Lord Jesus
Christ showed His power : " Why think ye evil
in your hearts ? For which is easier, to say to
the paralytic. Thy sins are remitted thee ; or. Rise
and walk? Therefore, that ye may know the
Son of man to have the power upon earth of re-
mitting sins, I say to thee, paralytic. Rise, and
walk." '° If the Lord set so much store by the
proof of His power as to reveal thoughts, and so
impart health by His command, lest He should
not be believed to have the power of remitting
sins ; it is not lawful for me to believe the same
power (to reside) in any one, whoever he be,
without the same proofs. In the act, however,
of urgently entreating from a martyr pardon for
adulterers and fornicators, you yourself confess
that crimes of that nature are not to be washed
away except by the martyrdom of the crimi-
nal himself, while you presume (they can be
washed away) by another's. If this is so, then
martyrdom will be another baptism. For " I
have withal," saith He, " another baptism." "
Whence, too, it was that there flowed out of the
wound in the Lord's side water and blood, the
materials of either baptism.'^ I ought, then, by
the first baptism too to (have the right of) set-
ting another free if I can by the second : and we
must necessarily force upon the mind (of our
opponents this conclusion) : Whatever authority,
whatever reason, restores ecclesiastical peace to
the adulterer and fornicator, the same will be
bound to come to the aid of the murderer and
idolater in their repentance, — at all events, of
the apostate, and of course of him whom, in the
battle of his confession, after hard struggling with
torments, savagery has overthrown. Besides, it
were unworthy of God and of His mercy, who
prefers the repentance of a sinner to his death,
that they should have easier return into (the
bosom of) the Church who have fallen in heat
of passion, than they who have fallen in hand-to-


1 Comp. de 7e.,c. xii.

2 Sceculi.

3 See I Cor. xv. 32.
* See Acts xxii. 28.
5 Luke xxiii. 39-43.


6 See I John iii. v.

7 See Heb. vii. 26-viii. :

8 See I Pet. iii. 18.

9 See Matt. xxv. 8, 9.
'° See Mark ii 9-11.
'' Luke xii. 50.

'^ John xix. 33, 34.


ELUCIDATIONS. lOi


hand combat/ Indignation urges us to speak.
Contaminated bodies you will recall rather than
gory ones ! Which repentance is more pitiable
— that which prostrates tickled flesh, or lacer-
ated? Which pardon is, in all causes, more
jusdy concessible — that which a voluntary, or
that which an involuntary, sinner implores ? No
one is compelled with his will to apostatize ; no
one against his will commits fornication. Lust
is exposed to no violence, except itself : it knows


agonies, or (he who has done so) amid delights?
he who when losing Him grieved, or he who
when losing Him sported ? And yet those scars
graven on the Christian combatant — scars, of
course, enviable in the eyes of Christ, because
th6y yearned after conquest, and thus also glori-
ous, because failing to conquer they yielded ;
(scars) after which even the devil himself yet
sighs ; (scars) with an infelicity of their own, but
a chaste one, with a repentance that mourns, but


no coercion whatever. Apostasy, on the con- ; blushes not, to the Lord for pardon — will anew
trary, what ingenuities of butchery and tribes of be remitted to such, because their apostasy was
penal inflictions enforce ! ^Vhich has more truly i expiable ! In their case alone is the " flesh
apostatized — he who has lost Christ amid weak." Nay, no flesh so strong as that which
I comp. de Monog., c. xv. ' 1 crushcs out the Spirit !


ELUCIDATIONS.
L

(The Shepherd of Hernias, p. 85.)
Here, and in chap. xx. below, TertuUian's rabid utterances against the Shepherd may be
balanced by what he had said, less unreasonably, in his better mood.' Now he refers to the
Shepherd's (ii. i) ^ view of pardon, even to adulterers. But surely it might be objected even
more plausibly against " the Shepherd," whom he prefers, in common with all Christians, as see
John viii. i-ii, which I take to be canonical Scripture. A curious question is suggested by what
he says of the figure of the Good Shepherd portrayed on the chalice : Is this irony, as if the
figure so familiar from illustrations of the catacombs must be meant for the Shepherd of Hermas ?
Regarding all pictures as idolatrous, he may intend to intimate that adultery (= idolatry) was thus
symbolized.

II.

(Clasping the knees of all, p. 86.)
Here is a portrait of the early penitential discipline sufficiently terrible, and it conforms to
the apostolic pictures of the same. "Tell it unto the Church," says our Lord (St. Matt, xviii. 17).
In I Cor. V. 4 the apostle ("present in spirit") gives judgment, but the whole Church is "gath-
ered together." In St. James v. 16 the "confession to 07ie atwther" seems to refer to this
public discipline, as also the prayer for healing enjoined on one another. St. Chrysostom, how-
ever, reflecting the discipline of his day, in which great changes were made, says, on Matt, xviii.
17, unless it be a gloss, ''Die Ecelesice id est Pnvsidibus = TrpoeSpevovmv." (Tom. vii. p. 536, ed.
Migne.)

III.
(Remedial discipline, p. 87.)
Powerfully as Tertvfllian states his view of this apostolic " delivering unto Satan " as for final
perdidon, it is not to be gainsaid that (i Cor. v. 5) the object was salvadon and hope, "that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." Thus, the power of Satan to inflict bodily
suffering (Job ii. 6), when divinely permitted, is recognised under the Gospel (Luke xiii. 16;
2 Cor. xii. 7). The remedial mercy of trials and sufferings may be inferred when providentially
occurring.

IV.
(Personally upon Peter, p. 99.)
See what has been said before. Rut note our author (now writing against the Church, and as
a Montanist) has no idea that the persona/ prerogative of St. Peter had descended to any bishop.
More when we come to Cyprian, and see vol. iii. p. 630, this series.

' 0>i Prayer, vol. iii. cap. xvi p. 6S6, supra, where he speaks respectfully. ^ Vol. ii. p. 22 (also p. 43), this scries.


VIII.
ON FASTING/

IN OPPOSITION TO THE PSYCHICS.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]


CHAP. I. CONNECTION OF GLUTTONY AND LUST.

GROUNDS OF PSYCHICAL OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE
MONTANISTS.

I SHOULD wonder at the Psychics, if they were
enthralled to voluptuousness alone, which leads
them to repeated marriages, if they were not
likewise bursting with gluttony, which leads them
to hate fasts. Lust without voracity would cer-
tainly be considered a monstrous phenomenon ;
since these two are so united and concrete, that,
had there been any possibility of disjoining them,
the pudenda would not have been aiifixed to the
belly itself rather than elsewhere. Look at the
body : the region (of these members) is one
and the same.- Li short, the order of the vices
is proportionate to the arrangement of the mem-
bers. First, the belly ; and then immediately
the materials of all other species of lascivious-
ness are laid subordinately to daintiness : through
love of eating, love of impurity finds passage.
I recognise, therefore, animal^ faith by its care
of the flesh (of which it wholly consists) — as
prone to manifold feeding as to manifold mar-
rying — so that it deservedly accuses the spiiitual
discipline, which according to its ability opposes
it, in this species of continence as well ; impos-
ing, as it does, reins upon the appetite, through
taking, sometimes no meals, or late meals, or
dry meals, just as upon lust, through allowing
but one marriage.

It is really irksome to engage with such : one
is really ashamed to wrangle about subjects the
very defence of which is offensive to modesty.
For how am I to protect chastity and sobriety
without taxing their adversaries? What those
adversaries are I will once for all mention : they


1 [Written, say, circa a.d. 208.]

2 i.e., Psychic.


are the exterior and interior botuH of the Psy-
chics. It is these which raise controversy with
the Paraclete ; it is on this account that the New
Prophecies are rejected : not that Montanusand
Priscilla and Maximilla preach another God, nor
that they disjoin Jesus Christ (from God), nor
that they overturn any particular rule of faith or
hope, but that they plainly teach more frequent
fasting than marrying. Concerning the limit of
marrying, we have already published a defence
of monogamy.3 Now our battle is the battle
of the secondary (or rather the primary) conti-
nence, in regard of the chastisement of diet.
They charge us with keeping fasts of our own ;
with prolonging our Stations generally into the
evening ; with obser\ang xerophagies likewise,
keeping our food unmoistened by any flesh, and
by any juiciness, and by any kind of specially
succulent fruit ; and with not eating or drinking
anything with a winey flavour ; also with absti-
nence from the bath, congruent with our dry
diet. They are therefore constantly reproaching
us with NOVELTY ; concerning the unlawfulness
of which they lay down a prescriptive rule, that
either it must be adjudged heresy, if (the point
in dispute) is a human presumption ; or else
pronounced pseudo-prophecy, if it is a spiritual
declaration ; provided that, either way, we who
reclaim hear (sentence of) anathema.

CHAP. II. ARGUMENTS OF THE PSYCHICS, DRAWN

FROM THE LAW, THE GOSPEL, THE ACTS, THE
EPISTLES, AND HEATHENISH PRACTICES.

For, SO far as pertains to fasts, they oppose to
us the definite days appointed by God : as when,
in Leviticus, the Lord enjoins upon Moses the
tenth day of the seventh month (as) a day of


3 [Which is a note of time, not unimportant.]


ON FASTING.


lO-


atonement, saying, " Holy shall be to you the
day, and ye shall vex your souls ; and every soul
which shall not have been vexed in that day
shall be exterminated from his people." ' At all
events, in the Gospel they think that those days
were definitely appointed for fasts in which "the
Bridegroom was taken away ; " ^ and that these
are now the only legitimate days for Christian
fasts, the legal and prophetical antiquities having
been abolished : for wherever it suits their wishes,
they recognise what is the meaning of " the Law
and the prophets until John."^ Accordingly,
(they think) that, with regard to the future,
fasting was to be indifferently observed, by the
New Discipline, of choice, not of command,
according to the times and needs of each indi-
vidual : that this, withal, had been the observ-
ance of the aposdes, imposing (as they did) no
other yoke of definite fasts to be observed by all
generally, nor similariy of Stations either, which
(they think) have withal days of their own (the
fourth and sixth days of the week), but yet take
a wide range according to individual judgment,
neither subject to the law of a given precept, nor
(to be protracted) beyond the last hour of the
day, since even prayers the ninth hour generally
concludes, after Peter's example, which is re-
corded in the Acts. Xerophagies, however, (they
consider) the novel name of a studied duty, and
very much akin to heathenish superstition, like
the abstemious rigours which purify an Apis, an
Isis, and a Magna Mater, by a restriction laid
upon certain kinds of food ; whereas faith, free
in Christ,-* owes no abstinence from particular
meats to the Jewish Law even, admitted as it has
been by the apostle once for all to the whole
range of the meat-markets — (the apostle, I
say), that detester of such as, in like manner as
they prohibit marrying, so bid us abstain from
meats created by God.*" And accordingly (they
think) us to have been even then prenoted as
" in the latest times departing from the faith,
giving heed to spirits which seduce the world,
having a conscience inburnt with doctrines of
liars."'' (Inburnt?) With what fires, prithee?
The fires, I ween, which lead us to repeated
contracting of nuptials and daily cooking of din-
ners ! Thus, too, they affirm that we share with
the Galatians the piercing rebuke (of the apos-
tle), as "observers of days, and of months, and
of years." ^ Meantime they hurl in our teeth
the fact that Isaiah withal has authoritatively
declared, " Not such a fast hath the Lord elect-
ed," that is, not abstinence from food, but the


works of righteousness, which he there ap-
pends : 9 and that the Lord Himself in the Gos-
pel has given a compendious answer to every
kind of scrupulousness in regard to food ; " that
not by such things as are introduced into the
mouth is a man defiled, but by such as are pro-
duced out of the mouth ; " '° while Himself withal
was wont to eat and drink till He made Himself
noted thus ; " Behold, a gormandizer and a
drinker : " " (finally), that so, too, does the apos-
tle teach that " food commendeth us not to God ;
since we neither abound if we eat, nor lack if
we eat not." '^

By the instrumentalities of these and similar
passages, they subtlely tend at last to such a
point, that every one who is somewhat prone to
appetite finds it possible to regard as superfluous,
and not so very necessary, the duties of absti-
nence from, or diminution or delay of, food, since
" God," forsooth, " prefers the works of justice
and of innocence." And we know the quahty
of the hortatory addresses of carnal conven-
iences, how easy it is to say, " I must believe
with my whole heart ; '^ I must love God, and
my neighbour as myself : "* for ' on these two pre-
cepts the whole Law hangeth, and the prophets,'
not on the emptiness of my lungs and intestines."

CHAP. III. THE PRINCIPLE OF FASTING TRACED

BACK TO ITS EARLIEST SOURCE.

Accordingly we are bound to affirm, before
proceeding further, this (principle), which is in
danger of being secretly subverted ; (namely),
of what value in the sight of God this " empti-
ness " you speak of is : and, first of all, whence
has proceeded the rationale itself of earning the
favour of God in this way. For the necessity of
the observance will then be acknowledged, when
the authority of a rationale, to be dated back
from the very beginning, shall have shone out to
view.

x^dam had received from God the law of not
tasting " of the tree of recognition of good and
evil," with the doom of death to ensue upon
tasting. '5 However, even (Adam) himself at that
time, reverting to the condition of a Psychic
after the spiritual ecstasy in which he had pro-
phetically interpreted that " great sacrament " '^
with reference to Christ and the Church, and no
longer being " capable of the things which were
the Spirit's," '^ yielded more readily to his belly
than to God, heeded the meat rather than the
mandate, and sold salvation for his gullet ! He


' Lev. xvi. 29, xxiii. 26-29.

2 Matt. ix. 14, 15; Mark li. 18-20; Luke v. 33-35.

3 Luke xvi 16; Matt. xi. 13.

* Comp. Gal. V. I.

S Comp. I Cor. x. 25.
' Comp. I Tim. iv. 3.
1 So Oehler punctuates. The reference is to t Tim. iv. i,

* See Gal iv. 10; the v^'ords icai Katpovs TertuUian omits.


9 See Isa. Iviii. 3-7.

1° See Matt. xv. 11 : Mark vii. 15.

" Matt, xi 19; Luke vii. 34.

12 I Cor. viii. 8.

'3 Rom. x. 10.

u Comp. Matt. xxii. 37-40, and the parallel passages.

15 See Gen. ii 16, 17.

16 Comp. Eph. v. 32 with Gen. ii. 23, 24.

17 See I Cor. ii. 14.


I04


ON FASTING.


ate, in short, and perished ; saved (as he would)
else (have been), if he had preferred to fast
from one little tree : so that, even from this
early date, animal faith may recognise its own
seed, deducing from thence onward its appetite
for carnalities and rejection of spiritualities. I
hold, therefore, that from the very beginning the
murderous gullet was to be punished with the
torments and penalties of hunger. Even if God
had enjoined no preceptive fasts, still, by point-
ing out the source whence Adam was slain. He
who had demonstrated the offence had left to
my intelligence the remedies for the offence.
Unbidden, I would, in such ways and at such
times as I might have been able, have habitually
accounted food as poison, and taken the anti-
dote, hunger ; through which to purge the pri-
mordial cause of death — a cause transmitted to
me also, concurrently with my very generation ;
certain that God willed that whereof He nilled
the contrary, and confident enough that the care
of continence will be pleasvng to Him by whom
I should have understood that the crime of in-
continence had been condemned. Further :
since He Himself both commands fasting, and
calls "a soul ' wholly shattered" — properly, of
course, by straits of diet — "a sacrifice ; " who
will any longer doubt that of all dietary macera-
tions the rationale has been this, that by a re-
newed interdiction of food and observation of
precept the primordial sin might now be expi-
ated, in order that man may make God satisfac-
tion through the self-same causative material
through which he had offended, that is, through
interdiction of food ; and thus, in emulous wise,
hunger might rekindle, just as satiety had extin-
guished, salvation, contemning for the sake of
one ////lawful more lawful (gratifications) ?

CHAP. rV. — THE OBJECTION IS RAISED, WHY, THEN,
WAS THE LIMIT OF LAWFUL FOOD EXTENDED
AFTER THE FLOOD? THE ANSWER TO IT.

This rationale was constantly kept in the eye
of the providence of God — modulating all
things, as He does, to suit the exigencies of the
times — lest any from the opposite side, with the
view of demolishing our proposition, should say :
"Why, in that case, did not God forthwith insti-
tute some definite restriction upon food? nay,
rather, why did He withal enlarge His permis-
sion? For, at the beginning indeed, it had only
been the food of herbs and trees which He had
assigned to man : ' Behold, I have given you all
grass fit for sowing, seeding seed, which is upon
the earth ; and every tree which hath in itself
the fruit of seed fit for sowing shall be to you
for food.' 2 Afterwards, however, after enumer-
ating to Noah the subjection (to him) of 'all


The reference is to Ps. li. 17 (in LXX. Ps. I. 19).
Gen. i. 29.


beasts of the earth, and fowls of the heaven, and
things moving on earth, and the fish of the sea,
and every creeping thing,' He says, 'They shall
be to you for food : just like grassy vegetables
have I given (them) you universally : but flesh
in the blood of its own soul shall ye not eat.' 3
For even by this very fact, that He exempts
from eating that flesh only the ' soul ' of which
is not out-shed through ' blood,' it is manifest
that He has conceded the use of all other flesh."
To this we reply, that it was not suitable for man
to be burdened with any further special law of
abstinence, who so recently showed himself una-
ble to tolerate so light an interdiction — of one
single fruit, to wit ; that, accordingly, having had
the rein relaxed, he was to be strengthened by
his very liberty ; that equally after the deluge, in
the /rformation of the human race, (as before
it), one law — of abstaining from blood — was
sufficient, the use of all things else being al-
lowed. For the Lord had already shown His
judgment through the deluge ; had, moreover,
likewise issued a comminatory warning through
the " requisition of blood from the hand of a
brother, and from the hand of every beast." ^
And thus, preministering the justice of judgment,
He issued the materials of liberty ; preparing
through allowance an undergrowth of discipline ;
permitting all things, with a view to take some
away; meaning to "exact more" if He had
" committed more ; " 5 to command abstinence
since He had foresent indulgence : in order that
(as we have said) the primordial sin might be
the more expiated by the operation of a greater
abstinence in the (midst of the) opportunity of
a greater licence.

CHAP. V. PROCEEDING TO THE HISTORY OF ISRAEL,

TERTULLIAN SHOWS THAT APPETITE WAS AS CON-
SPICUOUS AMONG THEIR SINS AS IN ADAM'S CASE.
THEREFORE THE RESTRAINTS OF THE LEVITICAL
LA\y WERE IMPOSED.

At length, when a familiar people began to be
chosen by God to Himself, and the restoration
of man was able to be essayed, then all the laws
and disciplines were imposed, even such as cur-
tailed food ; certain things being prohibited as
unclean, in order that man, by observing a per-
petual abstinence in certain particulars, might at
last the more easily tolerate absolute fasts. For
the first People had withal reproduced the first
man's crime, being found more prone to their
belly than to God, when, plucked out from the
harshness of Egyptian servitude " by the mighty
hand and sublime arm " ^ of God, they were seen
to be its lord, destined to the " land flowing with


3 See Gen. ix. 2-5 (in LXX.).
■* See Gen. i.\. 5, 6.

5 See Luke xii. 48.

6 Comp. Ps. cx.x.wi. 12 (in LXX. cxxxv.


ON FASTING.


105


milk and honey ; • but forthwith, stumbled at the
surrounding spectacle of an incopious desert,
sighing after the lost enjoyments of Egyptian
satiety, they murmured against Moses and Aaron :
" Would that we had been smitten to the heart
by the Lord, and perished in the land of Egypt,
when we were wont to sit over our jars of flesh
and eat bread unto the full ! How leddest thou
us out into these deserts, to kill this assembly by
famine ? " ^ From the self-same belly-preference
were they destined (at last) to deplore ^ (the fate
of) the self-same leaders of their own and eye-
witnesses of (the power of) God, whom, by their
regretful hankering after flesh, and their recollec-
tion of their Egyptian plenties, they were ever
exacerbating : " Who shall feed us with flesh ?
there have come into our mind the fish which in
Egypt we were wont to eat freely, and the cu-
cumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the
onions, and the garlic. But now our soul is arid :
nought save manna do our eyes see ! " * Thus
used they, too, (like the Psychics), to find the
angelic bread 5 of xerophagy displeasing : they
preferred the fragrance of garlic and onion to
that of heaven. And therefore from men so
ungrateful all that was more pleasing and appe-
tizing was withdrawn, for the sake at .once of
punishing gluttony and exercising continence,
that the former might be condemned, the latter
practicaUy learned.

CH-^P. VI. THE PHYSICAL TENDENCIES OF FAST-
ING AND FEEDING CONSIDERED. THE CASES OF
MOSES AND ELIJAH.

Now, if there has been temerity in our retra-
cing to primordial experiences the reasons for
God's having laid, and our duty (for the sake
of God) to lay, restrictions upon food, let us
consult common conscience. Nature herself
will plainly tell with what qualities she is ever
wont to find us endowed when she sets us, de/ore
taking food and drink, with our saliva still in a
virgin state, to the transaction of matters, by
the sense especially whereby things divine are
handled ; whether (it be not) with a mind much
more vigorous, with a heart much more alive,
than when that whole habitation of our interior
man, stuffed with meats, inundated with wines,
fermenting for the purpose of excremental secre-
tion, is already being turned into a premedita-
tory of privies, (a premeditatory) where, plainly,
nothing is so proximately supersequent as the
savouring of lasciviousness. "The people did
eat and drink, and they arose to play." ^ Under-
stand the modest language of Holy Scripture :


' See Ex. iii. 8.

^ See Ex. xvi. 1-3.

^ Comp. Num. xx. 1-12 with Ps. cvi. 31-33 (in LXX. cv. 31-33).

* See Num. xi. 1-6.

S See Ps. Ixxviii. 25 (in LXX. Ixxvii. 25).

* Comp. I Cor. x. 7 with Ex. xxxii. 6.


" play," unless it had been immodest, it would
not have reprehended. On the other hand, how
many are there who are mindful of religion, when
the seats of the memory are occupied, the limbs
of wisdom impeded? No one will suitably, fitly,
usefully, remember God at that time when it is
customary for a man to forget his own self. All
discipline food either slays or else wounds. I
am a liar, if the Lord Himself, when upbraiding
Israel with forgetfulness, does not impute the
cause to " fulness : " " (My) beloved is waxen
thick, and fat, and distent, and hath quite for-
saken God, who made him, and hath gone away
from the Lord his Saviour." 7 In short, in the
self-same Deuteronomy, when bidding precaution
to be taken against the self-same cause. He says :
" Lest, when thou shalt have eaten, and drunken,
and built excellent houses, thy sheep and oxen
being multiplied, and (thy) silver and gold, thy
heart be elated, and thou be forgetful of the
Lord thy God." ^ To the corrupting power of
riches He made the enormity of edacity ante-
cedent, for which riches themselves are the pro-
curing agents.9 Through them, to wit, had " the
heart of the People been made thick, lest they
should see with the eyes, and hear with the ears,
and understand with a heart " '° obstructed by
the " fats " of which He had expressly forbidden
the eating, " teaching man not to be studious
of the stomach.'^

On the other hand, he whose " heart " was
habitually found " lifted up " '^ rather than fattened
up, who in forty days and as many nights main-
tained a fast above the power of human nature,
while spiritual faith subministered strength (to
his body), I"* both saw with his eyes God's glory,
and heard with his ears God's voice, and under-
stood with his heart God's law : while He taught
him even then (by experience) that man liveth
not upon bread alone, but upon every word of
God ; in that the People, though fatter than he,
could not constantly contemplate even ]Moses
himself, fed as he had been upon God, nor his
leanness, sated as it had been with His glory ! 'S
Deservedly, therefore, even while in the flesh,
did the Lord show Himself to him, the colleague
of His own fasts, no less than to Elijah."" For
Elijah withal had, by this fact primarily, that he
had imprecated a famine, '? already sufficiently
devoted himself to fasts : " The Lord liveth,"
he said, " before whom I am standing in His


7 See Deut xxxii. 15.

' See Deut. viii. 12-14.

9 Comp. Eccles. vi. 7; Prov. xvi. 26. (The LXX. render the
latter quotation very differently from the Eng. ver. or the Vulg.)
■° See Isa. vi. 10; John xii. 40; Acts xxviii. 26, 27.
" See Lev. iii. 17.

'2 See Deut. viii. 3; Matt. iv. 4: Luke iv. 4.

'3 See Ps. Ixxxvi. 4 (in LXX. ixxxv. 4) ; Lam. iii. 41 (in LXX.
iii. 40).

'■* Twice over. See Ex. xxiv. 18 and xxxiv. 28: Deut. ix. 11, 25.

'5 See Ex. xxxiii. 18, 19, with xxxiv. 4-9, 29-35.

■6 Sec Matt. xvii. 1-13; Mark ix. 1-13; Luke ix. 28-36.

"■ Seejas. v. 17.


io6


ON FASTING.


sight, if there shall be dew in these years,
and rain-shower." ' Subsequently, fleeing from
threatening Jezebel, after one single (meal of)
food and drink, which he had found on being
awakened by an angel, he too himself, in a space
of forty days and nights, his belly empty, his
mouth dry, arrived at Mount Horeb ; where,
when he had made a cave his inn, with how
familiar a meeting with God was he received ! ^
"What (doest) thou, Elijah, here?"^ Much
more friendly was this voice than, " Adam, where
art thou?"+ For the latter voice was uttering
a threat to a fed man, the former soothing a
fasting one. Such is the prerogative of circum-
scribed food, that it makes God tent-fellow s with
man — peer, in truth, with peer ! For if the
eternal God will not hunger, as He testifies
through Isaiah,*^ this will be the time for man to
be made equal with God, when he lives without
food.

CHAP. VII. FURTHER EXAMPLES FROM THE OLD

TESTAMENT IN FAVOUR ©F FASTING.

And thus we have already proceeded to ex-
amples, in order that, by its profitable efficacy,
we may unfold the powers of this duty which
reconciles God, even when angered, to man.

Israel, before their gathering together by Sam-
uel on occasion of the drawing of water at Miz-
peh, had sinned ; but so immediately do they
wash away the sin by a fast, that the peril of bat-
tle is dispersed by them simultaneously (with the
water on the ground). At the very moment
when Samuel was offering the holocaust (in no
way do we learn that the clemency of God was
more procured than by the abstinence of the
people), and the aliens were advancing to bat-
tle, then and there " the Lord thundered with a
mighty voice upon the aliens, and they were
thrown into confusion, and fell in a mass in the
sight of Israel ; and the men of Israel went
forth out of Mizpeh, and pursued the aliens, and
smote them unto Bethor," — the unfed (chasing)
the fed, the unarmed the armed. Such will be
the strength of them who " fast to God." ^ For
such, Heaven fights. You have (before you) a
condition upon which (divine) defence will be
granted, necessary even to spiritual wars.

Similarly, when the king of the Assyrians, Sen-
nacherib, after already taking several cities, was
volleying blasphemies and menaces against Israel
through Rabshakeh, nothing else (but fasting)
diverted him from his purpose, and sent him into
the Ethiopias. After that, what else swept away
by the hand of the angel an hundred eighty and


1 See I Kings xvii. i (in LXX. 3 Kings ib.).

2 See I Kings xix. 1-8. But he took t^vo meals : see •

3 Vers. 9, 13.

4 Gen. iii. 9 (in LXX.).

5 Comp. Matt xvii. 4; Mark ix. 5; Luke ix. 33.

6 See-Js. xl. 28 in LXX. In E. V., " fainteth not."


four thousand from his army than Hezekiah the
king's humiliation? if it is true, (as it is), that
on hearing the announcement of the harshness
of the foe, he rent his garment, put on sackcloth,
and bade the elders of the priests, similarly hab-
ited, approach God through Isaiah — fasting be-
ing, of course, the escorting attendant of their
prayers.^ For peril has no time for food, nor
sackcloth any care for satiety's refinements.
Hunger is ever the attendant of mourning, just
as gladness is an accessory of fulness.

Through this attendant of mourning, and (this)
hunger, even that sinful state, Nineveh, is freed
from the predicted ruin. For repentance for
sins had sufficiently commended the fast, keep-
ing it up in a space of three days, starving out
even the cattle with which God was not angry.9
Sodom also, and Gomorrah, would have escaped
if they had fasted. '° This remedy even Ahab ac-
knowledges. When, after his transgression and
idolatry, and the slaughter of Naboth, slain by
Jezebel on account of his vineyard, Elijah had
upbraided him, " How hast thou killed, and pos-
sessed the inheritance? In the place where
dogs had licked up the blood of Naboth, thine
also shall they lick up," — he " abandoned him-
self, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted,
and slept in sackcloth. And then (came) the
word of the Lord unto Elijah, Thou hast seen
how Ahab hath shrunk in awe from my face : for
that he hath shrunk in awe I will not bring the
hurt upon (him) in his own days ; but in the
days of his son I will bring it upon (him) " —
(his son), who was not to fast." Thus a God-
ward fast is a work of reverential awe : and by
its means also Hannah the wife of Elkanah mak-
ing suit, barren as she had been beforetime,
easily obtained from God the filling of her belly,
empty of food, with a son, ay, and a prophet.'^

Nor is it merely change of nature, or aversion
of perils, or obliteration of sins, but likewise the
recognition of mysteries, which fasts will merit
from God. Look at Daniel's example. About
the dream of the King of Babylon all the soph-
ists are troubled : they affirm that, without ex-
ternal aid, it cannot be discovered by human
skill. Daniel alone, trusting to God, and know-
ing what would tend to the deserving of God's
favour, requires a space of three days, fasts with
his fraternity, and — his prayers thus commended
— is instructed throughout as to the order and
signification of the dream ; quarter is granted
to the tyrant's sophists ; God is glorified ; Dan-
iel is honoured ; destined as he was to receive,
even subsequently also, no less a fdvour of God
in the first year of King Darius, when, after care-


6,7.1


8 See 2 Kings xviii. xix.; 2 Chron. xxxii.; Isa xxx

9 See Jonah iii. Comp. de Pa., c. x.

■° See Ezek. xvi. 49; Matt. xi. 23, 24; Luke x. 12-1
•' See I Kings xxi. (in the LXX. it is 3 Kings xx.)
'- See I Sam. '


(m tne laa. it is 3 is.ings xx .;.
2, 7-20, iii. 20 (in LXX. i Kings).


ON FASTING.


107


ful and repeated meditation upon the times pre- 1 tism, the honourable gift of the Holy Spirit, to-
dieted by Jeremiah, he set his face to God in gether with the gift of prophecy besides, had
fasts, and sackcloth, and ashes. For the angel, hastened to descend, we see that his fasts had
withal, sent to him, immediately professed this ; been heard. '° I think, moreover, that the apos-


to be the cause of the Divine approbation : " I
am come," he said, " to demonstrate to thee,
since thou art pitiable "■— by fasting, to wit.
If to God he was "pitiable," to the lions in the
den he was formidable, where, six days fasting,
he had breakfast provided him by an angel.^

CHAP. VIII. EX.4.MPLES OF A SIMILAR KIND FROM

THE NEW.

We produce, too, our remaining (evidences) .
For we now hasten to modern proofs.

On the threshold of the Gospel,^ Anna the
prophetess, daughter of Phanuel, "who both
recognised the infant Lord, and preached many
things about Him to such as were expecting the
redemption of Israel," after the pre-eminent dis-
tinction of long-continued and single-husbanded
widowhood, is additionally graced with the testi-
mony of " fastings " also ; pointing out, as she
does, what the duties are which should charac-
terize attendants of the Church, and (pointing
out, too, the fact) that Christ is understood by
none more than by the once married and often
fastin


By and by the Lord Himself consecrated His | on the score of his paltry body, to boot !)


tie too, in the Second of Corinthians, among his
labours, and perils, and hardships, after "hunger
and thirst," enumerates "fasts" also "very
many." "

CHAP. IX. FROM FASTS ABSOLUTE (jEJUNIa)

TERTULLIAN COMES TO PARTLVL ONES AND
XEROPHAGIES.

This principal species in the category of diet-
ary restriction may already afford a prejudgment
concerning the inferior operations of abstinence
also, as being themselves too, in proportion to
their measure, useful or necessary. For the
exception of certain kinds from use of food is
a partial fast. Let us therefore look into the
question of the novelty or vanity of xerophagies,
to see whether in them too we do not find an
operation alike of most ancient as of most effi-
cacious religion.

I return to Daniel and his brethren, prefer-
ring as they did a diet of vegetables and the
beverage of water to the royal dishes and de-
canters, and being found as they were therefore

more handsome " (lest any be apprehensive

be-


own baptism (and, in His own, that of all) by
fasts ;■♦ having (the power) to make "loaves out
of stones," s ay, to make Jordan flow with wine
perchance, if He had been such a " glutton and
toper." ^ Nay, rather, by the virtue of con-
temning food He was initiating " the new man "
into " a severe handling " of " the old," ^ that
He might show that (new man) to the devil,
again seeking to tempt him by means of food,
(to be) too strong for the whole power of
hunger,


sides being spiritually cultured into the bargain.'^
For God gave to the young men knowledge and
understanding in every kind of literature, and to
Daniel in every word, and in dreams, and in
every kind of wisdom ; which (wisdom) was to
make him wise in this very thing also, — namely,
by what means the recognition of mysteries was
to be obtained from God. Finally, in the third
year of Cyrus king of the Persians, when he had
fallen into careful and repeated meditation on a
vision, he provided another form of humiliation.


Thereafter He prescribed to fasts a law — that 1 <' in those days," he says, "I Daniel was mourn


they are to be performed " without sadness
for why should what is salutary be sad? He
taught likewise that fasts are to be the weapons
for battling with the more direful demons : 9 for
what wonder if the same operation is the instru-
ment of the iniquitous spirit's egress as of the
Holy Spirit's ingress? Finally, granting that
upon the centurion Cornelius, even before bap-


' Dan. ix. 23, x. 11. ,,„.■,, „

2 See Bel and the Dragon (in LXX.) vers. 31-39- . Pitiable
appears to be Tertullian's rendering of what in the E. V. is rendered
" greatly beloved." Rig. (in Oehler) renders: " of how great com-

Eassion thou hast attained the favour ;"_ but surely _that overlooks the
ict that ihe Latin is " miscrabilis es," not " sis."

3 See Luke ii. 36-38. See lie Monog., c. viii.

* Matt. iv. 12; Luke iv. 1,2; comp. de Bapt., c. xx.

5 See Matt. iv. 3; Luke iv. 3.

6 See c ii.

7 Comp. Eph. iv. 22, 23: and, for the meaning of sugillationem
("severe handling"), comp. i Cor. ix. 27, where St. Paul's word
uircoTTia^u (= " I smite under the eye," Eng. ver. " I keep under ")
is perhaps exactly equivalent in meaning.

8 Matt. vi. 16-18.

9 See Matt. xvii. 21 ; Mark ix. 29.


ing during three weeks : pleasant bread I ate
not ; flesh and wine entered not into my mouth ;
with oil I was not anointed ; until three weeks
were consummated : " which being elapsed, an
angel was sent out (from God), addressing him
on this wise : " Daniel, thou art a man pitiable ;
fear not : since, from the first day on which thou
gavest thy soul to recogitation and to humilia-
tion before God, thy word hath been heard, and
I am entered at thy word." '^ Thus the "pitia-
ble " spectacle and the humiliation of xeroph-
agies expel fear, and attract the ears of God,
and make men masters of secrets.

I return likewise to Elijah. When the ravens
had been wont to satisfy him with " bread and


10 See Acts x. 44-46, 1-4, and 30.

" 2 Cor. xi. 27.

1= Dan. i.

'•5 See Dan. x. 1-3, 5, 12.


io8


ON FASTING.


flesh r ' why was it that afterwards, at Beersheba
of Judea, that certain angel, after rousing him
from sleep, offered him, beyond doubt, bread
alotje, and water ? ^ Had ravens been wanting,
to feed him more liberally? or had it been diffi-
cult to the "angel" to carry away from some
part of the banquet-room of the king some at-
tendant with his amply-furnished waiter, and
transfer him to Elijah, just as the breakfast of
the reapers was carried into the den of lions and
presented to Daniel in his hunger? But it be-
hoved that an example should be set, teaching us
that, at a time of pressure and persecution and
whatsoever difficulty, we must live on xeroph-
agies. With such food did David express his
own exomologesis ; " eating ashes indeed as it
were bread," that is, bread dry and foul like
ashes : " mingling, moreover, his drink with
weeping " — of course, instead of wine.^ For
abstinence from wine withal has honourable
badges of its own : (an abstinence) which had
dedicated Samuel, and consecrated Aaron, to
God. For of Samuel his mother said : " And
wine and that which is intoxicating shall he not
drink : " ■* for such was her condition withal when
praying to God. 5 And the' Lord said to Aaron :
" \Vine and spirituous liquor shall ye not drink,
thou and thy son after thee, whenever ye shall
enter the tabernacle, or ascend unto the sacri-
ficial altar ; and ye shall not die." ^ So true is
it, that such as shall have ministered in the
Church, being not sober, shall " die." Thus,
too, in recent times He upbraids Israel : " And
ye used to give my sanctified ones wine to
drink." And, moreover, this limitation upon
drink is the portion of xerophagy. Anyhow,
wherever abstinence from wine is either exacted
by God or vowed by man, there let there be
understood likewise a restriction of food fore-
furnishing a formal type to drink. For the
quality of the drink is correspondent to that of
the eating. It is not probable that a man should
sacrifice to God half his appetite ; temperate in
waters, and intemperate in meats. ^Vhether,
moreover, the apostle had any acquaintance
with xerophagies — (the apostle) who had re-
peatedly practised greater rigours, " hunger, and
thirst, and fasts many," who had forbidden
"drunkennesses and revellings " ^ — we have a
sufficient evidence even from the case of his dis-
ciple Timotheus ; whom when he admonishes,
" for the sake of his stomach and constant weak-
nesses," to use "a little wine," ^ from which he
was abstaining not from rule, but from devotion


1 See I Kings xvii. (in LXX. 3 Kings xvii.) 1-6.

2 I Kings xix. 3-7.

3 See Ps. cii. (in LXX. ci.) 9.

4 1 Sam. (in LXX. i Kings) i. 11.

5 I Sam. i. 15.

6 See Lev. x. 9.

7 See Rom. xiii. 13.
^ I Tim. V. 23.


— else the custom would rather have been bene-
ficial to his stomach — by this very fact he has
advised abstinence from wine as " worthy of
God," which, on a ground of necessity, he has
rt'/.ysuaded.

CHAP. X. OF STATIONS, AND OF THE HOURS OF

PRAYER.

In like manner they censure on the count of
novelty our Stations as being enjoined ; some,
moreover, (censure them) too as being prolonged
habitually too late, saying that this duty also
ought to be observed of free choice, and not
continued beyond the ninth hour, — (deriving
their rule), of course, from their own practice.
Well : as to that which pertains to the question
of injunction, I will once for all give a reply to
suit all causes. Now, (turning) to the point
which is proper to this particular cause — con-
cerning the limit of time, I mean — I must first
demand from themselves whence they derive
this prescriptive law for concluding Stations at
the ninth hour. If it is from the fact that we
read that Peter and he who was with him entered
the temple "at the ninth (hour), the hour of
prayer," who will prove to me that they had that
day been performing a Station, so as to interpret
the ninth hour as the hour for the conclusion and
discharge of the Station ? Nay, but you would
more easily find that Peter at the sixth hour had,
for the sake of taking food, gone up first on the
roof to pray ; 9 so that the sixth hour of the day
may the rather be made the limit to this duty,
which (in Peter's case) was apparently to finish
that duty, after prayer. Further : since in the
self-same commentary of Luke the third hour is
demonstrated as an hour of prayer, about which
hour it was that they who had received the initia-
tory gift of the Holy Spirit were held for drunk-
ards ; '° and the sixth, at which Peter went up on
the roof; and the ninth, at which they entered
the temple : why should we not understand that,
with absolutely perfect indifference, we must
pray " always, and everywhere, and at every time ;
yet still that these three hours, as being more
marked in things human — (hours) which divide
the day, which distinguish businesses, which re-
echo in the public ear — have likewise ever been
of special solemnity in divine prayers ? A per-
suasion which is sanctioned also by the corrobo-
rative fact of Daniel praying thrice in the day ; '^
of course, through exception of certain stated
hours, no other, moreover, than the more marked
and subsequently apostolic (hours) — the third,
the sixth, the ninth. And hence, accordingly,
I shall affirm that Peter too had been led rather


9 See Acts x. 9.
'° Acts ii. 1-4, 13, 15.

" The reference is to Eph. vi. 18 ; Col. iv. 2 ;
Luke xviii. I.

J'' See Dan. vi. 10.


ON FASTING.


109


by ancient usage to the observance of the ninth
hour, praying at the third specific interval, (the
interval) of final prayer.

These (arguments), moreover, (we have ad-
vanced) for their sakes who think that they are
acting in conformity with Peter's model, (a
model) of which they are ignorant : not as if we
slighted the ninth hour, (an hour) which, on the
fourth and sixth days of the week, we most highly
honour ; but because, of those things which are
observed on the ground of tradition, we are
bound to adduce so much the more worthy rea-
son, that they lack the authority of Scripture,
until by some signal celestial gift they be either
confirmed or else corrected. " And if," says
(the apostle), "there are matters which ye are
ignorant about, the Lord will reveal to you."'
Accordingly, setting out of the question the con-
firmer of all such things, the Paraclete, the guide
of universal truth,- inquire whether there be not
a worthier reason adduced among us for the ob-
serving of the ninth hour; so that this reason
(of ours) must be attributed even to Peter if he
observed a Station at the time in question. For
(the practice) comes from the death of the
Lord ; which death albeit it behoves to be com-
memorated always, without difference of hours ;
yet are we at that time more impressively com-
mended to its commemoration, according to the
actual (meaning of the) name of Station. For
even soldiers, though never unmindful of their
military oath, yet pay a greater deference to Sta-
tions. And so the "pressure" must be main-
tained up to that hour in which the orb — involved
from the sixth hour in a general darkness — per-
formed for its dead Lord a sorrowful act of duty ;
so that we too may then return to enjoyment
when the universe regained its sunshine.^ If
this savours more of the spirit of Christian reli- j
gion, while it celebrates more the glory of Christ,
I am equally able, from the self-same order of
events, to fix the condition oi late protraction of
the Station ; (namely), that we are to fast till a
late hour, awaiting the time of the Lord's sepul-
ture, when Joseph took down and entombed the
body which he had requested. Thence (it fol-
lows) that it is even irreligious for the flesh of
the servants to take refreshment before their
Lord did.

But let it suffice to have thus far joined issue
on the argumentative challenge ; rebutting, as I
have done, conjectures by conjectures, and yet
(as I think) by conjectures more worthy of a
believer. Let us see whether any such (princi-
ple) drawn from the ancient times takes us under
its patronage.

In Exodus, was not that position of Moses,


' See Phil. iii. 15,

^ John xiv. 26, xvi. 13.

3 See Matt, xxvii. 45-54 ; Mark xvi. 33-39 ; Luke xxiii. 44-47.


battling against Amalek by prayers, maintained
as it was perseveringly even till "sunset," a "late
Station ?"■♦ Think we that Joshua the son of
Nun, when warring down the Amorites, had
breakfasted on that day on which he ordered the
very elements to keep a Station ?5 The sun
"stood" in Gibeon, and the moon in Ajalon ;
the sun and the moon " stood in station until the
People was avenged of his enemies, and the sun
stood in the mid heaven." When, moreover,
(the sun) did draw toward his setting and the
end of the one day, there was no such day be-
foretime and in the latest time (of course, (no
day) so long), "that God," says (the writer),
"should hear a man" — (a man,) to be sure,
the sun's peer, so long persistent in his duty —
a Station longer even than late.

At all events, Saul himself, when engaged in
battle, manifestly enjoined this duty : " Cursed
(be) the man who shall have eaten bread until
evening, until I avenge me on mine enemy ; "
and his whole people tasted not (food), and
(yet) the whole earth was breakfasting ! So
solemn a sanction, moreover, did God confer on
the edict which enjoined that Station, that Jona-
than the son of Saul, although it had been in
ignorance of the fast having been appointed till
a late hour that he had allowed himself a taste
of honey, was both presently convicted, by lot, of
sin, and with difficulty exempted from punish-
ment through the prayer of the People : '' for he
had been convicted of gluttony, although of a
simple kind. But withal Daniel, in the first year
of King Darius, when, fasting in sackcloth and
ashes, he was doing exomologesis to God, said :
" And while I was still speaking in prayer, be-
hold, the man whom I had seen in dreams at
the beginning, swiftly flying, approached me, as
it were, at the hour of the evening sacrifice." ^
This will be a " late " Station which, fasting until
the evening, sacrifices a fatter (victim of) prayer
to God ! «

CHAP XI. — OF THE RESPECT DUE TO " HUM.AN AU-
THORITY ; " AND OF THE CHARGES OF " HERESY"
AND "PSEUDO-PROPHECY."

But all these (instances) I believe to be un-
known to those who are in a state of agitation at
our proceedings ; or else known by the reading
alone, not by careful study as well ; in accord-
ance with the greater bulk of "the unskilled "5
among the overboastful multitude, to wit, of the
Psychics. This is why we have steered our
course straight through the different individual
species of fastings, of xerophagies, of stations :


♦ See Ex. xvii. 8-12.
5 See Josh. x. 12-14.
<> See I Sam. (in LXX. i Kings) xiv. 24-45-

7 See Dan. ix. i, 3, 4, 20, 21.

8 Comp. de Or..c. xxviii.

9 Comp 2 Pet. iii, 16.


no


ON FASTING.


in order that, while we recount, according to the
materials which we find in either Testament,
the advantages which the dutiful observances of
abstinence from, or curtailment or deferment
of, food confer, we may refute those who invali-
date these things as empty observances ; and
again, while we similarly point out in what rank
of religious duty they have always had place,
may confute those who accuse them as novelties :
for neither is that novel which has always been,
nor that empty which is useful.

The question, however, still lies before us, that
some of these observances, having been com-
manded by God to man, have constituted this
practice legally binding ; some, offered by man
to God, have discharged some votive obligation.
Still, even a vow, when it has been accepted by
God, constitutes a law for the time to come,
owing to the authority of the Acceptor ; for he
who has given his approbation to a deed, when
done, has given a mandate for its doing thence-
forward. And so from this consideration, again,
the wrangling of the opposite party is silenced,
while they say : " It is either a pseudo-prophecy,
if it is a spiritual voice which institutes these
your solemnities ; or else a heresy, if it is a
human presumption which devises them." For,
while censuring that form in which the ancient
economies ran their course, and at the same time
drawing out of that form arguments to hurl back
(upon us) which the very adversaries of the
ancient economies will in their turn be able to
retort, they will be bound either to reject those
arguments, or else to undertake these proven
duties (which they impugn) : necessarily so ;
chiefly because these very duties (which they
impugn), from whatsoever institutor they are, be
he a spiritual man or merely an ordinary believer,
direct their course to the honour of the same
God as the ancient economies. For, indubitably,
both heresy and pseudo-prophecy will, in the
eyes of us who are '■all priests of one only God
the Creator and of His Christ, be judged by
diversity of divinity : and so far forth I defend
this side indifferently, offering my opponents to
join issue on whatever ground they choose. " It
is the spirit of the devil," you say, O Psychic.
And how is it that he enjoins duties which belong
to our God, and enjoins them to be offered to
none other than our God? Either contend that
the devil works with our God, or else let the
Paraclete be held to be Satan. But you affirm
it is "a human Antichrist:" for by this name I
heretics are called in John.' And how is it that,
whoever he is, he has in (the name of) our
Christ directed these duties toward our Lord ;
whereas withal antichrists have (ever) gone forth
(professedly teaching) towards God, (but) in


' See I John ii i8, 29; 2 John 7-10.


opposition to our Christ? On which side, then,
do you think the Spirit is confirmed as existing
among us ; when He commands, or when He
approves, what our God has always both com-
manded and approved? But you again set up
boundary-posts to God, as with regard to grace,
so with regard to discipline ; as with regard to
gifts, so, too, with regard to solemnities : so that
our observances are supposed to have ceased in
like manner as His benefits ; and you thus deny
that He still continues to impose duties, because,
in this case again, " the Law and the prophets
(were) until John." It remains for you to banish
Him wholly, being, as He is, so far as hes in
you, so otiose.

CHAP. XII. OF THE NEED FOR SOME PROTEST

AGAINST THE PSYCHICS AND THEIR SELF-INDUL-
GENCE.

For, by this time, in this respect as well as
others, "you are reigning in wealth and satiety "^
— not making inroads upon such sins as fasts
diminish, nor feeling need of such revelations as
xerophagies extort, nor apprehending such wars
of your own as Stations dispel. Grant that from
the time of John the Paraclete had grown mute ;
we ourselves would have arisen as prophets to
ourselves, for this cause chiefly : I say not now
to bring down by our prayers God's anger, nor
to obtain his protection or grace ; but to secure
by premunition the moral position of the " latest
times ; "^ enjoining every species of Tairrn'o^po-
vrjrn<;, since the prison must be familiarized to us,
and hunger and thirst practised, and capacity of
enduring as well the absence of food as anxiety
about it acquired : in order that the Christian
may enter into prison in like condition as if he
had (just) come forth of it, — to suffer there not
penalty, but discipline, and not the world's tor-
tures, but his own habitual observances ; and to
go forth out of custody to (the final) conflict
with all the more confidence, having nothing of
sinful false care of the flesh about him, so that
the tortures may not even have material to
work on, since he is cuirassed in a mere dry
skin, and cased in horn to meet the claws, the
succulence of his blood already sent on (heaven-
ward) before him, the baggage as it were of his
soul, — the soul herself withal now hastening
(after it), having already, by frequent fasting,
gained a most intimate knowledge of death !

Plainly, your habit is to fiirnish cookshops in
the prisons to untrustworthy martyrs, for fear
they should miss their accustomed usages, grow
weary of life, (and) be stumbled at the novel
discipline of abstinence ; (a discipline) which
not even the well-known Pristinus — your martyr,


2 I Cor. iv. 8.

3 See the Vulg. in i Tim. iv.
with the Greek in both places.


I ; and comp. there-


ON FASTING.


Ill


no Christian martyr — had ever come in contact
with : he whom — stuffed as he had long been,
thanks to the facilities afforded by the "free cus-
tody " (now in vogue, and) under an obligation,
I suppose, to all the baths (as if they were better
than baptism !), and to all the retreats of volup-
tuousness (as if they were more secret than those
of the Church !), and to all the allurements of
this life (as if they were of more worth than
those of life eternal !), not to be willing to die
— on the very last day of trial, at high noon,
you premedicated with drugged wine as an anti-
dote, and so completely enervated, that on being
tickled — for his intoxication made it feel like
tickling — with a few claws, he was unable any
more to make answer to the presiding officer
interrogadng him "whom he confessed to be
Lord ; " and, being now put on the rack for this
silence, when he could utter nothing but hic-
coughs and belchings, died in the very act of
apostasy ! This is why they who preach sobriety
are " false prophets ; " this why they who prac-
tise it are " heretics ! " AVhy then hesitate to
believe that the Paraclete, whom you deny in a
Montanus, exists in an Apicius ?

CHAP. XIII. — OF THE INCONSISTENCIES OF THE
PSYCHICS.

You lay down a prescription that this faith has
its solemnities " appointed " by the Scriptures
or the tradition of the ancestors ; and that no
further addition in the way of observance must
be added, on account of the unlawfulness of
innovation. Stand on that ground, if you can.
For, behold, I impeach you of fasting besides
on the Paschal-day, beyond the Hmits of those
days in which " the Bridegroom was taken
away ; " and interposing the half-fasts of Sta-
tions ; and you, (I find), sometimes living on
bread and water, when it has seemed meet to
each (so to do). In short, you answer that
" these things are to be done of choice, not of
command." You have changed your ground,
therefore, by exceeding tradition, in undertaking
observances which have not been "appointed."
But what kind of deed is it, to permit to your
own choice what you grant not to the command
of God? Shall human volition have more li-
cence than Divine power? I am mindful that I
am free from the world,"- not from God. Thus
it is my part to perform, without external sugges-
tion thereto, an act of respect to my Lord, it is
His to enjoin. I ought not merely to pay a
willing obedience to Him, but withal to court
Him; for the former I render to His command,
the latter to my own choice.

But it is enough for me that it is a customary
practice for the bishops withal to issue mandates


X. 19; saeculo.


for fasts to the universal commonalty of the
Church ; I do not mean for the special purpose
of collecting contributions of alms, as your beg-
garly fashion has it, but sometimes too from some
particular cause of ecclesiastical solicitude. And
accordingly, if you practise To.TTf.ivo^f>6vr](ji<; at
the bidding of a man's edict, and all unitedly,
how is it that in our case you set a brand upon
the very unity also of our fastings, and xeropha-
gies, and Stations? — unless, perhaps, it is against
the decrees of the senate and the mandates of
the emperors which are opposed to " meetings "
that we are sinning ! The Holy Spirit, when He
was preaching in whatsoever lands He chose,
and through whomsoever He chose, was wont,
from foresight of the imminence either of tempta-
tions to befall the Church, or of plagues to be-
fall the world, in His character of Paraclete
(that is. Advocate for the purpose of winning
over the judge by prayers), to issue mandates
for observances of this nature ; for instance, at
the present time, with the view of practising the
discipline of sobriety and abstinence : we, who
receive Him, must necessarily observe also the
appointments which He then made. Look at
the Jewish calendar, and you will find it nothing
novel that all succeeding posterity guards with
hereditary scrupulousness the precepts given to
the fathers. Besides, throughout the provinces of
Greece there are held in definite localities those
councils gathered out of the universal Churches,
by whose means not only all the deeper ques-
tions are handled for the common benefit, but
the actual representation of the whole Christian
name is celebrated with great veneration. (And
how worthy a thing is this, that, under the au-
spices of faith, men should congregate from all
quarters to Christ ! " See, how good and how
enjoyable for brethren to dwell in unity !"«
This psalm you know not easily how to sing,
except when you are supping with a goodly
company !) But those conclaves first, by the
operations of Stations and fastings, know what
it is " to grieve with the grieving," and thus at
last "to rejoice in company with the rejoicing." 3
If we also, in our diverse provinces, (but) pres-
ent mutually in spirit,-* observe those very so-
lemnities, whose then celebration our present
discourse has been defending, that is the sacra-
mental law.

CHAP. XIV. — REPLY TO THE CHARGE OF " GAL.\TI-
CISM."

Being, therefore, observers of " seasons " for
these things, and of "days, and months, and
years," s we Galaticize. Plainly we do, if we are


2 Ps. cxxxiii. (in LXX. and Vulg. cxxxii.).

3 See Rom. xii. 15.

< Comp. I Cor. V. 3; Col. ii. 5.
5 Comp. Gal. iv. 10.


112


ON FASTING.


observ^ers q{ Jewish ceremonies, of legal solem-
nities : tor those the apostle unteaches, suppress-
ing the continuance of the Old Testament which
has been buried in Christ, and establishing that
of the New. But if there is a new creation in
Christ," our solemnities too will be bound to be
new : else, if the apostle has erased all devotion
absolutely " of seasons, and days, and months,
and years," why do we celebrate the passover by
an annual xoX.d.'aoxi in the fijst month? Why in
\}cvt fifty ensuing days do we spend our time in
all exultation? Why do we devote to Stations
the fourth and sixth days of the week, and to
fasts the ^^ preparation-day ?^^^ Anyhow, you
sometimes continue your Station even over the
Sabbath, — a day never to be kept as a fast ex-
cept at the passover season, according to a reason
elsewhere given. With us, at all events, every
day likewise is celebrated by an ordinary conse-
cration. And it will not, then, be, in the eyes
of the apostle, the differentiati7ig principle —
distinguishing (as he is doing) " things new and
old " ^ — which will be ridiculous ; but (in this
case too) it will be your own unfairness, while
you taunt us with the form of antiquity all the
while you are laying against us the charge of
novelty.

CHAP. XV. — OF THE APOSTLE'S LANGUAGE CON-
CERNING FOOD.

The apostle reprobates likewise such as '' bid
to abstain from meats ; " but he does so from the
foresight of the Holy Spirit, precondemning al-
ready the heretics who would enjoin perpetual
abstinence to the extent of destroying and de-
spising the works of the Creator ; such as I may
find in the person of a Marcion, a Tatian, or a
Jupiter, the Pythagorean heretic of to-day ; not
in the person of the Paraclete. For how limited
is the extent of our " interdiction of meats ! "
Two weeks of xerophagies in the year (and not
the whole of these, — the Sabbaths, to wit, and
the Lord's days, being excepted) we offer to
God ; abstaining from things which we do not
reject, but defer. But further : when writing to
the Romans, the apostle now gives you a home-
thrust, detractors as you are of this observance :
" Do not for the sake of food," he says, " undo^
the work of God." What " work ? " That about
which he says,5 " It is good not to eat flesh, and
not to drink wine : " " for he who in these points
doeth service, is pleasing and propitiable to our
God." "One believeth that all things maybe
eaten ; but another, being weak, feedeth on vege-
tables. Let not him who eateth lightly esteem
him who eateth not. Who art thou, who judgest


' Comp. Luke xxii. 20; 2 Cor. v. 17, etc.

2 Comp. Mark xv. 42.

3 Comp. Matt. xiii. 52 ad Jin.
* Rom. xiv. 20,

S Ver. 21.


another's servant? " " Both he who eateth, and
he who eateth not, giveth God thanks." But,
since he forbids human choice to be made mat-
ter of controversy, how much niore Divine!
Thus he knew how to chide certain restricters
and interdicters of food, such as abstained from
it of contempt, not of duty ; but to approve
such as did so to the honour, not the insult, of
the Creator. And if he has " delivered you the
keys of the meat-market," permitting the eating
of "all things" with a view to establishing the
exception of " things offered to idols ; " still he
has not included the kingdom of God in the
meat-market : "For," he says, "the kingdom of
God is neither meat nor drink ; " ^ and, " Food
commendeth us not to God" — not that you
may think this said about dry diet, but rather
about rich and carefully prepared, if, when he
subjoins, " Neither, if we shall have eaten, shall
we abound ; nor, if we shall not have eaten, shall
we be deficient," the ring of his words suits, (as
it does), you rather (than us), who think that
you do " abound " if you eat, and are " defi-
cient " if you eat not ; and for this reason dis-
parage these observances.

How unworthy, also, is the way in which you
interpret to the favour of your own lust the fact
that the Lord "ate and drank " promiscuously !
But I think that He must have likewise " fasted,"
inasmuch as He has pronounced, not " the full,"
but " the hungry and thirsty, blessed : " ^ (He)
who was wont to profess " food " to be, not that
which His disciples had supposed, but "the
thorough doing of the Father's work; "^ teach-
ing " to labour for the meat which is permanent
unto life eternal ; " 9 in our ordinary prayer Hke-
wise commanding us to request " bread," '° not
the wealth of Attains" therewithal. Thus, too,
Isaiah has not denied that God " hath chosen "
a " fast ; " but has particularized in detail the
kind of fast which He has not chosen : " for in
the days," he says, " of your fasts your own wills
are found (indulged), and all who are subject to
you ye stealthily sting ; or else ye fast with a
view to abuse and strifes, and ye smite with the
fists. Not such, a, fast have I elected ;" '^ but
such an one as He has subjoined, and by sub-
joining has not abolished, but confirmed.

CHAP. XVI. — INSTANCES FROM SCRIPTURE OF DI-
VINE JUDGMENTS UPON THE SELF-INDULGENT;
AND APPEALS TO THE PRACTICES OF HEATHENS.

For even if He does prefer "the works of
righteousness," still not without a sacrifice, which


6 Rom. xiv. 17.

7 Comp. Luke vi. 21 with 25, and Matt. v. 6.

8 John iv. 31-34.

9 John vi. 27.

10 Matt. vi. 11; Luke xi. 3.

" See Hor., Od., i. i, 12, and Macleane's note there.
'2 See Isa. Iviii. 3, 4, 5, briefly, and more like the LXX. than the
Vulg. or the Eng. ver.


ON FASTING.


is a soul afflicted with fasts.' He, at all events,
is the God to whom neither a People inconti-
nent of appetite, nor a priest, nor a prophet, was
pleasing. To this day the " monuments of con-
cupiscence " remain, where the People, greedy
of " flesh," till, by devouring without digesting
the quails, they brought on cholera, were buried.
Eli breaks his neck before the temple doors,^
his sons fall in battle, his daughter-in-law expires
in child-birth : 3 for such was the blow which
had been deserved at the hand of God by the
shameless house, the defrauder of the fleshly
sacrifices.-* Sameas, a " man of God," after
prophesying the issue of the idolatry introduced
by King Jeroboam — after the drying up and
immediate restoration of that king's hand —
after the rending in twain of the sacrificial altar,
— being on account of these signs invited (home)
by the king by way of recompense, plainly de-
clined (for he had been prohibited by God)
to touch food at all in that place ; but having
presently afterwards rashly taken food from
another old man, who lyingly professed himself
a prophet, he was deprived, in accordance with
the word of God then and there uttered over
the table, of burial in his fathers' sepulchres.
For he was prostrated by the rushing of a lion
upon him in the way, and was buried among
strangers ; and thus paid the penalty of his
breach of fast.5

These will be warnings both to people and to
bishops, even spiritual ones, in case they may
ever have been guilty of incontinence of appe-
tite. Nay, even in Hades the admonition has
not ceased to speak ; where we find in the per-
son of the rich feaster, convivialities tortured ;
in that of the pauper, fasts refreshed ; having —
(as convivialities and fasts alike had) — as pre-
ceptors " Moses and the prophets." ^ For Joel
withal exclaimed : " Sanctify a fast, and a reU-
gious service ;"7 foreseeing even then that other
aposdes and prophets would sanction fasts, and
would preach observances of special service to
God. Whence it is that even they who court
their it/o/s by dressing them, and by adorning
them in their sanctuary, and by saluting them at
each particular hour, are said to do them service.
But, more than that, the heathens recognise
every form of Ta-n-eLvocjipovrja-L^. When the heaven
is rigid and the year arid, barefooted processions
are enjoined by public proclamation ; the magis-
trates lay aside their purple, reverse the fasces,
utter prayer, offer a victim. There are, more-
over, some colonies where, besides (these ex-


' See Ps. li. (1. in LXX. and Vulg.) i8, 19: see c. iii. above.

2 This seems an oversight; see i Sam. (in LXX. and Vulg.
Kings) iv. 13.

3 I Sam. iv. 17-21.

* I Sam. ii. 12-17, 22-25.

5 See I Kings (in LXX. and Vulg. 3 Kings) xiii.

6 Luke xvi. 19-31.
' Joel ii. 15.


traordinary solemnities, the inhabitants), by an
annual rite, clad in sackcloth and besprent with
ashes, present a suppliant importunity to their
idols, (while) baths and shops are kept shut till
the ninth hour. They have one single fire in
public — on the altars ; no water even in their
platters. There is, I believe, a Ninevitan sus-
pension of business ! A Jewish fast, at all events,
is. universally celebrated ; while, neglecting the
temples, throughout all the shore, in every open
place, they continue long to send prayer up to
heaven. And, albeit by the dress and ornamen-
tation of mourning they disgrace the duty, still
they do affect a faith in abstinence, and sigh for
the arrival of the long-lingering evening star to
sanction (their feeding). But it is enough for
me that you, by heaping blasphemies upon o//r
xerophagies, put them on a level with the chas-
tity of an Isis and a Cybele. I admit the com-
parison in the way of evidence. Hence (our
xerophagy) will be proved divine, which the devil,
the emulator of things divine, imitates. It is out
of truth that falsehood is built ; out of religion
that superstition is compacted. Hence you are
more irreligious, in proportion as a heathen is
more conformable. He, in short, sacrifices his
appetite to an idol-god ; you to (the true) God
will not. For to you your belly is god, and your
lungs a temple, and your paunch a sacrificial
altar, and your cook the priest, and your fra-
grant smell the Holy Spirit, and your condiments
spiritual gifts, and your belching prophecy.


CHAP. XVn. CONCLUSION.

" Old " you are, if we will say the truth, you
who are so indulgent to appetite, and justly do
you vaunt your " priority : " always do I recog-
nise the savour of F^sau, the hunter of wild beasts :
so unlimitedly studious are you of catching field-
fares, so do you come from " the field " of your
most lax discipline, so faint are you in spirit.^
If I offer you a paltry lentile dyed red with must
well boiled down, forthwith you will sell all your
"primacies :" with you "love" shows its fervour
in sauce-pans, " faith " its warmth in kitchens,
" hope " its anchorage in waiters ; but of greater
account is " love," because that is the means
whereby your young men sleep with their sis-
ters ! Appendages, as we all know, of appetite
are lasciviousness and voluptuousness. Which
alliance the apostle withal was aware of; and
hence, after premising, " Not in drunkenness
and revels," he adjoined, " nor in couches and
lusts." 9

To the indictment of your appetite pertains
(the charge) that " double honour " is with you


8 Comp. Gen. xxiii. 2, 3, 4, 31, and xxv. 27-34.

9 Rom. xiii. 13.


114


ELUCIDATIONS.


assigned to your presiding (elders) by double
shares (of meat and drink) ; whereas the apostle
has given them " double honour " as being both
bretlveti and officers J- Who, among you, is
superior in holiness, except him who is more
frecjuent in banciueting, more sumptuous, in ca-
tering, more learned in cups ? Men of soul and
flesh alone as you are, justly do you reject things
spiritual. If the prophets were pleasing to such,
my (prophets) they were not. Why, then, do
not you constantly preach, " Let us eat and
drink, for to-morrow we shall die?'*"^ just as lue
do not hesitate manfully to command, " Let us
fast, brethren and sisters, lest to-morrow per-
chance we die." Openly let us vindicate our
disciplines. Sure we are that " they who are in
the flesh cannot please God ; " -^ not, of course,
those who are in the siibstance of the flesh, but
in the ca7-e, the affection, the work, the will, of
it. Emaciation displeases not us ; for it is not
by weight that God bestows flesh, any more than


' I Tim. V. 17.

2 Isa. xxii. 13; 1 Cor. xv. 32.

3 Rom. viii. 8.


He does " the Spirit by measure." '^ More easily,
it may be, through the " strait gate " s of salva-
tion will slenderer flesh enter ; more speedily
will lighter flesh rise ; longer in the sepulchre
will drier flesh retain its firmness. Let Olympic
cestus-players and boxers cram themselves to
satiety. To them bodily ambition is suitable
to whom bodily strength is necessary ; and yet
they also strengthen themselves by xerophagies.
But ours are other thews and other sinews, just
as our contests withal are other ; we whose
"wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but
against the world's '^ power, against the spiritual-
ities of malice." Against these it is not by
robustness of flesh and blood, but of faith and
spirit, that it behoves us to make our antago-
nistic stand. On the other hand, an over-fed
Christian will be more necessary to bears and
lions, perchance, than to God ; only that, even
to encounter beasts, it will be his duty to prac-
tise emaciation.


* John iii. 34. .

5 Matt. vii. 13, 14; Luke xiii. 24.

'i Mundi: cf. xocr/AOKpaTopas, Eph. vi.


ELUCIDATIONS,
I.

(Greater licence, p. 104.)

In this treatise, which is designed to justify the extremes of Montanistic fasts, TertuUian's
genius often surprises us by his ingenuity. This is one of the instances where the forensic orator
comes out, trying to outflank and turn the position of an antagonist who has gained an advantage.
The fallacy is obvious. Kaye cites, in comparison, a passage ' from "The Apparel of Women,"
and another^ from "The Exhortation to Chastity." He remarks, "Were we required to produce
an instance [i.e. to prove the tendency of mankind to run into extremes], we should without
hesitation refer the reader to this treatise."

Fasting was ordained of Christ Himself as a means to an end. It is here reduced from its
instrumental character, and made an excuse for dividing the household of faith, and for cruel
accusations against brethren.

In our age of an entire relaxation of discipline, the enthusiast may nevertheless awaken us,
perhaps, to honest self-examination as to our manner of life, in view of the example of Christ
and His apostles, and their holy precepts.

II.

(Provinces of Greece, p. in.)
We have here an interesting hint as to the dpxata W-t] to which the Council of Nice ^ refers in
one of her most important canons. Provinces, synods, and the charges or pastoral letters of the
bishops are referred to as established institutions. And note the emphasis given to " Greece " as


II. cap. 10, p. 23, supt


^ Cap. 8, p. 55, supra.


ELUCIDATIONS. 115


the mother of churches, and of laws and customs. He looks Eastward, and not by any means
to the West, for high examples of the Catholic usages by which he was endeavouring to justify his
own.

III.

(An over-fed Christian, p. 114.)
"Are we not carnal " (psychics) in our days? May not the very excesses of TertuUian sting
and reproach us with the charge of excessive indulgence (Matt. ix. 15) ? The "over-fed Chris-
tians " whom he here reproaches are proved by this very treatise to have observed a system of
fasting which is little practised anywhere in our times — for a mere change to luxurious fish-diet
is the very mockery of fasting. We learn that the customary fasts of these psychics were as
follows : (i) the annual Paschal fast," from Friday till Easter-Day; (2) Wednesdays and Fridays
(stationary days^) every week; and (3) the "dry-food days,"^ — abstinence from "pleasant
bread" (Dan. x. 2), — though some Catholics objected to these voluntary abstinences.

IV.

(Practise emaciation, p. 114.)

Think of our Master's fast among the wild beasts ! Let us condescend to go back to
Clement, to Origen, and to TertuUian to learn the practical laws of the Gospel against avarice,
luxury, and " the deceitfulness of sin." I am emboldened to say this by some remarkable words
which I find, to my surprise, thrown out /;/ a scientific work '^ proceeding from Harvard University.
It is with exceeding gratitude that I quote as follows : " // is well to go away at times, that we
tnay see another aspect of human life which still survives in the East, and to feel that influence
which led even the Christ into the wilderness to prepare for the struggle with the animal nature
of man. 5 We need something of the experience of the Anchorites of Egypt, to impress us with
the great truth thit the distinction between the spiritual and the material remains broad and clear,
even if with the scalpel of our modern philosophy we cannot completely dissect the two ; and
this experience will give us courage to cherish our aspirations, keep bright our hopes, and hold
fast our Christian faith until the consummation comes."

' Capp. 2, 13, 14, supra.

^ Cap. 14. See De Orat., cap. 19, p. 687.

3 The Xcrophagis, cap. 2, p. 103.

•* Scientific Culture, by J. P. Cooke, professor of chemistry, etc. New York, 1884.

S This is ambiguous, but I merely note it. Heb. iv. 15. •


IX.


DE FUGA IN PERSECUTIONE.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]


I. My brother Fabius, you very lately asked,
because some news or other were communicated,
whether or not we ought to flee in persecution.
For my part, having on the spot made some
observations in the negative suited to the place
and time, I also, owing to the rudeness of some
persons, took away with me the subject but half
treated, meaning to set it forth now more fully
by my pen ; for your inquiry had interested me
in it, and the state of the times had already on
its own account pressed it upon me. As perse-
cutions in increasing number threaten us, so the
more are we called on to give earnest thought to
the question of how faith ought to receive them,
and the duty of carefully considering it concerns
you no less, who no doubt, by not accepting the
Comforter, the guide to all truth, have, as was
natural, opposed us hitherto in regard to other
questions also. We have therefore applied a
methodical treatment, too, to your inquiry, as
we see that we must first come to a decision
as to how the matter stands in regard to persecu-
tion itself, whether it comes on us from God or
from the devil, that with the less difficulty we
may get on firm ground as to our duty to meet
it ; for of everything one's knowledge is clearer
when it is known from whom it has its origin.
It is enough indeed to lay it down, (in bar of all
besides,) that nothing happens without the will
of God. But lest we be diverted from the point
before us, we shall not by this deliverance at
once give occasion to the other discussions if
one make answer — Therefore evil and sin are
both from God ; the devil henceforth, and even
we ourselves, are entirely free. The question in
hand is persecution. With respect to this, let
me in the meantime say, that nothing happens
without God's will; on the ground that perse-
cution is especially worthy of God, and, so to
speak, requisite, for the approving, to wit, or if


' [Written, say, circa a.d.
ii6


you will, the rejection of His professing servants.
For what is the issue of persecution, what other
result comes of it, but the approving and reject-
ing of faith, in regard to which the Lord will cer-
tainly sift His people? Persecution, by means
of which one is declared either approved or
rejected, is just the judgment of the Lord. But
the judging properly belongs to God alone.
This is that fan which even now cleanses the
Lord's threshing-floor — the Church, I mean —
winnowing the mixed heap of believers, and
separating the grain ^ of the martyrs from the
chaff" of the deniers ; and this ^ also the ladder ^
of which Jacob dreams, on which are seen, some
mounting up to higher places, and others going
down to lower. So, too, persecution may be
viewed as a contest. By whom is the conflict
proclaimed, but by Him by whom the crown
and the rewards are offered? You find in the
Revelation its edict, setting forth the rewards by
which He incites to victory — those, above all,
whose is the distinction of conquering in perse-
cution, in very deed contending in their victo-
rious struggle not against flesh and blood, but
against spirits of wickedness. So, too, you will
see that the adjudging of the contest belongs to
the same glorious One, as umpire, who calls us
to the prize. The one great thing in persecution
is the promotion of the glory of God, as He
tries and casts away, lays on and takes off. But
what concerns the glory of God will surely come
to pass by His will. And when is trust in God
more strong, than when there is a greater fear
of Him, and when persecution breaks out? The
Church is awe-struck. Then is faith both more
zealous in preparation, and better disciplined in
fasts, and meetings, and prayers, and lowliness,
in brotherly-kindness and love, in holiness and
temperance. There is no room, in fact, for


2 Matt. iii. 12.

3 Gen. xxviii. 12.


DE FUGA IN PERSECUTIONE.


117


ought but fear and hope. So even by this very
thing we have it clearly proved that persecution,
improving as it does the servants of God, can-
not be imputed to the devil.

2. If, because injustice is not from God, but
from the devil, and persecution consists of injus-
tice (for what more unjust than that the bishops
of the true God, that all the followers of the
truth, should be dealt with after the manner of
the vilest criminals ?), persecution therefore seems
to proceed from the devil, by whom the injustice
which constitutes persecution is perpetrated, we
ought to know, as you have neither persecution
without the injustice of the devil, nor the trial
of faith without persecution, that the injustice
necessary for the trial of faith does not give a
warrant for persecution, but supplies an agency ;
that in reality, in reference to the trial of faith,
which is the reason of persecution, the will of
God goes first, but that as the instrument of per-
secution, which is the way of trial, the injustice
of the devil follows. For in other respects, too,
injustice in proportion to the enmity it displays
against righteousness affords occasion for attes-
tations of that to which it is opposed as an ene-
my, that so righteousness may be perfected in
injustice, as strength is perfected in weakness.'
For the weak things of the world have been
chosen by God to confound the strong, and the
foolish things of the world to confound its wis-
dom.^ Thus even injustice is employed, that
righteousness may be approved in putting un-
righteousness to shame. Therefore, since the
service is not of free-will, but of subjection (for
persecution is the appointment of the Lord for
the trial of faith, but its ministry is the injustice
of the devil, supplied that persecution may be
got up), we believe that persecution comes to
pass, no question, by the devil's agency, but not
by the devil's origination. Satan will not be at
liberty to do anything against the servants of the
living God unless the Lord grant leave, either
that He may overthrow Satan himself by the
faith of the elect which proves victorious in the
trial, or in the face of the world show that apos-
tatizers to the devil's cause have been in reality
His servants. You have the case of Job, whom
the devil, unless he had received authority from
God, could not have visited with trial, not even,
in fact, in his property, unless the Lord had said,
" Behold, all that he has I put at your disposal ;
but do not stretch out your hand against him-
self." 3 In short, he would not even have
stretched it out, unless afterwards, at his request,
the Lord had granted him this permission also,
saying, " Behold, I deliver him to you ; only pre-
serve his life." So he asked in the case of the


1 2 Cor

2 I Cor.

3 Job i.


apostles likewise an opportunity to tempt them,
having it only by special allowance, since the
Lord in the Gospel says to Peter, " Behold, Satan
asked that he might sift you as grain ; but I have
prayed for you, that your faith fail not ; " ■♦ that
is, that the devil should not have power granted
him sufficient to endanger his faith. Whence it
is manifest that both things belong to God, the
shaking of faith as well as the shielding of it,
when both are sought from Him — the shaking
by the devil, the shielding by the Son. And cer-
tainly, when the Son of God has faith's protec-
tion absolutely committed to Him, beseeching it
of the Father, from whom He receives all power
in heaven and on earth, how entirely out of the
question is it that the devil should have the as-
sailing of it in his own power ! But in the prayer
prescribed to us, when we say to our Father,
" Lead us not into temptation " s (now what
greater temptation is there than persecution?),
we acknowledge that that comes to pass by His
will whom we beseech to exempt us from it.
For this is what follows, " But deliver us from
the wicked one," that is, do not lead us into
temptation by giving us up to the wicked one,
for then are we delivered from the power of the
devil, when we are not handed over to him to
be tempted. Nor would the devil's legion have
had power over the herd of swine ^ unless they
had got it from God ; so far are they from hav-
ing power over the sheep of God. I may say
that the bristles of the swine, too, were then
counted by God, not to speak of the hairs of
holy men. The devil, it must be owned, seems
indeed to have power — in this case really his
own — over those who do not belong to God,
the nations being once for all counted by God
as a drop of the bucket, and as the dust of the
threshing-floor, and as the spittle of the mouth,
and so thrown open to the devil as, in a sense, a
free possession. But against those who belong
to the household of God he may not do ought
as by any right of his own, because the cases
marked out in Scripture show when — that is,
for what reasons — he may touch them. For
either, with a view to their being approved, the
power of trial is granted to him, challenged or
challenging, as in the instances already referred
to, or, to secure an opposite result, the sinner is
handed over to him, as though he were an exe-
cutioner to whom belonged the inflicting of pun-
ishment, as in the case of Saul. "And the Spirit
of the Lord," says Scripture, "departed from
Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled
and stifled him ; " ? or the design is to humble,
as the apostle tells us, that there was given him


< Luke xxii. 31, 32.

5 Mati vi 13

6 Mark V. II.

7 I Sam. xvi. 14.


ii8


DE FUGA IN PERSECUTIONE.


a stake, the messenger of Satan, to buffet him ; '
and even this sort of thing is not permitted in
the case of holy men, unless it be that at the
same time strength of endurance may be per-
fected in weakness. For the apostle likewise de-
livered Phygellus and Hermogenes over to Satan,
that by chastening they might be taught not to
blaspheme.^ You see, then, that the devil re-
ceives more suitably power even from the ser-
vants of God ; so far is he from having it by any
right of his own.

3. Seeing therefore, too, these cases occur in
persecutions more than at other times, as there
is then among us more of proving or rejecting,
more of abasing or punishing, it must be that
their general occurrence is permitted or com-
manded by Him at whose will they happen even
partially ; by Him, I mean, who says, " I am He
who make peace and create evil,"^ — that is,
war, for that is the antithesis of peace. But what
other war has our peace than persecution ? If
ift its issues persecution emphatically brings either
life or death, either wounds or healing, you have
the author, too, of this. " I will smite and heal,
I will make alive and put to death." 4 "I will
burn them," He says, " as gold is burned ; and

■ I will try them," He says, "as silver is tried," 5
for when the flame of persecution is consuming
us, then the stedfastness of our faith is proved.
These will be the fiery darts of the devil, by
which faith gets a ministry of burning and kin-
dhng ; yet by the will of God. As to this I know
not who can doubt, unless it be persons with
frivolous and frigid faith, which seizes upon those
who with trembling assemble together in the
church. For you say, seeing we assemble with-
out order, and assemble at the same time, and
flock in large numbers to the church, the heathen
are led to make inquiry about us, and we are
alarmed lest we awaken their anxieties. Do ye
not know that God is Lord of all ? And if it is
God's will, then you shall suffer persecution ; but
if it is not, the heathen will be still. Believe it
most surely, if indeed you believe in that God
without whose will not even the sparrow, a penny
can buy, falls' to the ground. ^ But we, I think,
are better than many sparrows.

4. Well, then, if it is evident from whom per-
secution proceeds, we are able at once to satisfy
your doubts, and to decide from these introduc-
tory remarks alone, that men should not flee in
it. For if persecution proceeds from God, in no
way will it be our duty to flee from what has God
as its author ; a twofold reason opposing : for
what proceeds from God ought not on the one


I 2 Cor. xii. 7.
^ 2 Tim. i.'is; see
3 Isa. xlv. 7.
* Deut. xxxii 39.

5 Zech. xiii. 9.

6 Matt. X. 29.


hand to be avoided, and it cannot be evaded on
the other. It ought not to be avoided, because
it is good ; for everything must be good on which
God has cast His eye. And with this idea has
perhaps this statement been made in Genesis,
" And God saw because it is good ; " not that He
would have been ignorant of its goodness unless
He had seen it, but to indicate by this expression
that it was good because it was viewed by God.
There are many events indeed happening by the
will of God, and happening to somebody's harm.
Yet for all that, a thing is therefore good because
it is of God, as divine, as reasonable ; for what is
divine, and not reasonable and good ? \Vhat is,
good, yet not divine? But if to the universal
apprehension of mankind this seems to be the
case, in judging, man's faculty of apprehension
does not predetermine the nature of things, but
the nature of things his power of apprehension.
For every several nature is a certain definite
reality, and it lays it on the perceptive power to
perceive it just as it exists. Now, if that which
comes from God is good indeed in its natural
state (for there is nothing from God which is not
good, because it is divine, and reasonable), but
seems evil only to the human faculty, all will be
right in regard to the former ; with the latter the
fault will lie. In its real nature a very good
thing is chastity, and so is truth, and righteous-
ness ; and yet they are distasteful to many. Is
perhaps the real nature on this account sacrificed
to the sense of perception? Thus persecution
in its own nature too is good, because it is a
divine and reasonable appointment ; but those to
whom it comes as a punishment do not feel it
to be pleasant. You see that as proceeding from
Him, even that evil has a reasonable ground,
when one in persecution is cast out of a state of
salvation, just as you see that you have a reason-
able ground for the good also, when one by per-
secution has his salvation made more secure.
Unless, as it depends on the Lord, one either
perishes irrationally, or is irrationally saved, he
will not be able to speak of persecution as an
evil, which, while it is under the direction of
reason, is, even in respect of its evil, good. So,
if persecution is in every way a good, because
it has a natural basis, we on valid grounds lay it
down, that what is good ought not to be shunned
by us, because it is a sin to refuse what is good ;
besides that, what has been looked upon by God
can no longer indeed be avoided, proceeding as
it does from God, from whose will escape will
not be possible. Therefore those who think that
they should flee, either reproach God with doing
what is evil, if they flee from persecution as an
evil (for no one avoids what is good) ; or they
count themselves stronger than God : so they
think, who imagine it possible to escape when it
is God's pleasure that such events should occur.


DE FUGA IN PERSECUTIONE.


119


5. But, says some one, I flee, the thing it be-
longs to me to do, that I may not perish, if I
deny ; it is for Him on His part, if He chooses,
to bring me, when I flee, back before the tribu-
nal. First answer me this : Are you sure you
wiU deny if you do not flee, or are you not sure ?
For if you are sure, you have denied already,
because by presupposing that you will deny, you
have given yourself up to that about which you
have made such a presupposition ; and now it is
vain for you to think of flight, that you may avoid
denying, when in intention you have denied al-
ready. But if you are doubtful on that point,
why do you not, in the incertitude of your fear
wavering between the two different issues, pre-
sume that you are able rather to act a confessor's
part, and so add to your safety, that you may
not flee, just as you presuppose denial to send
you off" a fugitive ? The matter stands thus —
we have either both things in our own power, or
they wholly lie with God. If it is ours to confess
or to deny, why do we not anticipate the nobler
thing, that is, that we shall confess ? If you are
not willing to confess, you are not willing to suf-
fer ; and to be unwilling to confess is to deny.
But if the matter is wholly in God's hand, why
do we not leave it to His will, recognising His
might and power in that, just as He can bring us
back to trial when we flee, so is He able to screen
us when we do not flee ; yes, and even living in
the very heart of the people ? Strange conduct,
is it not, to honour God in the matter of flight
from persecution, because He can bring you
back from your flight to stand before the judg-
ment-seat ; but in regard of witness-bearing, to
do Him high dishonour by despairing of power
at His hands to shield you from danger? Why
do you not rather on this, the side of constancy
and trust in God, say, I do my part ; I depart
not ; God, if He choose, will Himself be my
protector? It beseems us better to retain our
position in submission to the will of God, than to
flee at our own will. Rutilius, a saintly martyr,
after having ofttimes fled from persecution from
place to place, nay, having bought security from
danger, as he thought, by money, was, notwith-
standing the complete security he had, as he
thought, provided for himself, at last unexpect-
edly seized, and being brought before the magis-
trate, was put to the torture and cruelly mangled,
— a punishment, I believe, for his fleeing, — and
thereafter he was consigned to the flames, and
thus paid to the mercy of God the suffering which
he had shunned. What else did the Lord mean
to show us by this example, but that we ought
not to flee from persecution because it avails us
nothing if God disapproves ?

6. Nay, says some one, he fulfilled the com-
mand, when he fled from city to city. For so
a certain individual, but a fugitive hkewis2, has


chosen to maintain, and others have done the

I same who are unwilling to understand the mean-
ing of that declaration of the Lord, that they

I may use it as a cloak for their cowardice, al-
though it has had its persons as well as its times
and reasons to which it specially applies. " When
they begin," He says, "to persecute you, flee from
city to city."' We maintain that this belongs
specially to the persons of the apostles, and to
their times and circumstances, as the following
sentences will show, which are suitable only to
the apostles : " Do not go into the way of the
Gentiles, and into a city of the Samaritans do
not enter : but go rather to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel." ^ But to ift the way of the
Gentiles is also open, as in it we in fact were
found, and to the very last we walk ; and no city
has been excepted. So we preach throughout
all the world ; nay, no special care even for Israel
has been laid upon us, save as also we are bound
to preach to all nations. Yes, and if we are ap-
prehended, we shall not be brought into Jewish
councils, nor scourged in Jewish s}-nagogues, but
we shall certainly be cited before Roman magis-
trates and judgment-seats.3 So, then, the cir-
cumstances of the apostles even required the
injunction to flee, their mission being to preach
first to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
That, therefore, this preaching might be fully

j accomplished in the case of those among whom
this behoved first of all to be carried out — that
the sons might receive bread before the dogs,

j for that reason He commanded them to flee then
for a time — not with the object of eluding dan-
ger, under the plea strictly speaking which per-
secution urges (rather He was in the habit of
proclaiming that they would suffer persecutions,
and of teaching that these must be endured) ;
but in order to further the proclamation of the
Gospel message, lest by their being at once
put down, the diffusion of the Gospel too might
be prevented. Neither were they to flee to any
city as if by stealth, but as if everywhere about
to proclaim their message ; and for this, every-

I where about to undergo persecutions, until they
should fulfil their teaching. Accordingly the
Saviour says, " Ye will not go over all the cities
of Israel." ■+ So the command to flee was re-
stricted to the limits of Judea. But no com-
mand that shows Judea to be specially the
sphere for preaching applies to us, now that the
Holy Spirit has been poured out upon all flesh.
Therefore Paul and the apostles themselves,
mindful of the precept of the Lord, bear this
solemn testimony before Israel, which they had
now filled with their doctrine — saying, "It was


Matt.
Matt
Matt.
Matt.


I20


DE FUGA IN PERSECUTIONE.


necessary that the word of God should have
been first dehvered to you ; but seeing ye have
rejected it, and have not thought yourselves
worthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gen-
tiles." ' And from that time they turned their
steps away, as those who went before them
had laid it down, and departed into the way of
the Gentiles, and entered into the cities of the
Samaritans; so that, in very deed, their sound
went forth into all the earth, and their words to
the end of the world.- If, therefore, the pro-
hibition against setting foot in the way of the
Gentiles, and entering into the cities of the
Samaritans, has come to an end, why should not
the command»to flee, which was issued at the
same time, have come also to an end ? Accord-
ingly, from the time when, Israel having had
its full measure, the apostles went over to the
Gentiles, they neither fled from city to city, nor
hesitated to suffer. Nay, Paul too, who had
submitted to deliverance from persecution by
being let down from the wall, as to do so was
at this time a matter of command, refused in
like manner now at the close of his ministry,
and after the injunction had come to an end, to
give in to the anxieties of the disciples, eagerly
entreating him that he would not risk himself at
Jerusalem, because of the sufferings in store for
him which Agabus had foretold ; but doing the
very opposite, it is thus he speaks, " What do
ye, weeping and disquieting my heart? For I
could wish not only to suffer bonds, but also to
die at Jerusalem, for the name of my Lord Jesus
Christ." 3 And so they all said, " Let the will
of the Lord be done." What was the will of the
Lord ? Certainly no longer to flee from perse-
cution. Otherwise they who had wished him
rather to avoid persecution, might also have
adduced that prior will of the Lord, in which
He had commanded flight. Therefore, seeing
even in the days of the apostles themselves, the
command to flee was temporary, as were those
also relating to the other things at the same time
enjoined, that [command] cannot continue with
us which ceased with our teachers, even although
it had not been issued specially for them ; or if
the Lord wished it to continue, the apostles did
wrong who were not careful to keep fleeing to
the last.

7. Let us now see whether also the rest of our
Lord's ordinances accord with a lasting command
of flight. In the first place, indeed, if persecu-
tion is from God, what are we to think of our
being ordered to take ourselves out of its way,
by the very party who brings it on us ? For if
He wanted it to be evaded, He had better not
have sent it, that there might not be the appear-


' Acts xiii, 46.

2 Ps. xix. 4.

3 Acts xxi. 13.


ance of His will being thwarted by another will.
For He wished us either to suffer persecution or
to flee from it. If to flee, how to sufi"er ? If
to suffer, how to flee? In fact, what utter in-
consistency in the decrees of One who com-
mands to flee, and yet urges to suffer, which is
the very opposite ! " Him who will confess Me,
/ also will confess before My Father." ■* How
will he confess, fleeing? How flee, confessing?
"Of him who shall be ashamed of Me, will
I also be ashamed before My Father." s If
I avoid suffering, I am ashamed to confess.
" Happy they who suffer persecution for My
name's sake." ^ ■ Unhappy, therefore, they who,
by running away, will not sufl'er according to the
divine command. " He who shall endure to
the end shall be saved." ? How then, when you
bid me flee, do you wish me to endure to the
end ? If views so opposed to each other do not
comport with the divine dignity, they clearly
prove that the command to flee had, at the time
it was given, a reason of its own, which we have
pointed out. But it is said, the Lord, providing
for the weakness of some of His people, never-
theless, in His kindness, suggested also the
haven of flight to them. For He was not able
even without flight — a protection so base, and
unworthy, and servile — to preserve in persecu-
tion such as He knew to be weak ! Whereas in
fact He does not cherish, but ever rejects the
weak, teaching first, not that we are to fly from
our persecutors, but rather that we are not to
fear them. " Fear not them who are able to kill
the body, but are unable to do ought against the
soul ; but fear Him who can destroy both body
and soul in hell." ** And then what does He
allot to the fearful? " He who will value his life
more than Me, is not worthy of Me ; and he
who takes not up his cross and follows Me, can-
not be My disciple." 9 Last of all, in the Reve-
lation, He does not propose flight to the " fear-
ful," '° but a miserable portion among the rest of
the outcast, in the lake of brimstone and fire,
which is the second death.

8. He sometimes also fled from violence Him-
self, but for the same reason as had led Him to
command the apostles to do so : that is, He
wanted to fulfil His ministry of teaching ; and
when it was finished, I do not say He stood
firm, but He had no desire even to get from His
Father the aid of hosts of angels : finding fault,
too, with Peter's sword. He likewise acknowl-
edged, it is true, that His " soul was troubled,
even unto death," " and the flesh weak : with the


4 Matt. X. 32, 33.

5 Mark viii. 38; Luke ix. ;

6 Matt. V. II.
^ Matt. X. 22.
s Matt. X. 28.

9 Matt. X. 37,38.

'° Rev. xxi. 8.

'" Matt. xxvi. 38.


DE FUGA IN PERSECUTIONE.


design, (however,) first of all, that by having, as
His own, trouble of soul and weakness of the
flesh, He might show you that both the sub-
stances in Him were truly human ; lest, as certain
persons have now brought it in, you might be led
to think either the flesh or the soul of Christ
different from ours ; and then, that, by an ex-
hibition of their states, you might be convinced
that they have no power at all of themselves
without the spirit. And for this reason He puts
first " the willing spirit," ' that, looking to the
natures respectively of both the substances, you
may see that you have in you the spirit's strength
as well as the flesh's weakness ; and even from
this may learn what to do, and by what means
to do it, and what to bring under what, — the
weak, namely, under the strong, that you may
not, as is now your fashion, make excuses on the
ground of the weakness of the flesh, forsooth,
but put out of sight the strength of the spirit.
He also asked of His Father, that if it might be,
the cup of suffering should pass from Him.^ So
ask you the like favour ; but as He did, hold-
ing your position, — merely offering supplication,
and adding, too, the other words : " but not
what I will, but what Thou wilt." But when you
run away, how will you make this request ? taking,
in that case, into your own hands the removal of
the cup from you, and instead of doing what your
Father wishes, doing what you wish yourself.

9. The teaching of the apostles was surely in
everything according to the mind of God : they
forgot and omitted nothing of the Gospel.
Where, then, do you show that they renewed
the command to flee from city to city ? In fact,
it was utterly impossible that they should have
laid down anything so utterly opposed to their
own examples as a command to flee, while it was
just from bonds, or the islands in which, for con-
fessing, not fleeing from the Christian name, they
were confined, they wrote their letters to the
Churches. Paul 3 bids us support the weak, but
most certainly it is not when they flee. For how
can the absent be supported by you ? By bear-
ing with them ? Well, he says that people must
be supported, if anywhere they have committed
a fault through the weakness of their faith, just
as (he enjoins) that we should comfort the faint-
hearted ; he does not say, however, that they
should be sent into exile. But when he urges
us not to give place to evil,* he does not offer
the suggestion that w^e should take to our heels,
he only teaches that passion should be kept
under restraint ; and if he says that the time
must be redeemed, because the days are evil,5
he wishes us to gain a lengthening of life, not


' Matt. xxvi. 41.

2 Matt. xxvi. 39.

3 I Thess. V. 14.
* Eph. iv. 27.

5 Eph. V. 16.


by flight, but by wisdom. Besides, he who bids
us shine as sons of light,^ does not bid us hide
away out of sight as sons of darkness. He
commands us to stand stedfast,^ certainly not to
act an opposite part by fleeing ; and to be girt,
not to play the fugitive or oppose the Gospel.
He points out weapons, too, which persons who
intend to run away would not require. And
among these he notes the shield^ too, that ye
may be able to quench the darts of the devil,
when doubtless ye resist him, and sustain his
assaults in their utmost force. Accordingly John
also teaches that we must lay down our lives for
the brethren ; 9 much more, then, we must do it
for the Lord. This cannot be fulfilled by those
who flee. Finally, mindful of his own Revela-
tion, in which he had heard the doom of the
fearful, (and so) speaking from personal knowl-
edge, he warns us that fear must be put away.
" There is no fear," says he, " in love ; but per-
fect love casteth out fear ; because fear has tor-
ment " — the fire of the lake, no doubt. " He
that feareth is not perfect in love"'" — to wit,
the love of God. And yet who will flee from
persecution, but he who fears? Who will fear,
iDut he who has not loved ? Yes ; and if you
ask counsel of the Spirit, what does He approve
more than that utterance of the Spirit? For,
indeed, it incites all almost to go and offer them-
selves in martyrdom, not to flee from it ; so that
we also make mention of it. If you are exposed
to public infamy, says he, it is for your good ;
for he who is not exposed to dishonour among
men is sure to be so before the Lord. Do not
be ashamed ; righteousness brings you forth into
the public gaze. Why should you be ashamed
of gaining glory? The opportunity is given you
when you are before the eyes of men. So also
elsewhere: seek not to die on .bridal beds, nor
in miscarriages, nor in soft fevers, but to die the
martyr's death, that He may be glorified who
has suffered for you.

10. But some, paying no attention to the
exhortations of God, are readier to apply to
themselves that Greek versicle of worldly wis-
dom, " He who fled will fight again ; " perhaps
also in the battle to flee again. And when will
he who, as a fugitive, is a defeated man, be con-
queror? A worthy soldier he furnishes to his
commander Christ, who, so amply armed by tlie
apostle, as soon as he hears persecution's trum-
pet, runs off from the day of persecution. I also
will produce in answer a quotation taken from
the world : " Is it a thing so very sad to die ? " "
He must die, in whatever way of it, either as


6 I Thess. V. 5.
' I Cor. XV. 58.

8 Eph. vi. 16.

9 I John iii. i6.
'" I John iv. 18.

" ^Enctd, xii. 646.


122


DE FUGA IN PERSECUTIONE.


conquered or as conqueror. But although he
has succumbed in denying, he has yet faced and
battled with the torture. I had rather be one to
be pitied than to be blushed for. More glori-
ous is the soldier pierced with a javelin in battle,
than he who has a safe skin as a fugitive. Do
you fear man, O Christian ? — you who ought to
be feared by the angels, since you are to judge
angels ; who ought to be feared by evil spirits,
since you have received power also over evil
spirits ; who ought to be feared by the whole
world, since by you, too, the world is judged.
You are Christ-clothed, you who flee before the
devil, since into Christ you have been baptized.
Christ, who is in you, is treated as of small
account when you give yourself back to the
devil, by becoming a fugitive before him. But,
seeing it is from the Lord you flee, you taunt all
runaways with the futility of their purpose. A
certain bold prophet also had fled from the Lord,
he had crossed over from Joppa in the direction
of Tarsus, as if he could as easily transport him-
self away from God ; but I find him, I do not
say in the sea and on the land, but, in fact, in
the belly even of a beast, in which he waS con-
fined for the space of three days, unable either
to find death or even thus escape from God.
How much better the conduct of the man who,
though he fears the enemy of God, does not flee
from, but rather despises him, relying on the
protection of the Lord ; or, if you wifl, having
an awe of God all the greater, the more that he
has stood in His presence, says, " It is the Lord,
He is mighty. All things belong to Him ; wher-
ever I am, I am in His hand : let Him do as He
wills, I go not away ; and if it be His pleasure
that I die, let Him destroy me Himself, while
I save myself for Him. I had rather bring
odium upon Him by dying by His will, than by
escaping through my own anger."

II. Thus ought every servant of God to feel
and act, even one in an inferior place, that he
may come to have a more important one, if he
has made some upward step by his endurance
of persecution. But when persons in authority
themselves — I mean the very deacons, and
presbyters, and bishops — take to flight, how will
a layman be able to see with what view it was
said, Flee from city to city? Thus, too, with
the leaders turning their backs, who of the com-
mon rank will hope to persuade men to stand
firm in the battle? Most assuredly a good
shepherd lays down his life for the sheep, ac-
cording to the word of Moses, when tlie Lord
Christ had not as yet been revealed, but was
already shadowed forth in himself: "If you
destroy this people," he says, " destroy me also
along with it." ' But Christ, confirming these


foreshadowings Himself, adds : " The bad shep-
herd is he who, on seeing the wolf, flees, and
leaves the sheep to be torn in pieces." ^ Why,
a shepherd like this will be turned off from the
farm ; the wages to have been given him at the
time of his discharge will be kept from 'him as
compensation ; nay, even from his former sav-
ings a restoration of the master's loss will be
required ; for " to him who hath shall be given,
but from him who hath not shall be taken away
even that which he seemeth to have." 3 Thus
Zechariah threatens : " Arise, O sword, against
the shepherds, and pluck ye out the sheep ; and
I will turn my hand against the shepherds."*
And against them both Ezekiel and Jeremiah
declaim with kindred threatenings, for their not
only wickedly eating of the sheep, — they feed-
ing themselves rather than those committed to
their charge, — but also scattering the flock, and
giving it over, shepherdless, a prey to all the
beasts of the field. And this never happens
more than when in persecution the Church is
abandoned by the clergy. If any one recog-
nises the Spirit also, he will hear him branding
the runaways. But if it does not become the
keepers of the flock to flee when the wolves in-
vade it — nay, if that is absolutely unlawful (for
He who has declared a shepherd of this sort
a bad one has certainly condemned him ; and
whatever is condemned has, without doubt, be-
come unlawful) — on this ground it will not be
the duty of those who have been set over the
Church to flee in the time of persecution. But
otherwise, if the flock should flee, the overseer
of the flock would have no call to hold his
ground, as his doing so in that case would be,
without good reason, to give to the flock pro-
tection, which it would not require in conse-
quence of its liberty, forsooth, to flee.

12. So far, my brother, as the question pro-
posed by you is concerned, you have our opinion
in answer and encouragement. But he who in-
quires whether persecution ought to be shunned
by us must now be prepared to consider the
following question also : Whether, if we should
not flee from it, we should at least buy ourselves
off from it. Going further than you expected,
therefore, I will also on this point give you my
advice, distinctly affirming that persecution, from
which it is evident we must not flee, must in like
manner not even be bought off. The difference
lies in the payment ; but as flight is a buying
off without money, so buying off" is money-flight.
Assuredly you have here too the counselling of
fear. Because you fear, you buy yourself off;
and so you flee. As regards your feet, you have
stood ; in respect of the money you have paid,


2 John X. 12.

3 Luke viii. i8.

4 Zech. xiii. 7.


DE FUGA IN PERSECUTIONE.


123


you have run away. Why, in this very standing
of yours there was a fleeing from persecution, in
the release from persecution which you bought ;
but that you should ransom with money a man
whom Christ has ransomed with His blood, how
unworthy is it of God and His ways of acting,
who spared not His own Son for you, that He
might be made a curse for us, because cursed is
he that hangeth on a tree,' — Him who was led
as a sheep to be a sacrifice, and just as a lamb
before its shearer, so opened He not His mouth ;-
but gave His back to the scourges, nay, His
cheeks to the hands of the smiter, and turned
not away His face from spitting, and, being
numbered with the transgressors, was delivered
up to death, nay, the death of the cross. All
this took place that He might redeem us from
our sins. The sun ceded to us the day of our
redemption ; hell re-transferred the right it had
in us, and our covenant is in heaven ; the ever-
lasting gates were lifted up, that the King of
Glory, the Lord of might, might enter in,^ after
having redeemed man- from earth, nay, from
hell, that he might attain to heaven. What,
now, are we to think of the man who strives
against that glorious One, nay, slights and defiles
His goods, obtained at so great a ransom — no
less, in truth, than His most precious blood?
It appears, then, that it is better to flee than to
fall in value, if a man will not lay out for himself
as much as he cost Christ. And the Lord in-
deed ransomed him from the angelic powers
which rule the world — from the spirits of wick-
edness, from the darkness of this life, from eter-
nal judgment, from everlasting death. But you
bargain for him with an informer, or a soldier,
or some paltry thief of a ruler — under, as they
say, the folds of the tunic — as if he were stolen
goods whom Christ purchased in the face of the
whole world, yes, and set at liberty. Will you
value, then, this free man at any price, and pos-
sess him at any price, but the one, as we have
said, it cost the Lord, — namely, His own blood?
(And if not,) why then do you purchase Christ
in the man in whom He dwells, as though He
were some human property? No otherwise did '
Simon even try to do, when he offered the apos-
tles money for the Spirit of Christ. Therefore {
this man also, who in buying himself has bought \
the Spirit of Christ, will hear that word, " Your
money perish with you, since you have thought
that the grace of God is to be had at a price ! "■♦
Yet who will despise him for being (what he is),
a denier? For what says that extorter? Give
me money : assuredly that he may not deliver
him up, since he tries to sell you nothing else
than that which he is going to give you for


money. When you put that into his hands, it is
certainly your wish not to be delivered up. But
not delivered up, had you to be held up to
public ridicule? While, then, in being unwill-
ing to be delivered up, you are not willing to be
thus exposed ; by this unwilhngness of yours you
have denied that you are what you have been
unwilling to have it made public that you are.
Nay, you say, While I am unwilling to be held
up to the public as being what I am, I have
acknowledged that I am what I am unwilling to
be so held up as being, that is, a Christian. Can
Christ, therefore, claim that you, as a witness for
Him, have stedfastly shown Him forth? He
who buys himself off does nothing in that way.
Before one it might, I doubt not, be said. You
have confessed Him ; so also, on the account of
your unwillingness to confess Him before many
you have denied Him. A man's very safety will
pronounce that he has fallen while getting out
of persecution's way. He has fallen, therefore,
whose desire has been to escape. The refusal
of martyrdom is denial. A Christian is preserved
by his wealth, and for this end has his treasures,
that he may not suffer, while he will be rich
toward God. But it is the case that Christ was
rich in blood for him. Blessed therefore are the

I poor, because, He says, the kingdom of heaven

! is theirs who have the soul only treasured up.s
If we cannot serve God and mammon, can we
be redeemed both by God and by mammon ?

' For who will serve mammon more than the man
whom mammon has ransomed ? Finally, of what
example do you avail yourself to warrant your
averting by money the giving of you up ? \Mien
did the apostles, dealing with the matter, in any

' time of persecution trouble, extricate themselves
by money ? And money they certainly had from
the prices of lands which were laid down at their
feet,^ there being, without a doubt, many of the
rich among those who believed — men, and also
women, who were wont, too, to minister to their
comfort. When did Qnesimus, or Aquila, or
Stephen,^ give them aid of this kind when they
were persecuted ? Paul indeed, when Felix the
governor hoped that he should receive money
for him from the disciples,** about which matter
he also dealt with the apostle in private, cer-
tainly neither paid it himself, nor did the dis-
ciples for him. Those disciples, at any rate,
who wept because he was equally persistent in
his determination to go to Jerusalem, and neglect-
ful of all means to secure himself from the per-
secutions which had been foretold as about to
occur there, at last say, " Let the will of the Lord
be done." What was that will? No doubt that
he should suffer for the name of the Lord, not


' Rom viti. 32; Gal. iii. 13.
Msa.liii. 7/
3 Ps. xxiv, 7.
* Acts viii. 20.


5 Matt. V. 3.

6 Acts iv. 34, 35.

7 Stephanas is perhaps intended. — Tr.

8 Acts xxiv. 26,


124


DE FUGA IN PERSECUTIONE.


that he should be bought off. For as Christ laid
down His life for us, so, too, we should do for
Him ; and not only for the Lord Himself, nay,
but likewise for our brethren on His account.
This, too, is the teaching of John when he de-
clares, not that we should pay for our brethren,
but rather that we should die for them. It
makes no difference whether the thing not to be
done by you is to buy off a Christian, or to buy
one. And so the will of God accords with this.
Look at the condition — certainly of God's or-
daining, in whose hand the king's heart is — of
kingdoms and empires. For increasing the
treasury there are daily provided so many appli-
ances — registerings of property, taxes in kind,
benevolences, taxes in money ; but never up to
this time has ought of the kind been provided
by bringing Christians under some purchase-
money for the person and the sect, although
enormous gains could be reaped from numbers
too great for any to be ignorant of them.
Bought with blood, paid for with blood, we owe
no money for our head, because Christ is our
Head. It is not fit that Christ should cost us
money. How could martyrdoms, too, take place
to the glory of the Lord, if by tribute we should
pay for the liberty of our sect? And so he
who stipulates to have it at a price, opposes the
divine appointment. Since, therefore, Caesar has
imposed nothing on us after this fashion of a
tributary sect — in fact, such an imposition never
can be made, — with Antichrist now close at
hand, and gaping for the blood, not for the
money of Christians — how can it be pointed
out to me that there is the command, " Render
to Caesar the things which are Caesar's?"' A
soldier, be he an informer or an enemy, extorts
money from me by threats, exacting nothing on
Caesar's behalf; nay, doing the very opposite,
when for a bribe he lets me go — Christian as I
am, and by the laws of man a criminal. Of
another sort is the denarius which I owe to
Caesar, a thing belonging to him, about which
the question then was started, it being a tribute
coin due indeed by those subject to tribute, not
by children. Or how shall I render to God the
things which are God's, — certainly, therefore,
His own likeness and money inscribed with His
name, that is, a Christian man? But what do
I' owe God, as I do Caesar the denarius, but
the blood which His own Son shed for me?
Now if I owe God, indeed, a human being
and my own blood; but I am now in this
juncture, that a demand is made upon me for
the payment of that debt, I am undoubtedly
guilty of cheating God if I do my best to with-
hold payment. I have well kept the command-
ment, if, rendering to Caesar the things which


' Matt. xxii. 21.


are Caesar's, I refuse to God the things which are
God's !

13. But also to every one who asks me I will
give on the plea of charity, not under any intimi-
dation. Who asks? 2 He says. But he who uses
intimidation does not ask. One who threatens
if he does not receive, does not crave, but com-
pels. It is not alms he looks for, who comes not
to be pitied, but to be feared. I will give, there-
fore, because I pity, not because I fear, when the
recipient honours God and returns me his bless-
ing ; not when rather he both believes that he
has conferred a favour on me, and, beholding his
plunder, says, " Guilt money." Shall I be angry
even with an enemy? But enmities have also
other grounds. Yet withal he did not say a be-
trayer, or persecutor, or one seeking to terrify
you by his threats. For how much more shall I
heap coals upon the head of a man of this sort,
if I do not redeem myself by money? " In like
manner," says Jesus, " to him who has taken
away your coat, grant even your cloak also."
But that refers to him who has sought to take
away my property, not my faith. The cloak,
too, I will grant, if I am not threatened with be-
trayal. If he threatens, I will demand even my
coat back again. Even now, the declarations of
the Lord have reasons and laws of their own.
They are not of unlimited or universal applica-
tion. And so He commands us to give to every
one who asks, yet He Himself does not give to
those who ask a sign. Otherwise, if you think
that we should give indiscriminately to all who
ask, that seems to me to mean that you would
give, I say not wine to him who has a fever, but
even poison or a sword to him who longs for
death. But how we are to understand, " Make to
yourselves friends of mammon," 3 let the previous
parable teach you. The saying was addressed
to the Jewish people ; inasmuch as, having man-
aged ill the business of the Lord which had been
entrusted to them, they ought to have provided
for themselves out of the men of mammon,
which we then were, friends rather than enemies,
and to have delivered us from the dues of sins
which kept us from God, if they bestowed the
blessing upon us, for the reason given by the
Lord, that when grace began to depart from
them, they, betaking themselves to our faith,
might be admitted into everlasting habitations.
Hold now any other explanation of this parable
and saying you like, if only you clearly see that
there is no likelihood of our opposers, should we
make them friends with mammon, then receiving
us into everlasting abodes. But of what will not
cowardice convince men? As if Scripture both
allowed them to flee, and ^commanded them to


2 Matt. V. 42.

3 Luke xvi. 9.


ELUCIDATIONS.


125


buy off ! Finally, it is not enough if one or an-
other is so rescued. Whole Churches have im-
posed tribute en masse on themselves. I know
not whether it is matter for grief or shame when,
among hucksters, and pickpockets, and bath-
thieves, and gamesters, and pimps, Christians too
are included as taxpayers in the lists of free sol-
diers and spies. Did the apostles, with so much
foresight, make the office of overseer of this
type, that the occupants might be able to enjoy
their rule free from anxiety, under colour of pro-
viding (a like freedom for their flocks) ? For
such a peace, forsooth, Christ, returning to His
Father, commanded to be bought from the sol-
diers by gifts like those you have in the Saturnalia !
14. But how shall we assemble together? say
you ; how shall we observe the ordinances of the
Lord ? To be sure, just as the apostles also did,
who were protected by faith, not by money ;
which faith, if it can remove a mountain, can
much more remove a soldier. Be your safe-
guard wisdom, not a bribe. For you will not
have at once complete security from the people
also, should you buy off the interference of the
soldiers. Therefore all you need for your pro-
tection is to have both faith and wisdom : if you
do not make use of these, you may lose even the
deliverance which you have purchased for your-
self; while, if you do employ them, you can have
no need of any ransoming. Lastly, if you can-


not assemble by day, you have the night, the
light of Christ luminous against its darkness.
You cannot run about among them one after
another. Be content with a church of threes. It
is better that you sometimes should not see your
crowds, than subject yourselves (to a tribute
bondage) . Keep pure for Christ His betrothed
virgin ; let no one make gain of her. These
things, my brother, seem to you perhaps harsh
and not to be endured ; but recall that God has
said, " He who receives it, let him receive it," '
that is, let him who does not receive it go his
way. He who fears to suffer, cannot belong to
Him who suffered. But the man who does not
fear to suffer, he will be perfect in love — in the
love, it is meant, of God ; " for perfect love
casteth out fear."^ "i\nd therefore many are
called, but few chosen." ^ It is not asked who
is ready to follow the broad way, but who the
narrow. And therefore the Comforter is* requi-
site, who guides into all truth, and animates to
all endurance. And they who have received
Him will neither stoop to flee from persecution
nor to buy it off, for they have the Lord Himself,
One who will stand by us to aid us in suffering,
as well as to be our mouth when we are put to
the question.


Matt, x:
I John i
Matt. X.


ELUCIDATIONS.


I.

(Persecutions threaten, p. 116.)

We have reserved this heroic tract to close our series of the ascetic essays of our author
because it places even his sophistical enthusiasm in a light which shows much to admire. Strange
that this defiant hero should have died (as we may infer) in his bed, and in extreme old age.
Great man, how much, alike for weal and woe, the ages have been taught by thee !

This is the place for a tabular view of the ten persecutions of the Ante-Nicene Church. They
are commonly enumerated as follows : ' —

I. Under Nero .^.d. 64.

XL Under Trajan a.d. 95.

HI. Under Trajan a.d. 107.

IV. Under Hadrian (a.d. 118 and) a.d. 134.

V. Under Aurelius (a.d. i 77) and Severus a.d. 202.

VI. Under Maximin a.d. 235.

VII. Under Decius a.d. 250.

VIII. Under Valerian a.d. 254.

IX. Under Aurelian a.d. 270.

X. Under Diocletian (a.d. 284 and) a.d. 303.

' See what Gibbon can say to tninitnize the matter (in cap. xvi. 4, vol. ii. p. 45, New York).


126


ELUCIDATIONS.


Periods of Comparative Rest.

I. Under Antoninus Pius a.d. 151.

II. Under Commodus a.d. 185.

III. Under Alexander Severus a.d. 223.

IV. Under Philip a.d. 248.

V. Under Diocletian a.d. 284 till a.d. 303.

In thus chastising and sifting his Church in the years of her gradual growth " from the small-
est of all seeds," we see illustrations of the Lord's Epistles to the seven churches of the Apoca-
lypse. Who can doubt that Tertullian's writings prepared the North-African Church for the
Decian furnace, and all believers for the "seven times hotter" fires of Diocletian?

(To the fearful, p. 120.)

In the Patientia ' Tertullian reflects the views of Catholics, and seems to allow those " perse-
cuted in one city to flee to another." So also in the Ad Uxorem,^ as instanced by Kaye.3 In
the Fuga we have the enthusiast, but not as Gibbon will have it,^ the most wild and fanatical of
declaimers. On the whole subject we again refer our readers to the solid and sober comments
of Kaye on the martyrdoms and persecutions of the early faithful, and on the patristic views of
the same.


IT.

(Enormous gains from numbers, p. 124.)
Christians were now counted by millions. The following tabular view of the Christian popu-
lation of the world from the beginning has been attributed to Sharon Turner. I do not find it
in any of his works with which I am familiar. The nineteenth century is certainly credited too
low, according to the modern computists ; but I insert it merely for the centuries we are now
considering.

GROWTH OF THE CHURCH IN NUMBERS,

First century 500,000

Second " 2,000,000

Third " 5,000,000

Fourth " 10,000,000

Fifth " 15,000,000

Sixth " 20,000,000

Seventh " 24,000,000

Eighth " 30,000,000

Ninth " 40,000,000

Tenth " 50,000,000

Eleventh " 70,000,000

Twelfth " 80,000,000

Thirteenth " 75,000,000

Fourteenth " 80,000,000

Fifteenth " 100,000,000

Sixteenth " 125,000,000

Seventeenth " 155,000,000

Eighteenth " 200,000,000

Nineteenth " 400,000,000

I Cap. xiii. 2 \ cap. j;;. 3 pp, 46, 138. •* In his disgraceful chap xvi.


X.
APPENDIX/


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]

I. A STRAIN OF JONAH THE PROPHET.


After the living, aye-enduring death
Of Sodom and Gomorrah ; after fires
Penal, attested by time-frosted plains
Of ashes ; after fruitless apple-growths,

5 Born but to feed the eye ; after the death
Of sea and brine, both in like fate involved ;
While whatsoe'er is human still retains
In change corporeal its penal badge : ^
A city — Nineveh — by stepping o'er

1° The path of justice and of equity,

On her own head had well-nigh shaken down
More fires of rain supernal. For what dread ^
Dwells in a mind subverted? Commonly
Tokens of penal visitations prove

15 All vain where error holds possession. Still,
Kindly and patient of our waywardness,
And slow to punish, the Almighty Lord
Will launch no shaft of wrath, unless He first
Admonish and knock oft at hardened hearts,

20 Rousing with mind august presaging seers.
For to the merits of the Ninevites
The Lord had bidden Jonah to foretell
Destruction ; but he, conscious that He spares
The subject, and remits to suppliants

25, The dues of penalty, and is to good
Ever inclinable, was loth to face
That errand ; lest he sing his seerly strain
Li vain, and peaceful issue of his threats
Ensue. His counsel presently is flight :

3° (If, howsoe'er, there is at all the power
God to avoid, and shun the Lord's right hand,
'Neath whom the whole orb trembles and is

held
In check : but is there reason in the act


1 [Elucidation.]

2 These two lines, if this be their true sense, seem to refer to Lot's
wife. But the grammar and meaning of this introduction are alike
obscure.

3 " Metus; " used, as in other places, oi godly fear.


Which in 4 his saindy heart the prophet
dares?)

35 On the beach-lip, over against the shores
Of the Cilicians, is a city poised,5
Far-famed for trusty port — Joppa her name.
Thence therefore Jonah speeding in a barque
Seeks Tarsus,^ through the signal providence

40 Of the same God ; 7 nor marvel is't, I ween,
If, fleeing from the Lord upon the lands.
He found Him in the waves. For suddenly
A little cloud had stained the lower air
With fleecy wrack sulphureous, itself '^

45 By the wind's seed excited : by degrees,
Bearing a brood globose, it with the sun
Cohered, and with a train caliginous
Shut in the cheated day. The main becomes
The mirror of the sky ; the waves are dyed

5° With black encirclement ; the upper air
Down rushes into darkness, and the sea
Uprises ; nought of middle space is left ;
While the clouds touch the waves, and the

waves all
Are mingled by the bluster of the winds

55 In whirling eddy. 'Gainst the renegade,
'Gainst Jonah, diverse frenzy joined to rave,
While one sole barque did all the struggle

breed
'Twixt sky and surge. From this side and

from that
Pounded she reels ; 'neath each wave-break-
ing blow

^° The forest of her tackling trembles all ;


^ Lit. " from," i.e., which, urged by a heart which is that of a
saint, even though on this occasion it failed, the prophet dared.

5 Libratur.

* " Tarshish," Eng. ver. ; perhaps Tartessus in Spain. For this
question, and the " trustiness" of Joppa (now Jaffa) as a port, see
Pusey on Jonah i. 3.
1 7 Ejusdem per signa Dei.


the cloud.


127


128


APPENDIX.


As, underneath, her spmal length of keel,
Staggered by shock on shock, all palpitates ;
And, from on high, her labouring mass of

yard
Creaks shuddering ; and the tree-like mast

itself
65 Bends to the gale, misdoubting to be riven.
Meantime the rising ' clamour of the crew
Tries every chance for barque's and dear

life's sake :
To pass from hand to hand ^ the tardy coils
To tighten the girth's noose : straitly to bind
70 The tiller's struggles ; or, with breast op-
posed,
T' impel reluctant curves. Part, turn by

turn.
With foremost haste outbale the reeking well
Of inward sea. The wares and cargo all
They then cast headlong, and with losses

seek
75 Their perils to subdue. At every crash
Of the wild deep rise piteous cries ; and out
They stretch their hands to majesties of gods,
Which gods are none ; whom might of sea

and sky
Fears not, nor yet the less from off their

poops
80 With angry eddy sweeping sinks them down.
Unconscious of all this, the guilty one
'Neath the poop's hollow arch was making

sleep
Re-echo stertorous with nostril wide
Inflated : whom, so soon as he who guides
85 The functions of the wave-dividing prow
Saw him sleep-bound in placid peace, and

proud
In his repose, he, standing o'er him, shook,
And said, " Why sing'st, with vocal nostril,

dreams.
In such a crisis ? In so wild a whirl,
90 Why keep'st thou only harbour? Lo ! the

wave
Whelms us, and our one hope is in the gods.
Thou also, whosoever is thy god,
Make vows, and, pouring prayers on bended

knee.
Win o'er thy country's Sovran ! "

Then they vote
95 To learn by lot who is the culprit, who
The cause of storm ; nor does the lot belie
Jonah : whom then they ask, and ask again,
"Who? whence? who in the world? from

what abode.


' Gew/Vus (Oehler) ; ge;«/«us (Migne) =" twin clamour," which
is not inapt.

2 Mrtndare (Oehler). If this be the true reading, the rendering
in the text seems to represent the meaning; for " mandare " with an
accusative, in the sense of" to bid the tardy coils tighten the girth's
noose," seems almost too gross a solecism for even so lax a Latinist
as our present writer Migne, however, reads m«ndare = /t> " dear
the tardy coils," i.e., probably from the wash and weed with which
the gale was cloying them.


What people, hail'st thou?" He avows

himself
100 A servant, and an over-timid one,

Of God, who raised aloft the sky, who based
The earth, who corporally fused the whole :
A renegade from Him he owns himself.
And tells the reason. Rigid turned they all
105 With dread. " What grudge, then, ow'st

thou us ? What now
Will follow ? By what deed shall we appease
The main? " For more and far more swell-
ing grew
The savage surges. Then the seer begins
Words prompted by the Spirit of the Lord : 3
no " Lo ! I your tempest am ; I am the sum
Of the world's 4 madness : 'tis in me," he says,
" That the sea rises, and the upper air
Down rushes ; land in me is far, death near,
And hope in God is none ! Come, headlong

hurl
"5 Your cause of bane : lighten your ship, and

cast
This single mighty burden to the main,
A willing prey ! " But they — all vainly ! - —

strive •

Homeward to turn their course ; for helm

refused
To suffer turning, and the yard's stiff poise
120 Willed not to change. At last unto the Lord
They cry : " For one soul's sake give us not

o'er
Unto death's maw, nor let us be besprent
With righteous blood, if thus Thine own

right hand
Leadeth." And from the eddy's depth a

whale
125 Outrising on the spot, scaly with shells,5
Unravelling his body's train, 'gan urge
More near the waves, shocking the gleaming

brine,
Seizing — at God's command — the prey ;

which, rolled
From the poop's summit prone, witli slimy

jaws
'jo He sucked ; and into his long belly sped
The living feast ; and swallowed, with the

man,
The rage of sky and main. The billowy

waste
Grows level, and the ether's gloom dissolves ;
The waves on this side, and the blasts on that,


3 Tunc Domini vates ingesta Spiritus infit. Of course it is a
gross offence against quantity to make a genitive in " us " short, as
the rendering in the text does. But a writer who makes the first sylla-
ble in " clamor " and the last syllable of gerunds in dn short, would
scarcely be likely to hesitate about taking similar liberties with a
genitive of the so-called fourth declension. It is possible, it is true,
to take " vates" and " Spiritus" as in apposition, and render, "Then
the seer-Spirit of the Lord begms to utter words inspired," or, " Then
the seer-Spirit begins to utter the promptings of the Lord." But
these renderings seem to accord less well with the ensuing word.s.

■t Mundi.

s i.e., apparently with shells which had gathered about him as he
lay in the deep.


APPENDIX.


29


135 Are to their friendly mood restored ; and,
where
The placid keel marks out a path secure,
White traces in the emerald furrow bloom.
The sailor then does to the reverend Lord
Of death make grateful offering of his fear ; '

140 Then enters friendly ports.

Jonah the seer
The while is voyaging, in other craft
Embarked, and cleaving 'neath the lowest


' This seems to be the sense of Oehler's " Nauta^at turn Domino
leti venerando timorem Sacrificat grates " — " grates" being in appo-
sition with "timorem." But Migne reads: " Nautse turn Domino
laeti venerando timorem Sacrificant grates: " —

" The sailors then do to the reverend Lord
Gladly make grateful sacrifice of fear: "
and I do not see that Oehler's reading is much better.


A wave : his sails the intestines of the fish,

Inspired with breath ferine ; himself, shut in
145 By waters, yet untouched ; in the sea's heart,

And yet beyond its reach ; 'mid wrecks of
fleets

Half-eaten, and men's carcasses dissolved

In putrid disintegrity : in life

Learning the process of his death ; but still —
15° To be a sign hereafter of the Lord^ —

A witness was he (in his very self) ,3

Not of destruction, but of death's repulse.


2 Comp. Matt. .xii. 38-41 ; Luke xi. 29, 30.

3 These words are not in the original, but are inserted (I confess)
to fill up the hne, and avoid endmg with an incomplete verse. If,
however, any one is curious enough to compare the translation, with
all its defects, with the Latin, he may be somewhat surprised to find
how very little alteration or adaptation is necessary in turning verse
into verse.


2. A STRAIN OF SODOM.


(AUTHOR UNCERTAIN.)


Already had Almighty God wiped off

By vengeful flood (with waters all conjoined

Which heaven discharged on earth and the

sea's plain '
Outspued) the times of the primeval age :

5 Had pledged Himself, while nether air should
bring
The winters in their course, ne'er to decree.
By liquid ruin, retribution's due ;
And had assigned, to curb the rains, the bow
Of many hues, sealing the clouds with band

10 Of purple and of green, Iris its name,
The rain- clouds' proper baldric.^

But alike
With mankind's second race impiety
Revives, and a new age of ill once more
Shoots forth ; allotted now no more to showers

15 For ruin, but io fires : thus did the land
Of Sodom earn to be by glowing dews
Upburnt, and typically thus portend
The future end.^ There wild voluptuousness
(Modesty's foe) stood in the room of law;

20 Which prescient guest would shun, and sooner
choose
At Scythian or Busirian altar's foot
'Mid sacred rites to die, and, slaughtered, pour
His blood to Bebryx, or to satiate
Libyan palaestras, or assume new forms

25 By virtue of Circaean cups, than lose
His outraged sex in Sodom.


' Maris xquor.

^ See Gen. i.x. 21, 22, x. 8-17.

3 Comp. 2 Pet. iii. 5-14.


At heaven's gate
There knocked for vengeance marriages com-

mixt
With equal incest common 'mong a race
By nature rebels 'gainst themselves ; ■♦ and
hurts
30 Done to man's name and person equally.
But God, forewatching all things, at fix'd time
Doth judge the unjust ; with patience tarrying
The hour when crime's ripe age — not any

force
Of wrath impetuous — shall have circum-
scribed
35 The space for waiting.^

Now at length the day
Of vengeance was at hand. Sent from the

host
Angelical, two, youths in form, who both
Were ministering spirits,*" carrying
The Lord's divine commissions, come beneath
40 The walls of Sodom. There was dwelling Lot,
A transplantation from a pious stock ;


4 The expression, " sinners against their own souls," in Num. xvi.
38 — where, however, the LXX. have a very different version — may
be compared with this; as likewise Prov. viii 36.

5 Whether the above be the sense of this most obscure triplet I
will not presume to determine. It is at least (I hope) intelligible
sense. But that the reader may judge for himself whether he can
offer any better, I subjoin the lines, which form a sentence alone, and
therefore can be judged of without their context: —

"Tempore sed certo Deus omnia prospectulatus,
Judicat injustos, patiens ubi criminis setas
Ccssandi spatium vis nulla coegerit irae."

6 Comp. Heb. i. 14. It may be as well here to inform the reader
once for all that prosody as well as syntax is repeatedly set at defiance
in these metrical fragments ; and hence, of course, arise some of the
chief difficulties in dealing with them.


I^.O


APPENDIX.


Wise, and a practiser of righteousness,
He was the only one to think on God :
As oft a fruitful tree is wont to lurk,

45 Guest-like, in forests wild. He, sitting then
Before the gate (for the celestials scarce
Had reached the ramparts) , though he knew

not them
Divine,' accosts them unsolicited.
Invites, and with ancestral honour greets ;

5° And offers them, preparing to abide
Abroad, a hospice. By repeated prayers
He wins them ; and then ranges studiously
The sacred pledges- on his board,^ and quits +
His friends with courteous offices. The night

55 Had brought repose : alternate 5 dawn had
chased
The night, and Sodom with her shameful law
Makes uproar at the doors. Lot, suppliant-
wise.
Withstands : " Young men, let not your new-
fed lust
Enkindle you to violate this youth ! ^

6o Whither is passion's seed inviting you?
To what vain end your lust ? For such an end
No creatures wed : not such as haunt the fens ;
Not stall-fed cattle ; not the gaping brood
Subaqueous ; nor they which, modulant

65 On pinions, hang suspended near the clouds ;
Nor they which with forth-stretched body

creep
Over earth's face. To conjugal delight
Each kind its kind doth owe : but female still
To all is wife ; nor is there one that has

70 A mother save a female one. Yet now.
If youthful vigour holds it right ^ to waste
The flower of modesty, I have within
Two daughters of a nuptial age, in whom
Virginity is swelling in its bloom,

75 Already ripe for harvest — a desire

Worthy of men — which let your pleasure

reap !
Myself their sire, I yield them ; and will pay.
For my guests' sake, the forfeit of my grief ! "
Answered the mob insane : " And who art
thou?

80 And what? and whence? to lord it over us,
And to expound us laws ? Shall foreigner


1 " Divinos; " i.e., apparently " superhuman," as everything heav-
enly is.

2 Of hospitality — bread and salt, etc.

3 "Mensa/" but perhaps "mens^" may be suggested — " the
sacred pledges of the board"

•* " Dispungit," which is the only verb in the sentence, and refers
both to pia pigiiora and to amicos. I use " quit" in the sense in
which we speak of " quitting a debtor," i.e., giving him his full due;
but the two lines are very hard, and present (as in the case of those
before quoted) a jumble of words without grammar: "pia pignora
mensa Officiisque probis studio dispungit amicos; " which may be


hat more literally rendered than in our text, thus : "he zealously

■ges" (i.e., fulfils) "his sacred pledges" (i.e., the promised

ho.spitality which he had offered them) " with (a generous) board.


and discharges" (i.e., fulfils his obligations to) " his friends with hon-
ourable courtesies."

5 Altera = alterna. But the statement differs from Gen. xix. 4.

^ " Istam juventam," i.e., the two "juvenes" (ver, 31) within.

7 " Fas " = 6crioj',;«(irrt//y right; distinct from "jus or" licitum.


Rule Sodom, and hurl threats? Now, then,

thyself
For daughters and for guests shalt sate our

greed !
One shall suffice for all ! " So said, so done :

S5 The frantic mob delays not. As, whene'er
A turbid torrent rolls with wintry tide.
And rushes at one speed through countless

streams
Of rivers, if, just where it forks, some tree
Meets the swift waves (not long to stand,
save while

90 By her root's force she shall avail to oppose
Her tufty obstacles), when gradually
Her hold upon the undermined soil
Is failing, with her bared stem she hangs,
And, with uncertain heavings to and fro,

95 Defers her certain fall ; not otherwise
Lot in the mid-whirl of the dizzy mob
Kept nodding, now almost o'ercome. But

power
Divine brings succour : the angelic youths.
Snatching him from the threshold, to his roof

i°o Restore him ; but upon the spot they mulct
Of sight the mob insane in open day, —
Fit augury of coming penalties !
Then they unlock the just decrees of God :
That penalty condign from heaven will fall

i°5 On Sodom ; that himself had merited
Safety upon the count of righteousness,
" Gird thee, then, up to hasten hence thy

flight,
And with thee to lead out what family
Thou hast : already we are bringing on

"o Destruction o'er the city." Lot with speed
Speaks to his sons-in-law ; but their hard heart
Scorned to believe the warning, and at fear
Laughed. At what time the light attempts

to climb
The darkness, and heaven's face wears double
hue

"5 From night and day, the youthful visitants
Were instant to outlead from Sodoma
The race Chaldaean,^ and the righteous house
Consign to safety : " Ho ! come. Lot ! arise,
And take thy yokefellow and daughters twain,

120 And hence, beyond the boundaries be gone,
Preventing 9 Sodom's penalties ! " And eke
With friendly hands they lead them trembling

forth,
And then their final mandates give : " Save,

Lot,
Thy life, lest thou perchance should will to
turn

'25 Thy retroverted gaze behind, or stay

The step once taken : to the mountain speed !"


8 i.e., Lot's race or family, which had come from " Ur of the
Chaldees." See Gen. xi. 26, 27, 28.

9 I use " preventing " in its now unusual sense of "anticipating
the arrival of."


APPENDIX.


131


Lot feared to creep the heights with tardy step,
Lest the celestial wrath-fires should o'ertake
And whelm him : therefore he essays to crave

13° Some other ports ; a city small, to wit.

Which opposite he had espied. " Hereto,"
He said, " I speed my flight : scarce with its

walls
'Tis visible ; nor is it far, nor great."
They, favouring his prayer, safety assured

135 To him and to the city ; whence the spot
Is known in speech barbaric by the name
Segor.' Lot enters Segor while the sun
Is rising,^ the last sun, which glowing bears
To Sodom conflagration ; for his rays

140 He had armed all with fire : beneath him
spreads
An emulous gloom, which seeks to intercept
The light ; and clouds combine to interweave
Their smoky globes with the confused sky :
Down pours a novel shower : the ether seethes

145 With sulphur mixt with blazing flames : ^ the
air
Crackles with liquid heats exust. From

hence
The fable has an echo of the truth
Amid its false, that the sun's progeny
Would drive his father's team ; but nought
availed

150 The giddy boy to curb the haughty steeds
Of fire : so blazed our orb : then lightning

reft
The lawless charioteer, and bitter plaint
Transformed his sisters. Let Eridanus
See to it, if one poplar on his banks

155 Whitens, or any bird dons plumage there
Whose note old age makes mellow ! •♦

Here they mourn
O'er miracles of metamorphosis
Of other sort. For, partner of Lot's flight.
His wife (ah me, for woman ! even then 5

160 Intolerant of law !) alone turned back
At the unearthly murmurs of the sky)
Her daring eyes, but bootlessly : not doomed
To utter what she saw ! and then and there
Changed into brittle salt, herself her tomb

165 She stood, herself an image of herself.
Keeping an incorporeal form : and still


' 2>)Yuip in the LXX., " Zoar" in Eng. ver.

2 " Siiitul exoriiur sol." But both the LXX. and the Eng. ver.
say the sun was risen when Lot entered the city.

3 So Oehler and Migne. But perhaps we may alter the pointing
slightly, and read : —

" Down pours a novel shower, sulphur mixt
With blazing flames: the ether seethes: the air
Crackles with liquid heats exust."
* The story of Phaethon and his fate is told in Ov., Met., ii. 1-399,
which may be compared with the present piece. His two sisters were
transformed into white poplars, according to some; alders, according
toothers. See Virg., yfe«., x. 190 sqq., Ec.,\\. 62 sqq. His half
brother (Cycnus or Cygnus) was turned into a swan: and the scene
of these transformations is laid by Ovid on the banks of the Eridanus
(the Po). But the fable is variously told; and it has been suggested
that the groundwork of it is to be found rather in the still-standing
of the sun recorded in Joshua.

s i.e., as she had been before in the case of Eve. See Gen. iii. i
sqq.


In her unsheltered station 'neath the heaven
Dures she, by rains unmelted, by decay
And winds unwasted ; nay, if some strange
hand
170 Deface her form, forthwith from her own
store
Her wounds she doth repair. Still is she

said
To live, and, 'mid her corporal change, dis-
charge
With wonted blood her sex's monthly dues.

Gone are the men of Sodom ; gone the glare
175 Of their unhallowed ramparts ; all the house

Inhospitable, with its lords, is gone :

The champaign is one pyre ; here embers
rough

And black, here ash-heaps with hoar mould,
mark out

The conflagration's course : evanished
iSo Is all that old fertility'^ which Lot,

Seeing outspread before him, . . .


No ploughman spends his fruitless toil on

glebes
Pitchy with soot : or if some acres there.
But half consumed, still strive to emulate
'S5 Autumn's glad wealth, pears, peaches, and
all fruits
Promise themselves full easely 7 to the eye
In fairest bloom, until the plucker's hand
Is on them : then forthwith the seeming

fruit
Crumbles to dust 'neath the bewraying touch,
•9° And turns to embers vain.

Thus, therefore (sky
And earth entombed alike), not e'en the sea
Lives there : the quiet of that quiet sea
Is death ! ** — a sea which no wave animates
Through its anhealant volumes ; which be-
neath


^ I have hazarded the bold conjecture — which I see others (Pa-
melius at all events) had hazarded before me — that " feritas " is used
by our author as = " fertilitas." The word, of course, is very incor-
rectly formed etymologically; but etymology is not our author s _/('>-/^
apparently. It will also be seen that there is seemingly a gap at this
point, or else some enormous mistake, in the Mss. An attempt has
been made (see Migne) to correct it, but not a very satisfactory one.
For the common reading, which gives two lines,

" Occidit ilia prior feritas, quam prospiciens Loth
Nullus arat frustra piceas fuligine glebas,"
which are evidently entirely unconnected with one another, it is pro-
posed to read,

" Occidit ilia prior feritas, quam prospiciens Loth,
Descruissc pii fertur commercia frairis. A
Nullus arat," etc. ^

This use of " fratris " in a wide sense may be justified from Gen.
xiii. 8 (to which passage, with its immediate context, there seems to
be a reference, whether we adopt the proposed correction or no) , and
similar passages in Holy Writ. But the transition is still abrupt to
the "nullus arat," etc.; and I prefer to leave the passage as it is,
without attempting to supply the hiatus.

7 This use of "easely "as a dissyllable is justifiable from Spen-
ser.

8 This seems to be the sense, but the Latin is somewhat strange:
" mors est maris ilia quieti," i.e., ilia (quits) maris quieti mors c.-it.
The opening lines of " Jonah" (above) should be compared with this
passage and its context.


APPENDIX.


'95 Its native Auster sighs not anywhere ;

Which cannot from its depths one scaly

race,
Or with smooth skin or cork-hke fence en-
cased,
Produce, or curled shell in single valve
Or double fold enclosed. Bitumen there
200 (The sooty reek of sea exust) alone.

With its own crop, a spurious harvest yields ;
Which 'neath the stagnant surface vivid heat
From seething mass of sulphur and of brine
Maturing tempers, making earth cohere
205 Into a pitch marine.' At season due
The heated water's fatty ooze is borne
Up to the surface ; and with foamy flakes
Over the level top a tawny skin
Is woven. They whose function is to catch
210 That ware put to, tilting their smooth skiu
down
With balance of their sides, to teach the

film,
Once o'er the gunnel, to float in : for, lo !
Raising itself spontaneous, it will swim
- Up to the edge of the unmoving craft ;


Inque picem dat terrae hserere marinam.


215 And will, when pressed,^ for guerdon large,
ensure
Immunity from the defiling touch
Of weft which female monthly efflux clothes.
Behold another portent notable.
Fruit of that sea's disaster : all things cast

220 Therein do swim : gone is its native power
For sinking bodies : if, in fine, you launch
A torch's lightsome ^ hull (where spirit serves
For fire) therein, the apex of the flame
Will act as sail ; put out the flame, and 'neath

225 The waters will the light's wreckt ruin go !

Such Sodom's and Gomorrah's penalties.
For ages sealed as signs before the eyes
Of unjust nations, whose obdurate hearts
God's fear have quite forsaken,^ will them

teach
230 To reverence heaven-sanctioned rights,^ and

lift
Their gaze unto one only Lord of all.


2 "Pressum" (Oehler) ; "pretium" (Migne): "it will yield a
prize, namely, that," etc.

3 Luciferam.

* Oehler's pointing is disregarded.

s " De caelo jura tueri; " possibly " to look for laws from heaven."


3. GENESIS.


(AUTHOR UNCERTAIN.)


In the beginning did the Lord create

The heaven and earth : ' for formless was the

land,2
And hidden by the wave, and God immense 3
O'er the vast watery plains was hovering.
While chaos and black darkness shrouded all :
Which darkness, when God bade be from the

pole'*
Disjoined, He speaks, " Let there be light ; "

and all
In the clear world s was bright. Then, when

the Lord
The first day's work had finished, He formed
Heaven's axis white with nascent clouds : the

deep
Immense receives its wandering ^ shores, and

waws


' Terram.

2 Tellus.

3 Immensus. See note on the word in the fragment " Concerning
the Cursing of the Heathen's Gods."

* Cardine.

5 Mundo.

'i " Errantia; " so called, probably, either because they appear to
move as ships pass them, or because they may be said to " wander"
by reason of the constant change which they undergo from the action
of the sea, and because of the shifting nature of their sands.


The rivers manifold with mighty trains.

The third dun light unveiled earth's ^ face,
and soon

(Its name assigned^) the dry land's story
'gins :
15 Together on the windy champaigns rise

The flowery seeds, and simultaneously

Fruit-bearing boughs put forth procurvant
arms.

The fourth day, with 9 the sun's lamp gen-
erates

The moon, and moulds the stars with trem-
ulous light
20 Radiant : these elements it '° gave as signs

To th' underlying world," to teach the times

Which, through their rise and setting, were
to change.

Then, on the fifth, the liquid " streams receive

Their fish, and birds poise in the lower air
25 Their pinions many-hued. The sixth, again,


7 Terrarum.

8 " God called the dry land Earth: " Gen. i. lo.

9 i.e., " together with; " it begets both sun and moon.
1° i.e., " the fourth day."

It Mundo.

'2 Or, " lucid " — liquentia.


APPENDIX.


i33


Supples the ice-cold snakes into their coils,

And over the whole fields diffuses herds

Of quadrupeds ; and mandate gave that all

Should grow with multiplying seed, and roam
30 And feed in earth's immensity.

All these

When power divine by mere command ar-
ranged,

Observing that things mundane still would
lack

A ruler, thus It ' speaks : " With utmost care.

Assimilated to our own aspect,^
35 Make We a man to reign in the whole orb."

And him, although He with a single word ^

Could have compounded, yet Himself did
deign

To shape him with His sacred own right
hand.

Inspiring his dull breast from breast divine.
40 Whom when He saw formed in a likeness
such

As is His own, He measures how he broods

Alone on gnawing cares. Straightway his
eyes

With sleep irriguous He doth perfuse ;

That from his left rib woman softlier
45 May formed be, and that by mixture twin

His substance may add firmness to her limbs.

To her the name of "Life" — which is
called "Eve " "^ —

Is given : wherefore sons, as custom is.

Their parents leave, and, with a settled home,
50 Cleave to their wives.

• The seventh came, when God

At His works' end did rest, decreeing it

Sacred unto the coming ages' joys.

Straightway — the crowds of living things
deployed

Before him — Adam's cunning skill (the .gift
55 Of the good Lord) gives severally to all

The name which still is permanent. Himself,

And, joined with him, his Eve, God deigns
address

" Grow, for the times to come, with manifold

Increase, that with your seed the pole and
earth 5
60 Be filled ; and, as Mine heirs, the varied
fruits

Pluck ye, which groves and champaigns ren-
der you,

From their rich turf." Thus after He dis-
coursed.

In gladsome court *" a paradise is strewn,

And looks towards the rays of th' early sun.^


' I.e., "Power Divine."
2 So Milton and Shakespeare.
' As (see above, 1. 31) He had all other things.
■• See Gen. iii. 20, with the LXX , and the inarg. in the Eng. ver
5 Terr^e.

^ The " gladsome court " — " teta aula " — seems to mean F.iicn,
in which the garden is said to have been planted. See Gen. ii. 8.
7 i.e., eastward. See the last reference.


65 These joys among, a tree with deadly fruits,
Breeding, conjoined, the taste of life and

death.
Arises. In the midst of the demesne ^
Flows with pure tide a stream, which irrigates
Fair offsprings from its liquid waves, and cuts
70 Quadrified paths from out its bubbling fount.
Here wealthy Phison, with auriferous waves,
Swells, and with hoarse tide wears ^ conspicu-
ous gems.
This prasinus,'° that glowing carbuncle,"
By name ; and laves, transparent in its shoals,
75 The margin of the land of Havilath.
Next Gihon, gliding by the yEthiops,
Enriches them. The Tigris is the third,
Adjoined to fair Euphrates, furrowing
Disjunctively with rapid flood the land
80 Of Asshur. Adam, with his faithful wife,
Placed here as guard and workman, is in-
formed
By such the Thunderer's " speech : " Tremble ,

ye not
To pluck together the permitted fruits
Which, with its leafy bough, the unshorn
grove
S5 Hath furnished ; anxious only lest perchance
Ye cull the hurtful apple, '^ which is green
With a twin juice for functions several."
And, no less blind meantime than Night her-
self.
Deep night 'gan hold them, nor had e'en a
robe
9° Covered their new- formed limbs.

Amid these haunts,
And on mild berries reared, a foamy snake,
Surpassing living things in sense astute.
Was creeping silently with chilly coils.
He, brooding over envious lies instinct
95 With gnawing sense, tempts the soft heart
beneath
The woman's breast : " Tell me, why shouldst

thou dread
The apple's '■* happy seeds ? Whv, hath not

God
All known fruits hallowed ? '5 Whence if thou

be prompt
To cull the honeyed fruits, the golden world '^
100 Will on its starry pole return." '7 But she
Refuses, and the boughs forbidden fears
To touch. But yet her breast 'gins be o'er-
come


8 ilJdibus in mediis.

9 Terit. So Job (xiv. 19), " The waters wear the stones."
'° " Onyx," Eng. ver. See the following piece, 1. 277.

" " Bdellium," Eng. Ver.; S-vepa^, LXX.

'- Comp. Ps. xxix. 3, especially in " Great Bible " (xxviii. 3 in
LXX.).

•3 Malum.

u Mali.

'5 " Numquid poma Deus non omnia nota sacravit? "

'6 Mundus.

'7 The writer, supposing it to be night (see 88, 89), seems to mean
that the serpent liinted that the fruit would instantly dispel night and
restore day. Compare the ensuing lines.


134


APPENDIX.


With sense infirm. Straightway, as she at

length
With snowy tooth the dainty morsels bit,
105 Stained with no cloud the sky serene up-lit !
Then taste, instilling lure in honeyed jaws,
To her yet uninitiated lord
Constrained her to present the gift ; which he
No sooner took, than — night effaced ! —

their eyes
1 10 Shone out serene in the resplendent world.'
When, then, they each their body bare

espied.
And when their shameful parts they see, with

leaves
Of fig they shadow them.

By chance, beneath
The sun's now setting light, they recognise
115 The sound of the Lord's voice, and, trem-
bling, haste
To bypaths. Then the Lord of heaven

accosts
The mournful Adam : "Say, where now thou

art."
Who suppliant thus answers : "Thine address,

0 Lord, O Mighty One, I tremble at,

120 Beneath my fearful heart ; and, being bare,

1 faint with chilly dread." Then said the
Lord :

"Who hath the hurtful fruits, then, given

you?"
"This woman, while she tells me how her

eyes
With brilliant day promptly perfused were,
125 And on her dawned the liquid sky serene.
And heaven's sun and stars, o'ergave them

me ! "
Forthwith God's anger frights perturbed Eve,
While the Most High inquires the authorship
Of the forbidden act. Hereon she opes
13° Her tale: "The speaking serpent's suasive

words
I harboured, while the guile and bland re-
. quest

Misled me : for, with venoms viperous
His words inweaving, stories told he me
Of those delights which should all fruits

excel."
135 Straightway the Omnipotent the dragon's

deeds
Condemns, and bids him be to all a sight
Unsightly, monstrous ; bids him presently
With grovelling beast to crawl ; and then to

bite
And chew the soil ; while war should to all

time
140 'Twixt human senses and his tottering self
Be waged, that he might creep, crestfallen,

prone,


Mundo.


Behind the legs of men,^ — that while he

glides
Close on their heels they may down-trample

him.
The woman, sadly caught by guileful words,
145 Is bidden yield her fruit with struggle hard.
And bear her husband's yoke with patient

zeal.3
" But thou, to whom the sentence ■* of thy

wife
(Who, vanquished, to the dragon pitiless
Yielded) seemed true, shalt through long

times deplore
15° Thy labour sad ; for thou shalt see, instead
Of wheaten harvest's seed, the thistle rise,
And the thorn plenteously with pointed

spines :
So that, with weary heart and mournful

breast.
Full many sighs shall furnish anxious food ; s
155 Till, in the setting hour of coming death,

To level earth, whence thou thy body draw'st,
. Thou be restored." This done, the Lord

bestows
Upon the trembling pair a tedious life ;
And from the sacred gardens far removes
160 Them downcast, and locates them opposite,
And from the threshold bars them by mid

fire,
Wherein from out the swift heat is evolved
A cherubim,^ while fierce the hot point

glows.
And rolls enfolding flames. And lest their

limbs
165 With sluggish cold should be benumbed, the

Lord
Hides flayed from cattle's flesh together sews.
With vestures warm their bare limbs cover-
ing.
When, therefore, Adam — now believing —

felt
(By wedlock taught) his manhood, he confers
170 On his loved wife the mother's name; and,

made
Successively by scions twain a sire.
Gives names to stocks ? diverse : Cain the first
Hath for his name, to whom is Abel joined.
The latter's care tended the harmless sheep ;
175 The other turned the earth with curved

plough.


- Virorum. . . „ , << j

3 " Servitiumque sui studio perferre mariti;" or, perhaps, and

drudge in patience at her husband's beck."

4'" Sententia: " her sentence, or opinion, as to the fruit and its

effects.

5 Or,

" That with heart-weariness and mournful breast
Full many sighs may furnish anxious food."

6 The writer makes "cherubim" — or "cherubin" — singular. I
have therefore retained his mistake. What the " hot point " — " cali-
dus apex " — is, is not clear. It may be an allusion to the " flaming
sword " (see Gen. iii. 24) ; or it may mean the top of the flame.

7 Or, "origins" — "orsis" — because Cain and Abel were origi-
nal types, as it were, of two separate classes of men.


APPENDIX.


135


These, when in course of time ' they brought

their gifts
To Him who thunders, offered — as their

sense
Prompted them — fruits unlike. The elder

one
Offered the first-fruits ^ of the fertile glebes :
180 The other pays his vows with gentle lamb.
Bearing in hand the entrails pure, and fat
Snow-white ; and to the Lord, who pious vows
Beholds, is instantly acceptable.
Wherefore with anger cold did Cain glow ; ^
1S5 \\lth whom God deigns to talk, and thus

begins :
"Tell Me, if thou live rightly, and discern
Things hurtful, couldst thou not then pass

thine age
Pure from contracted guilt? Cease to essay


' "Perpetuo;" "in process of time," Eng. ver. ; fieS' r;/xepa?,
LXX. in Gen. iv. 3.

2 Quae prosata fuerant. But, as Wordsworth remarks on Gen. iv.,
we do not read that Cain's offerings were first-fruits even.

^ Quod propter gehda Cai'n incanduit ira. If this, which is
Oehler's and JMigne's reading, be correct, the words gelida. and in-
catidnit seem to be intentionally contrasted, unless iiicandescere be
used here in a supposed sense of " growing white," " turning pale."
Urere IS used in Latin of heat and cold indifferently. Calida would,
of course, be a ready emendation ; but gelida has the advantage of
being far more startlmg.


With gnawing sense thy brother's ruin, who,
190 Subject to thee as lord, his neck shall yield."
Not e'en thus softened, he unto the fields
Conducts his brother ; whom when overta'en
In lonely mead he saw, with his twin palms
Bruising his pious throat, he crushed life out.
195 Which deed the Lord espying from high

heaven,
Straitly demands "where Abel is on earth?"
He says " he will not as his brother's guard
Be set." Then God outspeaks to him again :
" Doth not the sound of his blood's voice,

sent up
200 To Me, ascend unto heaven's lofty pole ?
Learn, therefore, for so great a crime what

doom
Shall wait thee. Earth, which with thy kins-
man's blood
Hath reeked but now, shall to thy hateful

hand
Refuse to render back the cursed seeds
205 Entrusted her ; nor shall, if set with herbs,
Produce her fruit : that, torpid, thou shalt

dash
Thy limbs against each other with much

fear."


4. A STRAIN OF THE JUDGMENT OF THE LORD.

(AUTHOR UNCERTAIN.)!


Who will for me in fitting strain adapt
Field-haunting muses ? and with flowers will

grace
The spring-tide's rosy gales ? And who will

give
The summer harvest's heavy stalks mature?

5 And to the autumn's vines their swollen
grapes ?
Or who in winter's honour will commend
The olives, ever-peaceful? and will ope
Waters renewed, even at their fountainheads ?
And cut from waving grass the leafy flowers ?

1° Forthwith the breezes of celestial light
I win attune. Now be it granted me
To meet the lightsome ^ muses ! to disclose
The secret rivers on the fluvial top
Of Helicon,^ and gladsome woods that grow

15 'Neath other star.-* And simultaneously


' The reader is requested to bear in mind, in reading this piece,
tedious in its elaborate struggles after effect, that the constant repeti-
tions of words and expressions with which his patience will be tried,
are due to the original. It was irksome to reproduce them; but
fidelity is a translator's first law.

'^ Luciferas.

3 Helicon is not named in the original, but it seems to be meant.

* i.e., in another clime or continent. "The writer is (or feigns to
be) an African. Helicon, of course, is in Europe.


I will attune in song the eternal flames ;
Whence the sea fluctuates with wave im-
mense ;
What powers moves the solid lands to quake ;
And whence the golden light first shot its

rays
20 On the new world ; or who from gladsome

clay .

Could man have moulded ; whence in empty

world ^
Our race could have upgrown ; and what the

greed
Of living which each people so inspires ;
What things for ill created are ; or what
25 Death's propagation ; whence have rosy

wreaths
Sweet smell and ruddy hue ; what makes the

vine
Ferment in gladsome grapes away ; and

makes
Full granaries by fruit of slender stalks

distended be ; or makes the tree grow ripe


5 Virtus.

6 Saeculo.


APPENDIX.


3° 'Mid ice, with olives black ; who gives to
seeds
Their increments of vigour various ;
And with her young's soft shadowings pro-
tects
The mother. Good it is all things to know
Which wondrous are in nature, that it may
35 Be granted us to recognise through all

The true Lord, who light, seas, sky, earth

prepared.
And decked with varied star the new-made

world ; '
And first bade beasts and birds to issue forth ;
And gave the ocean's waters to be stocked
40 With fish ; and gathered in a mass the sands.
With living creatures fertilized. Such strains
With stately ^ muses will I spin, and waves
Healthful will from their fountainheads dis-
close :
And may this strain of mine the gladsome
shower
45 Catch, which from placid clouds doth come,
and flows
Deeply and all unsought into men's souls,
And guide it into our new-turned lands
In copious rills.3

Now come : if any one
Sdll ignorant of God, and knowing naught
50 Of life to come,'* would fain attain to touch
The care-effacing living nymph, and through
The swift waves' virtue his lost life repair,
And 'scape the penalties of flame eterne,^
And rather win the guerdons of the Ufe
55 To come, let such remember God is One,
Alone the object of our prayers ; who 'neath
His threshold hath the whole world poised ;

Himself
Eternally abiding, and to be
Alway for aye ; holding the ages^ all ;
60 Alone, before all ages ; '' unbegotten,
Limidess God ; who holds alone His seat
Supernal ; supereminent alone
Above high heavens ; omnipotent alone ;
Whom all things do obey ; who for Hunself
65 Formed, when it pleased Him, man for aye ;
and gave
Him to be pastor of beasts tame, and lord
Of wild ; who by a word ^ could stretch forth

heaven ;
And with a word could solid earth suspend ;


' Mundum.

2 Compositis.

3 I have endeavoured to give some intelligible sense to these
lines ; but the absence of syntax in the original, as it now stands,
makes it necessary to guess at the meaning as best one may.

■> Venturi sevi.

S "But in them nature's copy's not eteriie." — Shakespeare,
Macbeth, act iii. scene 2.

* Saecula.

7 SertHotie tentts : i.e., the exertion (so to speak) needed to do
such mighty works only extended to the uttering of a speech ; no
more was requisite. See for a similar allusion to the contrast be-
tween the making of other things and the making of man, the
" Genesis," 30-39.


And quicklier than word^ had the seas wave
70 Disjoined ; ? and man's dear form with His

own hands
Did love to mould ; and furthermore did

will
His own fair likeness '° to exist in him ;
And by His Spirit on his countenance
The breath" of life did breathe.
Unmindful he
75 Of God, such guilt rashly t' incur ! Beyond
The warning's range he was not ought to

touch. '^
One fruit illicit, whence he was to know
Forthwith how to discriminate alike
Evil and equity, God him forbade
So To touch. What functions of the world "^ did

God
Permit to man, and sealed the sweet sweet

pledge
Of His own love ! and jurisdiction gave
O'er birds, and granted him both deep and

soil
To tame, and mandates useful did impart
S5 Of dear salvation ! 'Neath his sway He gave
The lands, the souls of flying things, the race
Feathered, and every race, or tame or wild,
Of beasts, and the sea's race, and monster-
forms
Shapeless of swimming things. But since so

soon
90 The primal man by primal crime transgressed
The law, and left the mandates of the Lord
(Led by a wife who counselled all the ills),
By death he 'gan to perish. Woman 'twas
Who sin's first ill committed, and (the law
95 Transgressed) deceived her husband. Eve,

induced
By guile, the thresholds oped to death, and

proved
To her own self, with her whole race as

well,
A procreatrix of funereal woes.
Hence unanticipated wickedness,
100 Hence death, like seed, for aye, is scattered.

Then
More frequent grew atrocious deed ; and toil
More savage set the corrupt orb astir :
(This lure the crafty serpent spread, inspired
By envy's self:) then peoples more invent
i°5 Practices of ill deeds ; and by ill deeds
Gave birth to seeds of wickedness.

And so
The only Lord, whose is the power supreme,


8 Dicto.

9 i.e., from the solid mass of earth. See Gen. i. 9,
'° Faciem.

II " Auram," or "breeze."

i^ " Immemor ille Dei temere committere tale!

Non ultra monitum quidquam contlngeret."
Whether I have hit the sense here I know not.
other passages I have punctuated for myself.
13 Munera mundi.


APPENDIX.


^Z7


Who o'er the heights the summits holds of

heaven
Supreme, and in exalted regions dwells
"0 In lofty light for ages, mindful too
Of present time, and of futurity
Prescient beforehand, keeps the progeny
Of ill-desert, and all the souls which move
By reason's force much-erring man — nor less
i'5 Their tardy bodies governs He — against
The age decreed, so soon as, stretched in

death,
Men lay aside their ponderous limbs, and,

light
As air, shall go, their earthly bonds undone.
And take in diverse parts their proper spheres.
120 (But some He bids be forthwith by glad gales
Recalled to life, and be in secret kept
To wait the decreed law's awards, until
Their bodies with resuscitated limbs
Revive.') Then shall men 'gin to weigh the
awards
125 Of their first life, and on their crime and faults
To think, and- keep them for their penalties
Which will be far from death ; and mindful

grow
Of pious duties, by God's judgments taught ;
To wait expectant for their penalty
130 And their descendants', fruit of their own
crime ;
Or else to live wholly the life of sheep,^
Without a name ; and in God's ear, now deaf,
Pour unavailing weeping.

Shall not God
Almighty, 'neath whose law are all things
ruled,
135 Be able after death life to restore?

Or is there ought which the creation's Lord
Unable seems to do? If, darkness chased.
He could outstretch the light, and could

compound
All the world's mass by a word suddenly,
140 And raise by potent voice all things from
iioiighf,
Why out of somewhat^ could He not com-
pound
The well-known shape which erst had been,

which He
Had moulded formerly ; and bid the form
Arise assimilated to Himself
145 Again? Since God's are all things, earth the
more


' These lines, again, are but a guess at the meaning of the origi-
nal, which is as obscure as defiance of grammar can well make it.
The sense seems to be, in brief, that while the vast majority are, im-
mediately on their death, shut up in Hades to await the "decreed
age," i.e., the day of judgment, some, like the children raised by
Elijah and Elisha, the man who revived on touching Elisha's bones,
and the like, are raised to die again. Lower down it will be seen
that the writer believes that the saints who came out of their graves
after our Lord's resurrection (.see Matt, xxvii. 51-54) did not die
again.

2 Cf. Ps. xlix. 14 (xlviii. 15 in LXX.).

3 i.e., the dust into which our bodies turn.


Gives Him all back ; for she will, when He

bids,
Unweave whate'er she woven had before.
If one, perhaps, laid on sepulchral pyre,
The flame consumed ; or one in its blind

waves
'5° The ocean have dismembered ; if of one ,
The entrails have, in hunger, satisfied
The fishes ; or on any's limbs wild beasts
Have fastened cruel death ; or any's blood.
His body reft by birds, unhid have lain :
155 Yet shall they not wrest from the mighty Lord
His latest dues. Need is that men appear
Quickened from death 'fore God, and at His

bar
Stand in their shapes resumed. Thus arid

seeds
Are dropt into the vacant lands, and deep
160 In the fixt furrows die and rot : and hence
Is not their surface ■♦ animated soon
With stalks repaired? and do theys not grow

strong
And yellow with the living grains ? and, rich
With various usury ,'^ new harvests rise
165 In mass? The stars all set, and, born again.
Renew their sheen ; and day dies with its

light
Lost in dense night ; and now night wanes

herself
As light unveils creation presently ;
And now another and another day
170 Rises from its own stars ; and the sun sets,
Bright as it is with splendour-bearing light ;
Light perishes when by the coming eve
The worlds is shaded ; and the phoenix lives
By her own soot ^ renewed, and presently
175 Rises, again a bird, O wondrous sight !
After her burnings ! The bare tree in time
Shoots with her leaves ; and once more are

her boughs
Curved by the germen of the fruits.

While then
The world 9 throughout is trembling at God's

voice,
1 80 And deeply moved are the high air's powers, '°
Then comes a crash unwonted, then ensue
Heaven's mightiest murmurs, on the ap-
proach of God,
The whole world's " Judge ! His coundess

ministers
Forthwith conjoin their rushing march, and

God


* i.e., the surface or ridge of the furrows.

5 i.e., the furrows. ,j

6 " Some thirty-fold, some sixty-fold, some an hundred-fold. See
the parable of the sower.

7 Mundo.

8 Fuligine.

9 Mundo.

'° Virtutibus. Perhaps the allusion is to Eph. u. 2, Matt. xxiv.
29, Luke xxi. 26.
" Mundi.


138


APPENDIX.


185 With majesty supernal fence around.

Angelic bands will from the heaven descend
To earth ; all, God's host, whose is faculty
Divine ; in form and visage spirits all
Of virtue : in them fiery vigour is ;
190 Rutilant are their bodies ; heaven's might
Divine about them flashes ; the whole orb
Hence murmurs ; and earth, trembUng to

her depths
(Or whatsoe'er her bulk is '), echoes back
The roar, parturient of men, whom she,
195 Being bidden, will with grief upyield.^ All

stand
In wonderment. At last disturbed are
The clouds, and the stars move and quake

from height
Of sudden power.3 When thus God comes,

with voice
Of pote'nt sound, at once throughout all

realms
200 The sepulchres are burst, and every ground
Outpours bones from wide chasms, and open-
ing sand
Outbelches living peoples ; to the hair 4
The members cleave ; the bones inwoven are
With marrow ; the entwined sinews rule
205 The breathing bodies ; and the veins 'gin

throb
With simultaneously infused blood :
And, from their caves dismissed, to open day
Souls are restored, and seek to find again
Each its own organs, as at their own place
210 They rise. O wondrous faith ! Hence every

age
Shoots forth ; forth shoots from ancient dust

the host
Of dead. Regaining light, there rise again
Mothers, and sires, and high-souled youths,

and boys.
And maids unwedded ; and deceased old men
215 Stand by with living souls ; and with the cries
Of babes the groaning orb resounds. 5 Then

tribes
Various from their lowest seats will come :
Bands of the Easterns ; those which earth's


1 Vel quanta est. If this be the right sense, the words are prob-
ably inserted, because the conflagration of " the earth and the works
that are therein " predicted in 2 Pet. iii. 10, and referred to lower
down in this piece, is supposed to have begun, and thus the " depths "
of the earth are supposed to be already diminishing.

2 I have ventured to alter one letter of the Latin; and for " quos
reddere jussa dorebit," read " quos reddere jussa do/ebit." If the
common reading be retained, the only possible meaning seems to be
"whom she will teach to render (to God) His commands," i.e., to
render obedience to them; or else, "to render (to God) what they
are bidden to render," i.e , an account of themselves; and earth, as
their mother, giving them birth out of her womb, is said to teach them
to do this. But the emendation, which is at all events simple, seems
to give a better sense: " being bidden to render the dead, whom she
is keeping, up, earth will grieve at the throes it causes her, but will
doit."

3 Subitse virtutis ab alto.

4 Comis, here " the heads."

s This passage is imitated from Virgil, ^^«.,vi. 305 sqq.; Georg.,
iv. 475 sqq.


Sees ; those which dwell in the downsloping

clime
220 Of the mid-world, and hold the frosty star's
Riphtean citadels. Every colonist
Of every land stands frighted here : the

boor;
The son of Atreus ^ with his diadem
Of royalty put off; the rich man mixt
225 Coequally in line with pauper peers.

Deep tremor everywhere : then groans the

orb
With prayers ; and peoples stretching forth

their hands
Grow stupid with the din !

The Lord Himself
Seated, is bright with light sublime ; and fire
23° Potent in all the Virtues ? flashing shines.
And on His high-raised throne the Heavenly

One
Coruscates from His seat ; with martyrs

hemmed
(A dazzling troop of men), and by His seers
Elect accompanied (whose bodies bright
23s Effulgent are with snowy stoles), He towers
Above them. And now priests in lustrous

robes
Attend, who wear upon their marked ^ front
Wreaths golden-red; and all submissive

kneel
And reverently adore. The cry of all
240 Is one : " O Holy, Holy, Holy, God ! "

To these 9 the Lord will mandate give, to

range
The people in twin lines ; and orders them
To set apart by number the depraved ;
While such as have His biddings followed
245 With placid words He calls, and bids them,

clad
With vigour — death quite conquered — ever

dwell
Amid light's inextinguishable airs,
Stroll through the ancients' ever blooming

realm.
Through promised wealth, through ever sunny

swards,
250 And in bright body spend perpetual hfe.

A place there is, beloved of the Lord,
In Eastern coasts, where light is bright and

clear.
And healthier blows the breeze ; day is

eterne,
Time changeless : 'tis a region set apart
255 By God, most rich in plains, and passing

blest.


6 i.e., " the king." The " Atridae " of Homer are referred to,—
Agamemnon " king of men," and Menelaus.
^ Or, " Powers."

8 Insigni. The allusion seems tobe to Ezek. i.v. 4, 6, Rev. vii. 3 et
seqq., xx. 3, 4, and to the inscribed mitre of the Jewish high priest,
see Ex. xxviii. 36, xxxix. 30.

9 I have corrected "his" {ox "hie." If the latter be retamed,
it would seem to mean " hereon."


APPENDIX.


139


In the meridian ' of His cloudless seat.
There gladsome is the air, and is in light
Ever to be ; soft is the wind, and breathes
Life-giving blasts ; earth, fruitful with a soil
260 Luxuriant, bears all things ; in the meads
Flowers shed their fragrance ; and upon the

plains
The purple — not in envy — mingles all
With golden-ruddy light. One gladsome

flower,
With its own lustre clad, another clothes ;
265 And here with many a seed the dewy fields
Are dappled, and the snowy tilths are crisped
With rosy flowers. No region happier
Is known in other spots ; none which in look
Is fairer, or in honour more excels.
270 Never in flowery gardens are there born
Such lilies, nor do such upon our plains
Outbloom ; nor does the rose so blush, what

time.
New-born, 'tis opened by the breeze ; nor is
The purple with such hue by Tyrian dye
275 Imbued, With coloured pebbles beauteous

gleams
The gem : here shines the prasinus ; ^ there

glows
The carbuncle ; and giant-emerald
Is green with grassy light. Here too are

born
The cinnamons, with odoriferous twigs ;
280 And with dense leaf gladsome amomum

joins
Its fragrance. Here, a native, lies the gold
Of radiant sheen ; and lofty groves reach

heaven
In blooming time, and germens fruitfuUest
Burden the living boughs. No glades like

these
285 Hath Ind herself forth-stretcht ; no tops so

dense
Rears on her mount the pine ; nor with a

shade
So lofty-leaved is her cypress crisped ;
Nor better in its season blooms her bough
In spring-tide. Here black firs on lofty peak
290 Bloom ; and the only woods that know no

hail
Are green eternally : no foliage falls ;
At no time fails the flower. There, too, there

blooms
A flower as red as Tarsine purple is :
A rose, I ween, it is (red hue it has,
295 An odour keen) ; such aspect on its leaves
It wears, such odour breathes. A tree it ^

stands.
With a new flower, fairest in fruits ; a crop


' Cardine, i.e., the hinge as it were upon which the sun turns in
his course.

^ See the " Genesis," 73.

3 Or, " there." The question is, whether a different tree is
meant, or the rose just spoken of.


Life-giving, dense, its happy strength does

yield.
Rich honies with green cane their fragrance

join.
And milk flows potable in runnels full ;
And with whate'er that sacred earth is green,
It all breathes life ; and there Crete's healing

gift 4
Is sweetly redolent. There, with smooth

tide.
Flows in the placid plains a fount : four

floods
Thence water parted lands. 5 The garden

robed
With flowers, I wot, keeps ever spring ; no

cold
Of wintry star varies the breeze ; and earth,
After her birth-throes, with a kindlier blast
Repairs. Night there is none ; the stars

maintain
Their darkness ; angers, envies, and dire

greed
Are absent ; and out-shut is fear, and cares
Driven from the threshold. Here the Evil

One
Is homeless ; he is into worthy courts
Out-gone, nor is't e'er granted him to touch
The glades forbidden. But here ancient

faith
Rests in elect abode ; and life here treads,
Joying in an eternal covenant ;
And health *" without a care is gladsome here
In placid tilths, ever to hve and be
Ever in light.

Here whosoe'er hath lived
Pious, and cultivant of equity
And goodness ; who hath feared the thun-
dering God
With mind sincere ; with sacred duteousness
Tended his parents ; and his other life ^
Spent ever crimeless ; or who hath consoled
With faithful help a friend in indigence;
Succoured the over-toiling needy one,
As orphans' patron, and the poor man's aid ;
Rescued the innocent, and succoured them
When prest with accusation ; hath to guests
His am])le table's pledges given ; hath done
All things divinely ; pious offices
Enjoined ; done hurt to none ; ne'er coveted
Another's : such as these, exulting all
In divine praises, and themselves at once
Exhorting, raise their voices to the stars ;
Thanksgivings to the Lord in joyous wise
They psalming celebrate ; and they shall go


■♦ This seems to be >««rj/«;«rt//(JTOj.

5 Here again it is plain that the writer is drawing his description
from what we read of the garden of Eden.

6 " Salus," heahh (probably) in its widest sense, both bodily and
mental; or perhaps " safety," " salvation."

^ Rehquam vitam, i.e, apparently his life in all other relations;
unless it mean his life after his parents death, which seems less
likely.


140


APPENDIX.


Their harmless way with comrade messen-
gers.
340 When ended hath the Lord these happy

gifts,
And Ukewise sent away to reahns eterne
The just, then comes a pitiable crowd
Wailing its crimes ; with parching tears it

pours
All groans effusely, and attests ' in acts
345 With frequent ululations. At the sight

Of flames, their merit's due, and stagnant

pools
Of fire, wrath's weapons, they 'gin tremble

all.^
Them an angelic host, upsnatching them,
Forbids to pray, forbids to pour their cries
35° (Too late !) with clamour loud : pardon
withheld.
Into the lowest bottom they are hurled !
O miserable men ! how oft to you
Hath Majesty divine made itself known !
The sounds of heaven ye have heard ; have
seen
355 Its lightnings ; have experienced its rains
Assiduous ; its ires of winds and hail !
How often nights and days serene do make
Your seasons — God's gifts — fruitful with

fair yields !
Roses were vernal ; the grain's summer-tide
360 Failed not ; the autumn variously poured
Its mellow fruits ; the rugged winter brake
The olives, icy though they were : 'twas God
Who granted all, nor did His goodness fail.
At God earth trembled ; on His voice the
deep
365 Hung, and the rivers trembling fled and left
Sands dry ; and every creature everywhere
Confesses God ! Ye (miserable men !)
Have heaven's Lord and earth's denied ; and

oft
(Horrible !) have God's heralds put to flight ;3
370 And rather slain the just with slaughter fell ;
And, after crime, fraud ever hath in you
Inhered. Ye then shall reap the natural fruit
Of your iniquitous sowing. That God is
Ye know ; yet are ye wont to laugh at Him.
375 Into deep darkness ye shall go of fire

And brimstone ; doomed to suffer glowing

ires
In torments just.'* God bids your bones de-
scend
To s penalty eternal ; go beneath


' i.e., "appeals to." So Burke: "I attest the former, I attest
the coming generations." This " attesting of its acts " .seems to refer
to Matt. XXV. 44. It appeals to them in hope of mitigating its doom.

2 This seems to be the sense. The Latin stands thus : " Flammas
pro meritis, stagnantia tela tremiscunt."

3 Or, " banished."

■* I adopt the correction (suggested in Migne) of justw for justrtj.

S This is an extraordinary use for the Latin dative ; and even if
the meaning be "for (i.e., to suffer) penalty eternal," it is scarcely
less so.


The ardour of an endless raging hell ; ^

3S0 Be urged, a seething mass, through rotant
pools
Of flame ; and into threatening flame He

bids
The elements convert ; and all heaven's fire
Descend in clouds.

Then greedy Tartarus
With rapid fire enclosed is ; and flame

3S5 Is fluctuant within with tempest waves ;

And the whole earth her whirling embers

blends !
There is a flamy furrow ; teeth acute
Are turned to plough it, and for all the years ^
The fiery torrent will be armed : with force

390 Tartarean will the conflagrations gnash

Their teeth upon the world.^ There are they

scorched
In seething tide with course precipitate ;
Hence flee ; thence back are borne in sharp

career ;
The savage flame's ire meets them fugitive !

395 And now at length they own the penalty

Their own, the natural issue of their crime.
And now the reeling earth, by not a swain
Possest, is by the sea's profundity
Prest, at her farthest limit, where the sun

400 (His ray out-measured) divides the orb,
And where, when traversed is the world,^ the

stars
Are hidden. Ether thickens. O'er the light
Spreads sable darkness ; and the latest flames
Stagnate in secret rills. A place there is

405 Whose nature is with sealed penalties
Fier)-, and a dreadful marsh white-hot
With heats infernal, where, in furnaces
Horrific, penal deed roars loud, and seethes,
And, rushing into torments, is up-caught

410 By the flame's vortex wide; by savage wave
And surge the turbid sand all mingled is
With miry bottom. Hither will be sent,
Groaning, the captive crowd of evil ones,
And wickedness (the sinful body's train),

415 To burn ! Great is the beating there of
breasts.
By bellowing of grief accompanied ;
Wild is the hissing of the flames, and thence
The ululation of the sufferers !
And flames, and limbs sonorous,^ will outrise

420 Afar : more fierce will the fire burn ; and up
To th' upper air the groaning will be borne.
Then human progeny its bygone deeds
Of ill will weigh ; and will begin to stretch
Heavenward its palms ; and then will wish
to know


^ Gehennae.

7 Or, " in all the years: " but see note 5 on this page.

8 Mundo.

9 " Artusque sonori," i.e., probably the arms and hands with
which (as has been suggested just before) the sufferers beat their un-
happy breasts.


APPENDIX.


14]


! 425 The Lord, whom erst it would not know,

what time
To know Him had proved useful to them.

There,
His life's excesses, handiworks unjust.
And crimes of savage mind, each will confess,
And at the knowledge of the impious deeds
430 Of his own life will shudder. And now first,
Whoe'er erewhile cherished ill thoughts of

God;
Had worshipped stones unsteady, lyingly
Pretending tj divinity ; hath e'er
Made sacreato gore-stained images
435 Altars ; hath voiceless pictured figures feared ;
Hath slender shades of false divinity
Revered ; whome'er ill error onward hath
Seduced ; whoe'er was an adulterer.
Or with the sword had slain his sons ; whoe'er
440 Had stalked in robbery ; whoe'er by fraud
His clients had deferred ; whoe'er with mind
Unfriendly had behaved himself, or stained
His palms with blood of men, or poison mixt
Wherein death lurked, or robed with wicked

guise
445 His breast, or at his neighbour's ill, or gain
Iniquitous, was wont to joy ; whoe'er
Committed whatsoever wickedness
Of evil deeds : him mighty heat shall rack.
And bitter fire ; and these all shall endure,
450 In passing painful death, their punishment.
Thus shall the vast crowd lie of mourning

men !

This oft as holy prophets sang of old,
And (by God's inspiration warned) oft told
The future, none ('tis pity !) none (alas !)
Did lend his ears. But God Almighty willed
His guerdons to be known, and His law's

threats
'Mid multitudes of such like signs promulged.
He 'stablished them ' by sending prophets

more.
These likewise uttering words divine ; and

some,
460 Roused from their sleep, He bids go from

their tombs
Forth with Himself, when He, His own tomb

burst,
Had risen. Many 'wildered were, indeed,
To see the tombs agape, and in clear light
Corpses long dead appear ; and, wondering
465 At their discourses pious, dulcet words I
Starward they stretch their palms at the mere

sound,-
And offer God and so-victorious Christ
Their gratulating homage. Certain 'tis
That these no more re-sought their silent

graves,


455


' i.e., the " guerdons " and the " threats."

2 "Ipsa voce," unless it mean "voice and all," i.e., and their
voice as well as their palms.


470 Nor were retained within earth's bowels
shut ; 3
But the remaining host reposes now
In lowhest beds, until — time's circuit run —
That great day do arrive.

Now all of you
Own the true Lord, who alone makes this
soul
475 Of ours to see His light,^ and can the same
(To Tartarus sent) subject to penalties ;
And to whom all the power of life and death
Is open. Learn that God cart do whate'er
He list ; for 'tis enough for Him to will,
4S0 And by mere speaking He achieves the
deed ;
And Him nought plainly, by withstanding,

checks.
He is my God alone, to Avhom I trust
With deepest senses. But, since death con-
cludes
Every career, let whoe'er is to-day
485 Bethink him over all things in his mind.
And thus, while life remains, while 'tis allowed
To see the light and change your life, be-
fore
The limit of allotted age o'ertake
You unawares, and that last day, which 5 is
490 By death's law fixt, your senseless eyes do
glaze.
Seek what remains worth seeking : watchful

be
For dear salvation ; and run down with ease
And certainty the good course. Wipe away
By pious sacred rites your past misdeads
495 Which expiation need ; and shun the storms,
The too uncertain tempests, of the world.^
Then turn to right paths, and keep sanctities.
Hence from your gladsome minds depraved

crime
Quite banish ; and let long-inveterate fault
500 Be washed forth from your breast ; and do
away
Wicked ill-stains contracted ; and appease
Dread God by prayers eternal ; and let all
Most evil mortal things to living good
Give way : and now at once a new life keep
505 Without a crime \ and let your minds begin
To use themselves to good things and to

true :
And render ready voices to God's praise.
Thus shall your piety find better things
All growing to a flame ; thus shall ye, too,
510 Receive the gifts of the celestial life ; ^
And, to long age, shall ever live with God,
Seeing the starry kingdom's golden joys.


3 See note i, p. 137.

< Here again a correction suggested in Migne's ed., of " zwam
\wzcm " for " sua luc^," is adopted.

5 " Qui " is read here, after Migne's suggestion, for " quia; " and
Oehler's and Migne's punctuation both are set aside.

6 Mundi.

7 Or, " assume the functions of the heavenly lile."


142


APPENDIX.


5. FIVE BOOKS IN REPLY TO MARCION.

(AUTHOR UNCERTAIN.)


BOOK I.

OF THE DIVINE UNITY, AND THE RESURREC-
TION OF THE FLESH.

PART I. OF THE DIVINE UNITY.

After the Evil One's impiety-
Profound, and his hfe-grudging mind, en-
trapped
Seduced men with empty hope, it laid
Them bare, by impious suasion to false trust
5 In him, — not with impunity, indeed ;
For he forthwith, as guilty of the deed,
And author rash of such a wickedness,
Received deserved maledictions. Thus,
Thereafter, maddened, he, most desperate
foe,

10 Did more assail and instigate men's minds
In darkness sunk. He taught them to forget
The Lord, and leave sure hope, and idols

vain
Follow, and shape themselves a crowd of

gods,
Lots, auguries, false names of stars, the show

15 Of being able to o'errule the births
Of embryos by inspecting entrails, and
Expecting things to come, by hardihood
Of dreadful magic's renegadoes led,
Wondering at a mass of feigned lore ;

20 And he impelled them headlong to spurn
Ufe,
Sunk in a criminal insanity ;
To joy in blood ; to threaten murders fell ;
To love the wound, then, in their neighbour's

flesh;
Or, burning, and by pleasure's heat entrapped,

23 To transgress nature's covenants, and stain
Pure bodies, manly sex, with an embrace
Unnameable, and uses feminine
Mingled in common contact lawlessly ;
Urging embraces chaste, and dedicate

30 To generative duties, to be held

For intercourse obscene for passion's sake.
Such in time past his deeds, assaulting men,
Through the soul's lurking-places, with a flow
Of scorpion-venom, — not that men would
blame

35 Him, for they followed of their own accord :
His suasion was in guile ; in freedom man
Performed it.

Whileas the perfidious one
Continuously through the centuries '


Ssecula.


Is breathing such ill fumes, and into hearts
40 Seduced injecting his own counselling.
And hoping in his folly (alas !) to find
Forgiveness of his wickedness, unware
What sentence on his deed is waiting him ;
With words of wisdom's wea\ang,^ and a voice
45 Presaging from God's Spirit, speak a host
Of prophets. Publicly he 3 does not dare
Nakedly to speak evil of the Lord,
Hoping by secret ingenuity
He possibly may lurk unseen. At length
50 The soul's Light 4 as the thrall of flesh is held ;
The hope of the despairing, mightier
Than foe, enters the lists ; the Fashioner,
The Renovator, of the body He ;
True Glory of the Father ; Son of God ;
55 Author unique ; a Judge and Lord He came,
The orb's renowned King ; to the opprest
Prompt to give pardon, and to loose the

bound ;
Whose friendly aid and penal suffering
Blend God and renewed man in one. With

child
60 Is holy virgin : life's new gate opes ; words
Of prophets find their proof, fulfilled by facts ;
Priests 5 leave their temples, and — a star

their guide —
Wonder the Lord so mean a birth should

choose.
Waters — sight memorable ! — turn to wine ;
65 Eyes are restored to blind ; fiends trembling

cry,
Outdriven by His bidding, and own Christ !
All limbs, already rotting, by a word
Are healed ; now walks the lame ; the deaf

forthwith
Hears hope ; the maimed extends his hand ;

the dumb
70 Speaks mighty words : sea at His bidding

calms.
Winds drop ; and all things recognise the

Lord :
Confounded is the foe, and yields, though

fierce.
Now triumphed over, to unequal '^ arms !
When all his enterprises now revoked
75 He 7 sees ; the flesh, once into ruin sunk.


2 The " icciis " of the edd. I have ventured to alter lo " textis,'
which gives (as in my text) a far better sense.

3 i.e., the Evil One.

■♦ i.e., the Son of God.

5 i.e., the Magi.

6 i.e., arms which seemed unequal; for the cross, in which Christ
seemed to be vanquished, was the very means of His triumph. See
Col. ii. 14, 15.

7 i.e., the Enemy.


APPENDIX.


t43


Now rising ; man — death vanquisht quite

— to heavens
Soaring ; the peoples sealed with holy pledge
Outpoured ; ' the work and envied deeds of

might
Marvellous ; ^ and hears, too, of penalties
80 Extreme, and of perpetual dark, prepared
For himself by the Lord by God's decree
Irrevocable ; naked and unarmed,
Damned, vanquisht, doomed to perish in a

death
Perennial, guilty now, and sure that he
85 No pardon has, a last impiety

Forthwith he dares, — to scatter everywhere
A word for ears to shudder at, nor meet
For voice to speak. Accosting men cast off
From God's community,^ men wandering
90 Without the light, found mindless, following
Things earthly, them he teaches to become
Depraved teachers of depravity.

By* them he preaches that there are

two Sires,
And realms divided : ill's cause is the Lord s
95 Who built the orb, fashioned breath-quick-
ened flesh,
And gave the law, and by the seers' voice

spake.
Him he affirms not good, but owns Kim jus ^;
Hard, cruel, taking pleasure fell in war ;
In judgment dreadful, pliant to no prayers.
100 His suasion tells of other one, to none
E'er known, who nowhere is, a deity
False, nameless, constituting nought, and

who
Hath spoken precepts none. Him he calls

good;
Who judges none, but spares all equally,
105 And grudges hfe to none. No judgment

waits
The guilty ; so he says, bearing about
A gory poison with sweet honey mixt
For wretched men. That flesh can rise —

to which
Himself was cause of ruin, which he spoiled [
"o Iniquitously with contempt (whence,^ cursed


■ i.e., with the Holy Spirit, the " Pledge " or " Promise " of the
Father (see Acts i. 4, 5), "outpoured" upon " the peoples" — both
Jewish and Gentile — on the day of Pentecost and many subsequent
occasions; see, for instances, Acts x. and xix.

2 The " mirandae virtutis opus, invisaque facta," I take to be the
miracles wrought by the apostles through the might (virtus) of the
Spirit, as we read m the Acts. These were objects of" envy" to
the Enemy, and to such as — like Simon Magus, of whom we find
record — were his servants.

■5 i.e., excommunicated, as Marcion was. The "last impiety"
{extremum ne/as), or "last atrocity" {cxireimim /acinus) ,~
see 218, lower down— seems to mean the introduction of heretical
teaching-.

* This use of the ablative, though quite against classical usage,
js apparently admissible in late Latinity. It seems to me that tlie
" his ' zs an ablative here, the men being regarded for the moment
as merely instrumenls, not agoits ; but it may be a dative = " to
these he preaches," etc., i.e., he dictates to them what they afterwards
are to teach in public.

s It must be borne in mind that "Dominus" (the Lord), and
" Deus " (God), are kept as distinct terms throughout this piece.

^ i.e., for which reason.


He hath grief without end), its ever-foe, —
He doth deny ; because with various wound
Life to expel and the salvation whence
He fell he strives : and therefore says that
Christ
"5 Came suddenly to earth,? but was not made,
By any compact, partner of the flesh ;
But Spirit-form, and body feigned beneath
A shape imaginary, seeks to mock
Men with a semblance that what is not is.
120 Does this, then, become God, to sport with
men
By darkness led? to act an impious lie?
Or falsely call Himself a man? He walks.
Is carried, clothed, takes due rest, handled

is,
Suffers, is hung and buried : man's are all
125 Deeds which, in holy body conversant.
But sent by God the Father, who hath all
Created, He did perfect properly.
Reclaiming not another's but His own ;
Discernible to peoples who of old
130 Were hoping for Him by His very work,
And through the prophets' voice to the round

world '^
Best known : and now they seek an un-
known Lord,
Wandering in death's threshold manifest,
And leave behind the known. False is their
faith,
135 False is their God, deceptive their reward,
False is their resurrection, death's defeat
False, vain their martyrdoms, and e'en

Christ's name
An empty sound : whom, teaching that He

came
Like magic mist, they (quite demented) own
140 To be the actor of a lie, and make

His passion bootless, and the populace ^
(A feigned one !) without crime ! Is God

thus true?
Are such the honours rendered to the Lord ?
Ah ! wretched men ! gratuitously lost
145 In death ungrateful ! Who, by blind guide
led.
Have headlong rushed into the ditch ! ■" and

as
In dreams the fancied rich man in his store
Of treasure doth exult, and with his hands
Grasps it, the sport of empty hope, so ye,
150 Deceived, are hoping for a shadow vain
Of guerdon !

Ah ! ye silent laughingstocks,
Or doomed prey, of the dragon, do }-e hope,


7 i.e., as Marcion is stated by some to have taught, in the fifteenth
year of Tiberius; founding his statement upon a perverted reading
of Luke iii. i. It will be remembered that Marcion only used St.
Luke's Gospel, and that in a mutilated and corrupted form.

8 Orbi.

9 i.e., of the Jews.

'° "Infossa, ie.,asFabricius (quoted in Migne's ed.) explains
it, " in <frfossa. It is the past part, oi/cdio.


144


APPENDIX.


Stern men, for death in room of gentle peace ? '
Dare ye blame God, who hath created works
»55 So great? in whose earth, 'mid profuse dis-
plays
Of His exceeding parent-care, His gifts
(Unmindful of Himself!) ye largely praise.
Rushing to ruin ! do ye reprobate —
Approving of the works — the Maker's self,
i6o The world's ^ Artificer, whose work withal
Ye are yourselves? Who gave those litUe

selves
Great honours ; sowed your crops ; made all

the brutes ^
Your subjects ; makes the seasons of the year
Fruitful with stated months ; grants sweet-
nesses,
165 Drinks various, rich odours, jocund flowers.
And the groves' grateful bowers ; to growing

herbs
Grants wondrous juices ; founts and streams

dispreads
With sweet waves, and illumes with stars the

sky
And the whole orb : the infinite sole Lord,
170 Both JUST and good ; known by His work ;

to none
By aspect known ; whom nations, flourishing
In wealth, but foolish, wrapped in error's

shroud,
(Albeit 'tis beneath an alien name
They praise Him, yet) their. Maker knowing,

dread
175 To blame : nor e'en one* — save you, hell's

new gate ! —
Thankless, ye choose to speak ill of your

Lord!

These cruel deadly gifts the Renegade
Terrible has bestowed, through Marcion —

thanks
To Cerdo's mastership — on you ; nor comes
180 The thought into your mind that, from Christ's

name
Seduced, Marcion's name has carried you
To lowest depths.s Say of His many acts


' If this line be correct, — " Speratis pro pace truces homicidia
blanda," — though I cannot see the propriety of the " truces" in it,
it seems to mean, "Do ye hope or expect that the master you are
serving will, instead of the gentle peace he promises you, prove a
murderer and lead you to death? No, you do not expect it; but so
it is."

2 Mundi.

3 Animalia.

* The sentence breaks off abruptly, and the verb which should
apparently have gone with " e'en one '' is joined to the " ye " in the
next line.

5 The Latin is : —

" Nee venit in mentem quod vos, a nomine Christi
Seductos, ad Marcionis tulit infima nomen."
The rendering in my text, I admit, involves an exceedingly harsh
construction of the Latin, but I see not how it is to be avoided; unless
either (i) we take noinen absolutely, and " ad Marcionis infima" to-
gether, and translate, " A name has carried you to Marcion's lowest
depths; " in which case the question arises. What name is meant? can
it be the name " Electi"? Or else (2) we take " tulit" as referring to
the " terrible renegade," i e , the arch-fiend, and " infima " as in appo-
sition with " ad ^larcionis nomen," and translate, " He has carried
you to the name of Marcion — deepest degradation."


What one displeases you ? or what hath God
Done which is not to be extolled with praise ?
185 Is it that He permits you, all too long,
(Unworthy of His patience large,) to see
Sweet light? you, who read truths,^ and,

docking them.
Teach these your falsehoods, and approve as

past
Things which are yet to be ? 7 What hinders,

else,
19° That we believe your God incredible ? ^
Nor marvel is't if, practised as he 9 is,
He captived you unarmed, persuading you
There are two Fathers (being damned by

One),
And all, whom he had erst seduced, are
. gods ;
195 And after that dispread a pest, which ran
W^ith multiplying wound, and cureless crime,
To many. Men unworthy to be named.
Full of all magic's madness, he induced
To call themselves "Virtue Supreme ; " and

feign
200 (With harlot comrade) fresh impiety;
To roam, to fly.'° He is the insane god
Of Valentine, and to his Nonage
Assigned heavens thirty, and Profundity
Their sire." He taught two baptisms, and

led
205 The body through the flame. That there

are gods
So many as the year hath days, he bade
A Basilides to believe, and worlds
As many. Marcus, shrewdly arguing
Through numbers, taught to violate chaste

form
210 'Mid magic's arts ; taught, too, that the

Lord's cup
Is an oblation, and by prayers is turned
To blood. His '^ suasion prompted Hebion
To teach that Christ was born from human

seed ;


6 i.e., the Gospels and other parts of Holy Scripture.

7 i.e., I take it, the resurrection. Cf 2 Tim. ii. 17, 18.

8 Whether this be the sense (i.e., "either tell us what it is which
displeases you in ojir God, whether it be His too great patience in
bearing with you, or what; or else tell us what is to hinder us from
believing yottr God to be an incredible being") of this passage, I
will not venture to determine. The last line in the edd. previous to
Oehler's ran: " Aut incredibilf quid differt credere vestrum? " Oehler
reads " incredibil^;« " (sc. Deum), which I have followed; but he
suggests, " Aut incredibil^'OT qui differt ccedere vestrum ? " Which
may mean " or else " — i e., if it were not for his " too great patience"
— " why " — " qui " — " does He delay to smite your incredible god? "
and thus challenge a contest and prove His own superiority.

9 i.e., the " terrible renegade."

'° The reference here is to Simon Magus; for a brief account of
whom, and of the other heretics in this list, down to Hebion inclusive,
the reader is referred to the Adv. omn. //«•>-., above. The words " to
roam, to fly," refer to the alleged wanderings of Simon with his para-
mour Helen, and his reported attempt (at Rome, in the presence of
St. Peter) to fly. The tale is doubtful.

" The Latin runs thus: —

"Et aevo
Triginta tribuit caelos, patremque Profundum."
But there seems a confusion between Valentine and his aeons and
Basilides and his heavens. See the Adv. omit. Hter., above.

^^ i.e., the Evil One's, as before.


APPENDIX.


145


He taught, too, circumcision, and that room

215 Is still left for the Law, and, though Law's
founts
Are lost,' its elements must be resumed.
Unwilling am I to protract in words
His last atrocity, or to tell all
The causes, or the names at length. Enough

220 It is to note his many cruelties

Briefly, and the unmentionable men.

The dragon's organs fell, through whom he

now.
Speaking so much profaneness, ever toils
To blame the Maker of the world.^ But
come ;

225 Recall your foot from savage Bandit's cave.
While space is granted, and to wretched men
God, patient in perennial parent-love.
Condones all deeds through error done !

Believe
Truly in the true Sire, who built the orb ;

230 Who, on behalf of nien incapable

To bear the law, sunk in sin's whirlpool, sent
The true Lord to repair the ruin wrought,
And bring them the salvation promised
Of old through seers. He who the man-
dates gave

235 Remits sins too. Somewhat, deservedly,
Doth He exact, because He formerly
Entrusted somewhat ; or else bounteously,
As Lord, condones as it were debts to slaves :
Finally, peoples shut up 'neath the curse,

240 And meriting the penalty, Himself

Deleting the indictment, bids be washed !

PART II. OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.

The zuhole man, then, believes ; the whole is

washed ;
Abstains from sin, or truly suffers wounds
For Christ's name's sake: he rises a true^

man,
245 Death, truly vanquisht, shall be mute. But

not
Part of the man, — his soul, — her own parf*

left
Behind, will win the palm which, labouring
And wrestling in the course, combinedly
And simultaneously with flesh, she earns.
250 Great crime it were for two in chains to bear
A weight, of whom the one were affluent
The other needy, and the wretched one
Be spurned, and guerdons to the happy one
Rendered. Not so the Just — fair Renderer
255 Of wages — deals, both good and just, whom

we
Believe Almighty : to the thankless kind,


' i.e., probably Jerusalem and the temple there.

2 Mundi.

3 Oehler's " versus" (:=" changed the man rises") is set aside
for Migne's " verus." Indeed it is probably a misprint.

* i.e., her own dwelling or " quarters," — the body, to wit, if the
reading " sua parte " be correct.


Full is His will of pity. Nay, whate'er

He who hath greater mortal needs doth

need^ •

That, by advancement, to his comrade he
260 May equalled be, that will the affluent
Bestow the rather unsolicited :
So are we bidden to believe, and not
Be willing to cast blame unlawfully
On the Lord in our teaching, as if He
265 Were one to raise the soul, as having met
With ruin, and to set her free from death.
So that the granted faculty of life
Upon the ground of sole desert (because
She bravely acted), should abide with her; 7
270 While she who ever shared the common lot
Of toil, l\\Q flesh, should to the earth be left.
The prey of a perennial death. Has, then,
The soul pleased God by acts of fortitude ?
By no means could she Him have pleased
alone
275 Without the flesh. Hath she borne penal
bonds ? ^
The flesh sustained upon her limbs the

bonds.
Contemned she death? But she hath left

the flesh
Behind in death. Groaned she in pain?

^\iQ flesh
Is slain and vanquisht by the wound. Re-
pose
2S0 Seeks she? "Vsxo. flesh, spilt by the sword in
dust.
Is left behind to fishes, birds, decay,
And ashes ; torn she is, unhappy one !
And broken ; scattered, she melts away.
Hath she not earned to rise ? for what could
she
285 Have e'er committed, lifeless and alone ?
What so life-grudging ^ cause impedes, or

else
Forbids, the flesh to take God's gifts, and

live
Ever, conjoined with her comrade soul.
And see what she hath been, when formerly
290 Converted into dust ? '° After, renewed,
Bear she to God deserved meeds of praise,
Not ignorant of herself, frail, mortal, sick."
Contend ye as to what the living might "^


5 Egestas.

6 Eget.

7 I have ventured to alter the " e\. viven//" of Oehler and Migne
into " ;<t vivent//," which seems to improve the sense.

8 It seems to me that these ideas should all be expressed interrog-
atively, and I have therefore so expressed them in my text.

9 See line 2.

■° " Cernere quid fuerit conversa in pulvere quondam."

Whether the meaning be that, as the soul will be able (as it should
seem) to retrace all that she has experienced since she left the body,
so the body, when revived, will be able as it were to look back upon
all that has happened to her since the soul left her, — something after
the manner in which Hamlet traces the imaginary vicissitudes of
Caesar's dust, — or whether there be some great error in the Latin, I
leave the reader to judge.

" i.e., apparently remembering that she was so before.

J2 Vivida virtus.


146


APPENDIX.


Of the great God can do ; who, good alike

295 And potent, grudges hfe to none ? Was this
Death's captive ? ' shall this perish vanquished,
Which the Lord hath with wondrous wisdom

made,
And art? This by His virtue wonderful
Himself upraises ; this our Leader's self

300 Recalls, and this with His own glory clothes.
God's art and wisdom, then, our body shaped.
What can by these be made, how faileth it
To be by virtue reproduced?^ No cause
Can holy parent-love withstand ; (lest else

305 Ill's caused should mightier prove than Power
Supreme ;)
That man even now saved by God's gift, may

learn ■*
(Mortal before, now robed in light immense.
Inviolable, wholly quickened,^ soul
And body) God, in virtue infinite,

310 In parent-love perennial, through His King
Christ, through whom opened is light's way ;

and now,
Standing in new light, filled now with each

gift,'
Glad with fair fruits of living Paradise,
May praise and laud Him to eternity,?

315 Rich in the wealth of the celestial hall.

BOOK 11.

OF THE HARMONY OF THE OLD AND NEW
LAWS.8

After the faith was broken by the dint

Of the foe's breathing renegades,^ and swoln

With wiles the hidden pest '° emerged ; with

lies
Self-prompted, scornful of the Deity
5 That underUes the sense, he did his plagues
Concoct : skilled in guile's path, he mixed

his own
Words impious with the sayings of the saints.


1 I rather incline to read for " hsec captiva {m'i mortis," " haec
captiva iuai mortis " =

" Is this
To be death's thrall?"
" This " is, of course, the flesh.

2 For " Quod cuph his fieri, deest hoc virtute reduci," I venture
to read, " Quod capit," etc., taking " capit " as = " capax est." " By
these," of course, is by wisdom and art; and " virtue " = " power."

3 i.e., the Evil One.

* i.e., may learn io know.

_ 5 Oehler's " viius " seems to be a mistake for " viz/us," which
isMigne's reading; as in the fragment " Dc exsecrandis gentium
diis," we saw {snb fin.) " vi^entem " to be a probable misprint for
" viwentem." If, however, it is to be retained, it must mean " appear-
ing " (i.e., in presence of God) " wholly," in body as well as soul.

* i.e., the double gift of a saved soul and a saved body.

7 In seternum.

8 I have so frequently had to construct my own text (by altering
the reading or the punctuation of the Latin) in this book, that, for
brevity's sake, I must ask the reader to be content with this statement
once for all, and not expect each case to be separately noted.

9 The " foe," as before, is Satan; his "breathing instruments"
are the men whom he uses (cf. Shakespeare's " no breather" = nQ
man, in the dialogue between Orlando and Jacques, As you Like it,
act iii. sc. 2) ; and they are called " renegades," like the Evil One
himself, because they have deserted from their allegiance to God in
Christ.

1° Heresy,


And on the good seed sowed his wretched

tares.
Thence willing that foul ruin's every cause
10 Should grow combined; to wit, that with
more speed
His own iniquitous deeds he may assign
To God clandestinely, and may impale
On penalties such as his suasion led ;
False with true veiling, turning rough with
smooth,
15 And, (masking his spear's point with rosy
wreaths,)
Slaying the unwary unforeseen with death
Supreme. His supreme wickedness is this :
That men, to such a depth of madness sunk !
Off-broken boughs ! " should into parts divide
20 The endlessly-dread Deity ; Christ's deeds
Sublime should follow with false praise, and

blame
The former acts," God's countless miracles,
Ne'er seen before, nor heard, nor in a heart
Conceived ; '^ and should so rashly frame in
words
25 The impermissible impiety

Of wishing by " wide dissimilitude
Of sense " to prove that the two Testa-
ments
Sound adverse each to other, and the Lord's
Oppose the prophets' words ; of drawing
down
30 All the Law's cause to infamy ; and eke
Of reprobating holy fathers' life
Of old, whom into friendship, and to share
His gifts, God chose. Without beginning,

one
Is, for its lesser part, accepted. '-^ Though
35 Of one are four, of four one,'5 yet to them
One part is pleasing, three they (in a word)
Reprobate : and they seize, in many ways,
On Paul as their own author ; yet was he
Urged by a frenzied impulse of his own
40 To his last words : '^ all whatsoe'er he spake
Of the old covenant ■? seems hard to them.


" Cf John XV. 2, 4, 5, 6; Rom. xi. 17-20. The writer simply calls
them " abruptos homines;" and he seems to mean excoDunutiicated,
like Marcion.

'- i.e., those recorded in the Old Testarnent.

'3 I have followed Migne's suggestion here, and transposed one
line of the original. The reference seems to be to Isa. Ixiv. 4, quoted
m I Cor. ii. 9, where the Greek differs somewhat remarkably from
the LXX.

'•♦ Unless some line has dropped out here, the construction, harsh
enough in my English, is yet harsher in the Latin. " Accipitur" has
no subject of any kind, and one can only guess from what has gone
before, and what follows, that it must mean " one Testament."

'-^ Harsh still. It must refer to the four Gospels — the " coat with-
out seam " — in their quadrate unity; Marcion receiving but one-^
St Luke's — and that without St. Luke's name, and also in a muti-
lated and interpolated form.

'ti This seems to be the sense. The allusion is to the fact that
Marcion and his sect accepted but ten of St. Paul's Epistles: leaving
out entirely those to Timothy and Titus, and all the other books,
except his one Gospel.

"■ It seems to me that the reference here must evidently be to the
Epistle to the Hebrews, which treats specially of the old covenant.
If so, we have some indication as to the authorship, if not the date, of
the book; for TertuUian himself, though he frequently cites the
Epistle, appears to hesitate (to say the least) as to ascribing it to St.
Paul.


APPENDIX.


147


Because, deservedly, "made gross in heart." '
Weight apostohc, grace of beaming word,
Dazzles their mind, nor can they possibly

45 Discern the Spirit's drift. Dull as they are,
Seek they congenial animals !

But ye
Who have not yet, (false deity your guide,
Reprobate in your very mind,^) to death's
Inmost caves penetrated, learn there flows

50 A stream perennial from its fount, which
feeds
A tree, (twice sixfold are the fruits, its grace !)
And into earth and to the orb's four winds
Goes out : into so many parts doth flow
The fount's one hue and savour.^ Thus,
withal,

55 From apostolic word descends the Church,
Out of Christ's womb, with glory of His Sire
All filled, to wash off filth, and vivify
Dead fates."* The Gospel, four in number,

one
In its diffusion 'mid the Gentiles, this,

60 By faith elect accepted, Paul hands down
(Excellent doctor !) pure, without a crime ;
And from it he forbade Galatian saints
To turn aside withal ; whom " brethren false,"
(Urging them on to circumcise themselves,

65 And follow " elements," leaving behind
Their novel " freedom,") to " a shadow old
Of things to be " were teaching to be slaves.
These were the causes which Paul had to

write
To the Galatians : not that they took out

70 One small part of the Gospel, and held that
For the whole bulk, leaving the greater part
Behind. And hence 'tis no words of a book,
But Christ Himself, Christ sent into the orb,
Who is the gospel, if ye will discern ;

75 Who from the Father came, sole Carrier
Of tidings good ; whose glory vast completes
The early testimonies ; by His work
Showing how great the orb's Creator is :
Whose deeds, conjoined at the same time
with words,

80 Those faithful ones, Matthew, Mark, Luke,
and John,
Recorded unalloyed (not speaking words
External), sanctioned by God's Spirit, 'neath
So great a Master's eye !

This paschal Lamb
Is hung, a victim, on the tree : Him Paul,


S5 Writing decrees to Corinth, with his torch,'
Hands down as slain, the future life and God
Promised to the fathers, whom before
He had attracted.

See what virtue, see
What power, the paschal image ^ has ; ye thus
90 Will able be to see what power there is
In the true Passover.

Lest well-earned love
Should tempt the faithful sire and seer, ^ to

whom
His pledge and heir ^ was dear, whom God

by chance 9
Had given him, to offer him to God
95 (x\ mighty execution !), there is shown
To him a lamb entangled by the head
In thorns ; a holy victim — holy blood
For blood — to God. From whose piacular

death,
That to the wasted race '° it might be sign
100 And pledge of safety, signed are with blood
Their posts and thresholds many:" — aid

immense ! —
The flesh (a witness credible) is given
For food. The Jordan crossed, the land

possessed,
Joshua by law kept passover with joy,
105 And immolates a lamb ; and the great kings
And holy prophets that were after him.
Not ignorant of the good promises
Of sure salvation ; full of godly fear
The great Law to transgress, (that mass of
types
no In image of the Supreme Virtue once
To come,) did celebrate in order due
The mirrorly-inspected passover.'^


' Comp. Isa. vi. 9, 10, with Acts xxviii. 17-29.

2 The reference seems to be to Rom. i. 28; comp., too, Tit. i.
15, 16.

3 The reference is to Gen. ii. 9-14.

* Fata mortua. This extraordinary expression appears to mean
"dead men;" men who, through Adam, ^xc fated, so to speak, to
die, and are imder the sad_/a/i? of being " rfcrtrf in trespasses and
sins." See Eph. ii. i. As far as quantity is concerned, it might as
well be "/acta mortua," " dead works," such as we read of in Heb.
vi. I, ix. 14. It is true these works cannot strictly be said to be ever
vivified; but a very similar inaccuracy seems to be committed by
our author lower down in this same book.


5 I have followed Oehler's " face " for the common " phase; " but
what the meaning is I will not venture to decide. It may probably
mean one of two things: {a) that Paul wrote by torchlight ; {b) that
the light which Paul holds forth in his life and writings, is a torch to
show the Corinthians and others Christ.

6 i.e., the legal passover, "image" or type of "the true Pass-
over," Christ. See i Cor. v. 6-9.

7 Abraham. See Gen. xxii. 1-19.

8 Isaac, a pledge to Abraham of all God's other promises.

9 Forte. I suppose this means out of the ordinary course of
nature ; but it is a strange word to use.

'° Israel, wasted by the severities of their Egyptian captivity.
" " Mu//a / " but " m\ita " = " mute " has been suggested, and is
not inapt.

•- I have given what appears to be a possible sense for these almost
unintelligible lines. They run as follows in Oehler: —
" Et reliqui magni reges sanctique prophetae,
Non ignorantes certae promissa salutis,
Ingentemque metu pleni transcendere legem,
Venturam summse virtutis imagine molem,
Inspectam e speculo celebrarunt ordine pascham."
I rather incline to alter them somehow thus: —

" Ingentemque metu plen« transcendere legem,
Ventur^cw in summae virtutis imagine, — j-clem ^^

InspectKW e speculo, — celebrarunt ordine pascham; '
connecting these three lines with " non ignorantes," and rendering: —
" Not ignorant of the good promises
Of sure .salvation ; and that One would come,
For such as filled are with godly fear
The law to overstep, a mighty One,
In Highest Virtue's image, — the Sun seen
In mirror: — did in order celebrate
The passover."
That is, in brief, they all, in celebrating the type, looked for%vard to
the Antitype to come.


148


APPENDIX.


In short, if thou recur with rapid mind
To times primordial, thou wilt find results
115 Too fatal following impious words. That

man
Easily credulous, alas ! and stripped
Of life's own covering, might covered be
With skins, a lamb is hung : the wound slays

sins,
Or death by blood effaces, or enshrouds
120 Or cherishes the naked with its fleece.

Is sheep's blood of more worth than human

blood.
That, offered up for sins, it should quench

wrath ?
Or is a lamb (as if he were more dear !)
Of more worth than much people's? aid

immense !
125 As safeguard of so great salvation, could
A lamb, if offered, have been price enough
For the redeemed ? Nay : but Almighty

God,
The heaven's and earth's Creator, infinite,'
Living, and perfect, and perennially
130 DweUing in light, is not appeased by these,
Nor joys in cattle's blood. Slain be all

flocks ;
Be every herd upburned into smoke ;
That expiatively 't may pardon win
Of but one sin : in vain at so vile price
135 Will the stained figure of the Lord — foul

flesh —
Prepare, if wise, such honours : ^ but the

hope
And faith to mortals promised of old —
Great Reason's counterpart ^ — hath wrought

to bring
These boons premeditated and prepared
140 Erst by the Father's passing parent-love ;
That Christ should come to earth, and be a

man !
Whom when John saw, baptism's first open-
er, John,
' Comrade of seers, apostle great, and sent
As sure forerunner, witness faithful ; John,
HS August in life, and marked with praise sub-
lime,-*
He shows, to such as sought of olden time
God's very Paschal Lamb, that He is come
At last, the expiation of misdeed,
To undo many's sins by His own blood,
150 In place of reprobates the Proven One,
In place of vile the dear ; in body, man ;
And, in life, God : that He, as the slain

Lamb,


1 Immensus.

2 Jhis, again, seems to be the meaning, unless the passage (which
is not improbable) be corrupt. The flesh, " foul " now with sin, is
called the " stained image of the Lord," as having been originally in
His image, but being now stained by guilt.

3 Faith is called so, as being the reflection of divine reason.

•• i.e., the praise of Christ Himself See Matt. .xi. 7-15, with the
parallel passage, Luke vii. 24-30; comp. also John v. 33-35.


Might US accept,5 and for us might outpour
Himself. Thus hath it pleased the Lord to
spoil
155 Proud death : thus wretched man will able be
To hope salvation. This slain paschal Lamb
Paul preaches : nor does a phantasmal shape
Of the sublime Lord (one consimilar
To Isaac's silly sheep ^) the passion bear,
160 Wherefore He is called Lamb : but 'tis
because.
As wool. He these renewed bodies clothes,
Giving to many covering, yet Himself
Never deficient. Thus does the Lord shroud
In His Sire's virtue, those whom, disarrayed
165 Of their own light, He by His death re-
deemed,
Virtue which ever is in Him. So, then,
The Shepherd who hath lost the sheep Him-
self
Re-seeks it. He, prepared to tread the

strength
Of the vine, and its thorns, or to o'ercome
170 The wolfs rage, and regain the cattle lost.
And brave to snatch them out, the Lion He
In' sheepskin-guise, unasked presents Him-
self
To the contemned 7 teeth, baffling by His

garb
The robber's bloody jaws.

Thus everywhere
175 Christ seeks force-captured Adam ; treads
the path *

Himself where death wrought ruin ; per-
meates
All the old heroes' monuments ; ^ inspects
Each one ; the One of whom all types were

full;
Begins e'en from the womb to expel the
death
iSo Conceived simultaneously with seed
Of flesh within the bosom ; purging all
Life's stages with a silent wisdom ; debts
Assuming ; 9 ready to cleanse all, and give
Their Maker back the many whom the one '°
185 Had scattered. And, because one direful
man
Down-sunk in pit iniquitous did fall.
By dragon-subdued virgin's " suasion led ;
Because he pleased her wittingly ; '^ because
He left his heavenly covering '^ behind ;


5 i.e., perhaps " render acceptable."

6 See above, 91-99.

7 i.e., teeth which /ie contemned, for His people's sake: not that
they are to 7(S contemptible.

8 i.e., perhaps permeating, by the influence of His death, the
tombs of all the old saints.

9 i.e., undertaking our debts in our stead.
10 Adam. See Rom. v., passim.

" It is an idea of the genuine Tertullian, apparently, that Eve
was a " virgin " all the time she was with Adam in Paradise. A sim-
ilar idea appears in the " Genesis" above.

I- Consiiio. Comp. i Tim. ii. 14, " Adam was fwi deceived"
13 Called " life's own covering" (i.e., apparently his innocence) in
117, above.


APPENDIX.


149


190 Because the " tree " their nakedness did

prove ;
Because dark death coerced them : in hke

wise
Out of the self-same mass ' re-made returns,
Renewed now, — the flower of flesh, and

host
Of peace, — a flesh from espoused virgin

born,
195 Not of man's seed ; conjoined to its own
Artificer ; without the debt of death.
These mandates of the Father through bright

stars
An angel carries down, that angel-fame
The tidings may accredit ; telling how
200 " A virgin's debts a virgin, flesh's flesh.

Should pay." Thus introduced, the Giant-
Babe,
The Elder-Boy, the Stripling-Man, pursues
Death's trafl. Thereafter, when completed

was
The ripe age of man's strength, when man

is wont
205 To see the lives that were his fellows drop
By slow degrees away, and to be changed
In mien to wrinkles foul and limbs inert,
While blood forsakes his veins, his course he

stayed.
And suffered not his fleshly garb to age.
210 Upon what day or in what place did fall

Most famous Adam, or outstretched his hand
Rashly to touch the tree, on that same day.
Returning as the years revolve, within
The stadium of the " tree " the brave Athlete,
215 'Countering, outstretched His hands, and,

penalty
For praise pursuing,- quite did vanquish

death.
Because He left death of His own accord
Behind, disrobing Him of fleshly slough,
And of death's dues ; and to the " tree "

affixed
220 The serpent's spoil — "the world's ^ prince "

vanquisht quite ! —
Grand trophy of the renegades : for sign
Whereof had Moses hung the snake, that all,
^^'ho had by many serpents stricken been,
INIight gaze upon the dragon's self, and see
225 Him vanquisht and transfixt.

When, afterwards,
He reached the infernal region's secret

waves,
And, as a victor, by the light which aye
Attended Him, revealed His captive thrall,
And by His virtue thoroughly fulfilled
230 The Father's bidding. He Himself re-took


1 Or, "ore."

^ Comp. Heb. xii. 2, " Who, for the joy that was set before
Him" — 6? ai'Ti T^5 TTpo/ceififi'T)? aiiTiZ p^apas.
3 Mundi. See John xiv. 30.


The body which, spontaneous, He had left.
This was the cause of death : this same was

made
Salvation's path : a messenger of guile
The former was ; the latter messenger
235 Of peace : a spouse her man + did slay ; a

spouse
Did bear a lion : s hurtful to her man ^
A virgin ? proved ; a man ^ from virgin born
Proved victor : for a type whereof, while

sleep
His 9 body wrapped, out of his side is ta'en
240 A woman,'° who is her lord's " rib ; whom he,
Awaking, called " flesh from his flesh, and

bones
From his own bones ; " with a presaging mind
Speaking. Faith wondrous ! Paul, deserv-
edly,
(Most certain author !) teaches Christ to be
245 "The Second Adam from the heavens.""'

Truth,
Using her own examples, doth refulge ;
Nor covets out of alien source to show
Her paces keen : '^ this is a pauper's work,
Needy of virtue of his own ! Great Paul
25° These mysteries — taught to him — did teach ;

to wit.
Discerning that in Christ thy glory is,
O Church ! from His side, hanging on high

" tree,"
His lifeless body's " blood and humour "

flowed.
The blood the woman '+ was ; the waters

were
255 The new gifts of the font : '5 this is the

Church,
True mother of a living people ; flesh
New from Christ's flesh, and from His bones

a bone.
A spot there is called Golgotha, — of old
The fathers' earher tongue thus called its

name, —
260 "The skull-pan of a head : " here is earth's

midst ;
Here victory's sign ; here, have our elders

taught,
There was a great head "^ found ; here the

first man,


* Vimm.

5 " The Lion of the tribe of Juda." Rev. v. 5.

6 Viro. This use of " man " may be justified, to say nothing of
other arguments, from Jer. xliv. 19, where " our men" seem plainly
= " our husbands." See marg.

7 Virgo: a play on the word in connection with the "viro" and
what follows.

8 Vir.

9 i.e., Adam's. The constructions, as will be seen, are oddly con-
fused throughout, and 1 rather suspect some transposition of lines.

'o Mulier.

" Mariti.

'2 See I Cor. xv. 22 sqq., especially 45, 47.

'3 Acres gressus.

'* Femina.

'5 Lavacri.

J6 " Os; " lit., " face " or " mouth."


ISO


APPENDIX.


We have been taught, was buried ; here the

Christ
Suffers ; with sacred blood the earth ' grows

moist.
2f'5 That the old Adam's dust may able be,

Commingled with Christ's blood, to be up-
raised
By dripping water's virtue. The "one ewe"
That is, which, during Sabbath-hours, alive
The Shepherd did resolve that He would

draw
270 Out of th' infernal pit. This was the cause
Why, on the Sabbaths, He was wont to cure
The prematurely dead Hmbs of all flesh ;
Or perfected for sight the eyes of him
Blind from his birth — eyes which He had

not erst
275 Given ; or, in presence of the multitude.
Called, during Sabbath-hours, one wholly dead
To life, e'en from the sepulchre.^ Himself
The new man's Maker, the Repairer good
Of th' old, supplying what did lack, or else
280 Restoring what was lost. About to do —
When dawns " the holy day " — these works,

for such
As hope in Him, in plenitude, (to keep
His plighted word,) He taught men thus

His power
To do them.

What ? If flesh dies, and no hope
285 Is given of salvation, say, what grounds

Christ had to feign Himself a man, and heal
Men, or have care for flesh? If He recalls ^
Some few, why shall He not withal recall
All? Can corruption's power liquefy
290 The body and undo it, and shall not
The virtue of the Lord be powerful
The undone to recall?

They, who believe

Their bodies are ;?^/ loosed from death, do not

Believe the Lord, who wills to raise His own

295 Works sunken ; or else say they that the Good

Wills not, and that the Potent hath not

power, —
Ignorant from how great a crime they suck
Their milk, in daring to set things infirm
Above the Strong.-* In the grain lurks the

tree ;
3°o And if this 5 rot not, buried in the earth.
It yields not tree-graced fruits.^ Soon bound

will be


1 Terra.

2 This would seem to refer to Lazarus; but it seems to be an as
sumption that his raising took place on a Sabbath.

3 i.e., to life.

* 1 have ventured to alter the "71/orti," of the edd. into " /^orti; '
and " causas " (as we have seen) seems, in this late Latin, nearly =

" ''^'^•!'

5 i.e., the grain.

^ This may seem an unusual expression, as it is more common ti
regard the fruit as gracing the tree, than the tree the fruit. But, ii
point of fact, the tree, with its graceful form and foliage, may be said
to give a grace to the fruit; and so our author puts it here: " decora
tos arbore fructus."


The liquid waters : 'neath the whistling cold
They will become, and ever will be, stones,
Unless a mighty power, by leading on
305 Soft- breathing warmth, undo them. The great

bunch
Lurks in the tendril's slender body : if
Thou seek it, it is not ; when God doth will,
'Tis seen to be. On trees their leaves, on

thorns
The rose, the seeds on plains, are dead and

fail,
310 And rise again, new living. For man's use
These things doth God before his eyes recall
And form anew — man's, for whose sake at

first 7
The wealthy One made all things bounteously.
AH naked fall ; with its own body each
315 He clothes. Why man alone, on whom He

showered
Such honours, should He not recall in all
His first perfection ^ to Himself? man, whom
He set o'er all ?

Flesh, then, and blood are said
To be not worthy of God's realm, as if
320 Paul spake of flesh materially. He

Indeed taught mighty truths ; but hearts inane
Think he used carnal speech : for piistine

deeds
He meant beneath the name of " flesh and

blood ; "
Remembering, heavenly home-slave that he

is,
325 His heavenly Master's words ; who gave the

name
Of His own honour to men born from Him
Through water, and from His own Spirit

poured
A pledge ; ^ that, by whose virtue men had

been
Redeemed, His name of honour they withal
330 Might, when renewed, receive. Because,

then. He
Refused, on the old score, the heavenly

realm
To peoples not yet from His fount re-born.
Still with their ancient sordid raiment clad —
These are " the dues of death " — saying

that that
335 Which human is must needs be born again, —
" What hath been born of flesh is flesh ; and

what
From Spirit, life ; " '° and that the body,

washed.
Changing with glory its old root's new seeds,"


'«" here for " pnmz^.?.

■ tantum quantum primo fuerat," i.e., with a body


7 I read " prin

8 " Tantum " =
as well as a spirit.

9 Pignus : "the promise of the Father" (Acts i. 4); "the
earnest of the Spirit" (2 Cor. i. 22; v. 5). See, too, Eph. i. 13, 14;
Rom. viii. 23.

■° The reference is to John iii. 6, but it is not quite correctly given.
I I' See note on 245, above.


APPENDIX.


151


Is no more called " from flesh : " Paul follows

this ;
340 Thus did he speak of " flesh." In fine, he

said '
This frail garb with a robe must be o'erclad,
This mortal form be wholly covered ;
Not that another body must be given,
But that the former one, dismantled,^ must
345 Be with God's kingdom wholly on all sides
Surrounded : " In the moment of a glance,"
He says, " it shall be changed : " as, on the

blade,
Dispreads the red corn's ^ face, and changes

'neath
The sun's glare its own hue ; so the same

flesh,
350 From " the effulgent glory " ^ borrowing.
Shall ever joy, and joying,5 shall lack death ;
Exclaiming that " the body's cruel foe
Is vanquisht quite ; death, by the victory
Of the brave Christ, is swallowed ; " ^ praises

high
355 Bearing to God, unto the highest stars.

BOOK III.

OF THE HARMONY OF THE FATHERS OF THE
OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS.

Now hath the mother, formerly surnamed
Barren, giv'n birth : 7 now a new people, born
From the free woman,^ joys : (the slave ex-
pelled.
Deservedly, with her proud progeny ;
5 Who also leaves ungratefully behind
The waters of the living fount,^ and drinks —
Errant on heated plains — 'neath glowing

star : •°)
Now can the Gentiles as their parent claim
Abraham ; who, the Lord's voice following,
10 Like him, have all things left," hfe's pil-
grimage
To enter. " Be glad, barren one ; " conceive
The promised people ; " break them out, and

cry,"
Who with no progeny wert blest ; of whom
Spake, through the seers, the Spirit of old
time :
15 She hath borne, out of many nations, one ;


very rare form — here for
a the text, which here, as elsewhere, is


' See 2 Cor. v. i sqq.

^ I read " inerm«w " —
But there seems a confusion
probably corrupt.

3 " Cene," which seems senseless here, I have changed to
cereris."

■* There seems to be a reference to 2 Pet. i. 17.

S Here again I have altered the punctuation by a very simple
change.

^ See I Cor. xv. 54; Isa. xxv. 8 (where the LXX. have a strange
reading) .

7 Isa. liv. i; Gal iv. 27.

^ Gal. iv. 19-31.

9 The Jewish people leaving Christ, " the fountain of living
waters" (Jer. ii. 13; John vii. 37-39), is compared to Hagar leaving
the well, which was, we may well believe, close to .'Vbraham's tent.

'° Et tepidis errans ardenti sidcre potat. See Gen. xxi. 12-20.

'' See Matt. xix. 27; Mark x. 28; Luke xviii. 28.


With whose beginning are her pious limbs
Ever in labour.

Hers "just Abel " '^ was,
A pastor and a cattle-master he ;
Whom violence of brother's right hand slew
20 Of old. Her Enoch, signal ornament,
Limb from her body sprung, by counsel strove
To recall peoples gone astray from God
And following misdeed, (while raves on earth
The horde of robber-renegades,'^) to flee
25 The giants' sacrilegious cruel race ;

Faithful in all himself. With groaning deep '•♦
Did he please God, and by deserved toil
Translated 'S is reserved as a pledge.
With honour high. Perfect in praise, and
found
30 Fauldess, and just — God witnessing'^ the
fact —
In an adulterous people, Noah (he
Who in twice fifty years '7 the ark did weave)
By deeds and voice the coming ruin told.
Favour he won, snatched out of so great waves
35 Of death, and, with his progeny, preserved.
Then, in the generation '^ following.
Is Abraham, whose sons ye do deny
Yourselves to be ; who first — race, country,

sire,
All left behind — at suasion of God's voice
40 Withdrew to realms extern : such honours he
At God's sublime hand worthily deserved
As to be father to believing tribes
And peoples. Jacob with the patriarchs
(Himself their patriarch) through all his own
45 Life's space the gladdest times of Christ fore-
sang
By words, act, virtue, toil.

Him follows — free
From foul youth's stain — Joseph, by slander

feigned.
Doomed to hard penalty and gaol : his groans
Glory succeeds, and the realm's second
crown,
50 And in dearth's time large power of fur-
nishing
Bread : so appropriate a type of Christ,
So lightsome type of Light, is manifest
To all whose mind hath eyes, that they may

see
In a face-mirror "^ their sure hope.

Himself
55 The patriarch Judah, see ; the origin


'2 See Matt, xxiii. 35.

" i.e., apparently the "giants: " see Gen. vi. 4; but there is no
mention of them in Enoch's time (Migne).
'•* i.e., over the general sinfulness.
'S I suggest " translat;<i" for " translat7<;« " here.
'6 See Gen. vii. i.
'7 Loosely; 120 years is the number in Gen. vi. 3.

18 Gente.

19 Speculo vultus. The two words seem to me to go together,
and, imle.ss the second be indeed redundant, to mean iwrhaps a small
haud-mirroy, which affords more facilities for minute examination
of the face than a larger fixed one.


152


APPENDIX.


Of royal line,' whence leaders rose, nor kings
Failed ever from his seed, until the Power
To come, by Gentiles looked for, promised

long,
Came.

Moses, leader of the People, (he
60 Who, spurning briefly-blooming riches, left
The royal thresholds,) rather chose to bear
His people's toils, afflicted, with bowed

neck.
By no threats daunted, than to gain himself
Enjoyments, and of many penalties
65 Remission : admirable for such faith

And love, he, with God's virtue armed,

achieved
Great exploits : smote the nation through

with plagues ;
And left their land behind, and their hard

king
Confounds, and leads the People back ; trod

waves ;
70 Sunk the foes down in waters ; through a

" tree " ^
Made ever-bitter waters sweet ; spake much
(Manifestly to the People) with the Christ,^
From whose face light and brilliance in his

own
Reflected shone ; dashed on the ground the

law
?5 Accepted through some few,"* — implicit type,
And sure, of his own toils ! — smote through

the rock ;
And, being bidden, shed forth streams ; and

stretched
His hands that, by a sign,5 he vanquish might
The foe ; of Christ all severally, all ^


1 " Sortis; " lit. " lot," here = " the line or family chosen by lot.
Compare the similar derivation of" clergy."

2 Lignum.

3 I have ventured to substitute " Christy" for " Christz'; and thus,
for

" Cum Christz' populo manifeste multa locutus,"
read,

" Cum Christo (populo manifeste) multa locutus."
The reference is to the fact, on which such special stress is laid, of the
Lord's " speaking to Moses /^c^- to /ace, as a man spcakcth ■with
his friend." See especially Num. xii. 5-8, Deut. xxxiv. 9-12, with
Deut. xviii. 17-19, Acts iii. 22, 23, vii. 37.
* The Latin in Oehler and Migne is thus:

" Acceptam legem per paucos fudit in orbem; "
and the reference seems to me to iae to Ex. xxxii. 15-20, though the
use of "orbem" for "ground "is perhaps strange; but " humum "
would have been against the metre, if that argument be of any weight
in the case of a writer so prolific of false quantities. Possibly the
lines may mean that " he diffused through some few " — i.e., through
the Jews, " few" as compared with the total inhabitants of the orb —
" the Law which he had received; " but then the following line seems
rather to favour the former view, because the tables of the Law —
called briefly " the Law" — broken by Moses so soon after he had
received them, were typical of the inefficacy of all Moses' own toils,
which, after all, ended in disappointment, as he was forbidden, on ac-
count of a sin committed in the very last of the forty years, to lead
the people into " the land," as 'he had fondly hoped to do. Only I
suspect some error in " per paucos; " unless it be lawful to supply
"dies," and take it to mean "received during but few days," i.e.,
^^ within few days," "only a few days before," and " accepted " or
" kept " by the People " during but a few days." Would it be lawful
to conjecture " perpaucz'i " as one word, with "ante diebus" to be
understood?

5 i.e., the sign of the cross. See Tertullian,a^z/. Marc, 1. iii. c.
■x.y\\\. sub.fin.; also rt^/e'. Jud., c. x. mcd.

6 i.e., all the acts and the experiences of Moses.


80 Co7?ibined through Christ, do speak. Great
and approved,
He 7 rests with praise and peace.

But Joshua,
The son of Nun, erst called Oshea — this

man
The Holy Spirit to Himself did jom
As partner in His name : ^ hence did he
cleave
S5 The flood ; constrained the People to pass
o'er;
Freely distributed the land — the prize
Promised the fathers ! — stayed both sun and

moon
While vanquishing the foe ; races extern
And giants' progeny outdrave ; razed groves ;
90 Altars and temples levelled ; and with mind
Loyal 9 performed all due solemnities :
Type of Christ's name ; his virtue's image.

What
Touching the People's Judges shall I say
Singly? whose virtues,'" it unitedly
95 Recorded, fill whole volumes numerous
With space of words. But yet the order due
Of filling out the body of my words.
Demands that, out of many, I should tell
The life of few.

Of whom when Gideon, guide
100 Of martial band, keen to attack the foe,
(Not keen to gain for his own family,
By virtue," tutelary dignity,'^)
And needing to be strengthened '3 in the faith
Excited in his mind, seeks for a sign
105 Whereby he either could not, or could, wage
Victorious war ; to wit, that with the dew
A fleece, exposed for the night, should be
Moistened, and all the ground lie dry around
(By this to show that, with the world,'-* should
dry '5
no The enemies' palm) ; and then again, the
fleece
Alone remaining dry, the earth by night
Should with the self-same "" moisture be be-
dewed :


7 Moses.

^ See Ex. xxiii. 20-23; and comp, adv. Marc, 1. iii. c. xvi.
9 Legitima, i e., reverent of law.
'° i.e.. virtuous acts.

11 Or, " valour."

12 The Latin runs thus:

" Acer in hostem,
Non virtute sua tutelam acquirere genti."
I have ventured to read " su<^," and connect it with "genti;" and
thus have obtained what seems to me a probable sense. See Judg.
viii. 22, 23.

13 I read " firraa«a?«j" for " iivcaatus."
'•* Mundo.

15 I have again ventured a correction, " coarescere " for " coa-
/escere." It makes at least some ."iense out of an otherwise (to me)
unintelligible passage, the " palm " being taken as the well-known
symbol of bloom and triumph. So David in Ps. xcii. 12 (xci. 13 in
LXX.), "The righteous i\\-s\\ flojirish like ihi^ palm-tree." To
" dnr " here is, of course, neuter,' and means to " wither."

lo I have changed " eadem " — which must agree with " nocte,"
and hence give a false sense; for it was not, of course, on " the same
night," but on the next, that this second sign was given — into
" eoAexn," to agree with " liquore," which gives a true one, as the
" moisture," of course, was the same, — dew, namely.


APPENDIX.


153


For by this sign he prostrated the heaps
Of bandits ; with Christ's People 'countering

them
115 Without much soldiery, with cavalry'

Three hundred — the Greek letter Tau, in

truth,
That number is ^ — with torches armed, and

horns
Of blowers with the mouth : then ^ was the

fleece,
The people of Christ's sheep, from holy seed
120 Born (for the earth means nations various,
And scattered through the orb), which fleece

the word
Nourishes ; ;;/^/// death's image ; Tau the sign
Of the dear cross ; the horn the heraldings
Of life ; the torches shining in their stand +
125 The glowing Spirit : and this testing, too.
Forsooth, an image of Christ's virtue was : 5
To teach that death's fierce batdes should

not be
By trump angelic vanquished before
Th' indocile People be deservedly
13° By their own fault left desolate behind.
And Gentiles, flourishing in faith, received
In praise.

Yea, Deborah, a woman far
Above all fame, appears ; who, having braced
Herself for warlike toil, for country's sake,
135 Beneath the palm-tree sang how victory
Had crowned her People ; thanks to whom

it was
That the foes, vanquisht, turned at once their

backs.
And Sisera their leader fled ; whose flight
No man, nor any band, arrested : him,
140 Suddenly renegade, a woman's hand —

Jael's^ — with wooden weapon vanquished

quite.
For token of Christ's victory.

With firm faith
Jephthah appears, who a deep-wounding

vow
Dared make — to promise God a grand re-
ward
145 Of war : him 7 then, because he senselessly
Had promised what the Lord not wills, first

meets
The pledge ^ dear to his heart ; who suddenly


rally


Equite. It appears to be used loosely for " men of war" gener-


2 Which is taken, from its form, as a sign of the cross: sec below.

3 Refers to the " when " in 99, abos'C.

* Lychno. The "faces" are probably the 7uzcks.
S " Scilicet hoc testamen erat virtutis imago."
^ The text as it stands is, in Oehler: —

..." Hie Baal Christi victoria signo

Extemplo refugam devicit femina ligno; "
which I would read : —

..." Hunc Jael, Christi victoria- signo,

Extemplo," etc.

7 For " kic" 1 would incline to read " huic."

8 i.e., child.


Fell by a lot unhoped by any. He,

To keep his promise, broke the sacred laws

Of parenthood : the shade of mighty fear

Did in his violent mind cover his vow

Of sin : as solace of his widowed life

For 9 wickedness, renown, and, for crime,

praise.
He won.

Nor Samson's strength, all corporal

might
Passing, must we forget ; the Spirit's gift
Was this ; the power was granted to his head.'°
Alone he for his People, daggerless.
Armless, an ass-jaw grasping, prostrated
A thousand corpses; and no bonds could

keep
The hero bound : but after his shorn pride
Forsook him thralled, he fell, and, by his

death, —
Though vanquisht, — bought his foes back

'neath his power.

Marvellous Samuel, who first received
The precept to anoint kings, to give chrism
And show men-Christs," so acted laudably
In life's space as, e'en after his repose.
To keep prophetic rights.'^

Psalmographist
David, great king and prophet, with a voice
Submiss was wont Christ's future suffering
To sing : which prophecy spontaneously
His thankless lawless People did perform :
Whom '3 God had promised that in time to

come,
Fruit of his womb, '4 a holy progeny.
He would on his sublime throne set : the

Lord's
Fixt faith did all that He had promised.

Corrector of an inert People rose
Emulous '5 Hezekiah ; who restored
Iniquitous forgetful men the Law : '^'
All these God's mandates of old time he first
Bade men observe, who ended war by

prayers,'''
Not by steel's point : he, dying, had a grant
Of years and times of life made to his tears :
Deservedly such honour his career
Obtained.

With zeal immense, Josiah, prince
Himself withal, in like wise acted : none
So much, before or after ! — Idols he
Dethroned ; destroyed unhallowed temples ;

burned


9 i.e., instead of.

'° i.e., to his unshorn Nazarite locks.

" Viros ostendere Christos.

'- See I Sam. xxviii. (in LXX. i Kings) 11-19.

'3 i.e., ic>whom, to />rtp/(/.

'^ " Ex utero: " a curious expression for a man; but so it is.

'5 i.e., emulous of David's virtues.

"> Comp. especially 2 Chron. xxix. xxx. xxxi.

'7 Our author is quite correct in his order. A comparison of dates
as given in the Scripture history shows us that his reforms preceded
his war with Sennacherib.


154


APPENDIX.


With fire priests on their altars ; all the bones
Of prophets false updug ; the altars burned,
190 The carcases to be consumed did serve
For fuel !

To the praise of signal faith,
Noble Elijah, (memorable fact !)
Was rapt ; ' who hath not tasted yet death's

dues ;
Since to the orb he is to come again.
195 His faith unbroken, then, chastening with
stripes
People and frenzied king, (who did desert
The Lord's best service), and with bitter flames
The foes, shut up the stars ; kept in the clouds
The rain ; showed all collectively that God
200 Js ; made their error patent ; — for a flame.
Coming v/ith force from heaven at his prayers,
Ate up the victim's parts, dripping with flood.
Upon the altar : ^ — often as he willed,
So often from on high rushed fire ; ^ the^
stream
205 Dividing, he made pathless passable ; <
And, in a chariot raised aloft, was borne
To paradise's hall.

Disciple his
Elisha was, succeeding to his lot : s
Who begged to take to him Elijah's lot^
210 In double measure ; so, vvith forceful stripe,
The People to chastise : ^ such and so great
A love for the Lord's cause he breathed.

He smote
Through Jordan ; made his feet a way, and

crossed
Again ; raised with a twig the axe down-sunk
215 Beneath the stream ; changed into vital meat
The deathful food ; detained a second time.
Double in length,^ the rains ; cleansed lep-
rosies ; 9
Entangled foes in darkness ; and when one
Offcast and dead, by bandits' slaughter slain,
220 His hmbs, after his death, already hid

In sepulchre, did touch, he — light recalled —
Revived.

Isaiah, wealthy seer, to whom
The fount was oped, — so manifest his
faith ! —


' The " tactus" of the Latin is without sense, unless indeed it
refer to his being twice "touched" by an angel. See i Kings (in
LXX. 3 Kings) xix. 1-8. I have therefore substituted " raptus,"
there being no mention of the angel in the Latin.

2 " Ara^f " should probably be " arrt;«."

3 See 2 Kin^ (in LXX. 4 Kings) i. 9-12.

^ For " transgressas et avia fecit," I read " transgress?<j avia
fecit," taking " transgressus " as a subst.
5 Sortis.
^ Sortem.

7 Our author has somewhat mistaken Elisha's mission apparently;
for as there is a significant difference in the meaning of their respec-
tive names, so there is in their works: Elijah's miracles being rather
miracles of judgment, it has been remarked; Elisha's, of mercy.

8 Xhe reference is to a famine in Elisha's days, which — 2 Kings
(in LXX. 4 Kings) viii. i. — was to last seven years ; whereas that
for which Elijah prayed, as we learn in Jas. v. 17, lasted three and
six montlis. But it is not said that YX\^& prayed /or that famine.

9 We only read oi one leprosy which Elisha cleansed — Naaman's.
He inflicted leprosy on Gehazi, which was " to cleave to him and to
his seed for ever."


Poured from his mouth God's word forth.
Promised was
225 The Father's will, bounteous through Christ ;
through him
It testified before the way of life,
And was approved : '° but him, though stain-
less found.
And undeserving, the mad People cut
With wooden saw in twain, and took away
230 With cruel death.

The holy Jereimy
Followed ; whom the Eternal's Virtue bade
Be prophet to the Gentiles, and him told
The future : who, because he brooded o'er
His People's deeds illaudable, and said
235 (Speaking with voice presaging) that, unless
They had repented of betaking them
To deeds iniquitous against their slaves,"
They should be captived, bore hard bonds,

shut up
In squalid gaol ; and, in the miry pit,
240 Hunger exhausted his decaying limbs.
But, after he did prove what they to hear
Had been unwilling, and the foes did lead
The People bound in their triumphal trains.
Hardly at length his wrinkled right hand lost
245 Its chains : it is agreed that by no death
Nor slaughter was the hero ta'en away.

Faithful EzEKiEL, to whom granted
was
Rich grace of speech, saw sinners' secrets ;

wailed
His own afflictions ; prayed for pardon ; saw
25° The vengeance of the saints, which is to be
By slaughter ; and, in Spirit wrapt, the place
Of the saints' realm, its steps and accesses,
And the salvation of the flesh, he saw.
Hosea, Amos, Micah, Joel, too,
255 With Obadiah, Jonah, Nahum, come ;
Hahakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai,
And Zechariah who did violence
Suffer, and Malachi — angel himself ! —
Are here : these are the Lord's seers ; and
their choir,
260 As still they sing, is heard ; and equally
Their proper wreath of praise they all have
earned.

How great was Daniel ! What a
man !

What power !
Who by their own mouth did false witnesses
Bewray, and saved a soul on a false charge
265 Condemned ; '^ and, before that, by mouth
resolved


'° Praetestata y'xam vitae atque probata per ipsam est. I suspect
we should read " y'\a" quantity being of no importance with our
author, and take "praetestata" as passive: "The way of life was
testified before, and proved, through him."

" This seems to be the meaning, and the reference will then be to
Jer. xxxiv. 8-22 (in LXX. xli. 8-22) ; but the punctuation both in
Oehler and Migne makes nonsense, and I have therefore altered it.

12 See the apocryphal " Susanna."


APPENDIX.


155


The king's so secret dreams ; foresaw how

Christ
Dissoh'es the hmbs of kingdoms ; was ac-
cused
For his Lord's sake ; was made the hons'

prey ;
And, openly preserved ' before all eyes,
270 Rested in peace.

His THREE COMPANIONS, scarcc
With due praise to be sung, did piously
Contemn the king's iniquitous decree.
Out of so great a number : to the flames
Their bodies given were ; but they preferred,
275 For the Great Name, to yield to penalties
Themselves, than to an image stretch their

palms
On bended knees. Now their o'erbrilliant

faith,
Now hope outshining all things, the wild

fires
Hath quencht, and vanquisht the iniquitous !
280 Ezra the seer, doctor of Law, and

priest
Himself (who, after full times, back did lead
The captive People), with the Spirit filled
Of memory, restored by word of mouth
All the seers' volumes, by the fires and mould ^
2S5 Consumed.

Great above all born from seed
Is John : whose praises hardly shall we skill
To tell : the washer ^ of the flesh : the Lord's
Open forerunner ; washer,^ too, of Christ,
Himself first born again from Him : the first
290 Of the new convenant, last of the old,

Was he ; and for the True Way's sake he

died.
The first slain victim.

See God-Christ ! behold
Alike, His twelve-fold warrior-youth ! 4

in all
One faith, one love, one power ; the flower

of men ;
295 Lightening the world 5 with light ; comrades

of Christ
And apostolic men ; who, speaking truth.
Heard with their ears Salvation,*^ with their

eyes
Saw It, and handled with their hand the late
From death recovered body,^ and partook


' For " servat/jque palam cunctis in pace quievit," which the edd.
give, I suggest " servat«jque," etc., and take " palam " for governing
" cunctis."

2 Ignibus et jnnlta consumpta volumina vatum. MuHa must,
apparently, be an error for some word signifying " mould " or the
like; unless, with the disregard of construction and quantity observ-
able in this author, it be an ace. pi. to agree with volumina, so that
we must take " otniu'a tnulta voluiniua " together, which would alter
the whole construction of the context.

3 Ablutor.

* Juventus.

5 Mundo.

6 Salutem:= Christum. So Simeon, " Mine eyes have seen Thy
salvation," where the Oreek word should be noted and compared
with its usage in the LXX., especially in the Psalms. See Luke ii. 30.

' Comp. I John i. 1,2.


3°o As fellow-guests of food therewith, as they
Themselves bear witness.

Him did Paul as well
(Forechosen apostle, and in due time sent),
When rapt into the heavens,'* behold : and

sent
By Him, he, with his comrade Barnabas,
305 And with the earlier associates

Joined in one league together, everywhere
Among the Gentiles hands the doctrine

down
That Christ is Head, whose members are

the Church,
He the salvation of the body. He
310 The members' hfe perennial ; He, made

flesh.
He, ta'en away for all, Himself first rose
Again, salvation's only hope ; and gave
The norm to His disciples : they at once
All variously suffered, for His Name,
315 Unworthy penalties.

Such members bears
With beauteous body the free mother, since
She never her Lord's precepts left behind,
And in His home hath grown old, to her

Lord
Ever most choice, having for His Name's

sake
320 Penalties suffered. For since, barren once,
Not yet secure of her futurity,
She hath outgiven a people born of seed
Celestial, and 9 been spurned, and borne the

spleen '°
Of her own handmaid ; now 'tis time to see
325 This former-barren mother have a son
The heir of her own liberty ; not Hke
The handmaid'' s heir, yoked in estate to her,
Although she bare him from celestial seed
Conceived. Far be it that ye should with

words
330 Unlawful, with rash voice, collectively
Without distinction, give men exemplary
(Heaven's glowing constellations, to the mass
Of men conjoined by seed alone or blood),
The rugged bondman's " name ; or that one

think
335 That he may speak in servile style about
A People who the mandates followed
Of the Lord's Law. No : but we mean the

troop
Of sinners, empty, mindless, who have placed
God's promises in a mistrustful heart;


8 See 2 Cor. xii. i sqq.

9 The common reading is, " Atque su^ famulje portarvV spreta
dolorem," for which Oehler reads " portar// ,■ " but I incline rather
to suggest that "porta?'//" be retained, but that the "a/que" be
changed into " acque," thus: " A^-que sua; famula; portjif// spreta
dolorem; " i.e., Since, like Sarah, the once barren Christian church-
mother hath had children, equally, like Sarah, hath she had to bear
scorn and spleen at her handmaid's — the Jewish church-mother's —
hands.

•o Dolorem.

" i.e., Ishmael's.


156


APPENDIX.


340 Men vanquisht by the miserable sweet

Of present life : that troop would have been

bound
Capital slavery to undergo,
By their own fault, if sin's cause shall impose
Law's yoke upon the mass. For to serve
God,

345 And be whole-heartedly intent thereon,
Untainted faith, and freedom, is thereto
Prepared spontaneous.

The just fathers, then.
And holy stainless prophets, many, sang
The future advent of the Lord ; and they

350 Faithfully testify what Heaven bids

To men profane : with them the giants,' men
With Christ's own glory satiated, made
The consorts of His virtue, fiUing up
The hallowed words, have stablished our
faith ;

355 By facts predictions proving.

Of these men
Disciples who succeeded them throughout
The orb, men wholly filled with virtue's

breath.
And our own masters, have assigned to us
Honours conjoined with works.

Of whom the first

360 Whom Peter bade to take his place and sit
LTpon this chair in mightiest Rome where he
Himself had sat,^ was Linus, great, elect.
And by the mass approved. And after him
Cletus himself the fold's flock undertook ;

365 As his successor Anacletus was

By lot located : Clement follows him ;
Well, known was he to apostolic men : 3
Next EvARiSTUs ruled without a crime
The law.-* To Sixtus Sextus Alexander

370 Commends the fold : who, after he had filled
His lustral times up, to Telesphorus
Hands it in order : excellent was he.
And martyr faithful. After him succeeds
A comrade in the law,5 and master sure :

375 When lo ! the comrade of your wickedness.
Its author and forerunner — Cerdo hight —
Arrived at Rome, smarting with recent

wounds :
Detected, for that he was scattering
Voices and words of venom stealthily :

3S0 For which cause, driven from the band, he
bore
This sacrilegious brood, the dragon's breath


1 " Immanes," if it be the true reading.

2 This is the way Oehler's punctuation reads. Migne's reads as
follows : —

. . . " Of whom the first
Whom mightiest Rome bade take his place and sit
Upon the chair where Peter's self had sat," etc.

3 " Is apostolicis bene notus."_ This may mean, {a) as in our
text; {b) by his apostolically-minded writings — writings like an
apostle's; or (c) by the apostolic writings, i.e., b>y the mention made
of him, supposing him to be the same, in Phil. iv. 3.

* Legem.
5 Legis.


Engendering it. Blooming in piety
United stood the Church of Rome, compact
By Peter : whose successor, too, himself,

3S5 And now in the ninth place, Hyginus was,
The burden undertaking of his chair.
After him followed Pius — Hermas his
Own brother ^ was ; angelic " Pastor " he.
Because he spake the words delivered him : 7

390 And Anicetus^ the allotted post

In pious order undertook. 'Neath whom
Marcion here coming, the new Pontic pest,
(The secret daring deed in his own heart
Not yet disclosed,) went, speaking commonly,

395 In all directions, in his perfidy.

With lurking art. But after he began
His deadly arrows to produce, cast off
Deservedly (as author of a crime
So savage), reprobated by the saints,

400 He burst, a wondrous monster ! on our view.

BOOK IV.

OF MARCION'S ANTITHESES.?

What the Inviolable Power bids

The youthful people,'° which, rich, free, and

heir.
Possesses an eternal hope of praise
(By right assigned) is this : that with great

zeal
5 Burning, armed with the love of peace — yet

not
As teachers (Christ alone doth all things

teach").
But as Christ's household-servants — o'er the

earth
They should conduct a massive war ; '^ should

raze
The wicked's lofty towers, savage walls,
10 And threats which 'gainst the holy people's

bands
Rise, and dissolve such empty sounds in air.
Wherefore we, justly speaking emulous words,'3
Out of his '■♦ own words even strive to express
The meaning of salvation's records, '5 which
15 Large grace hath poured profusely ; and to

ope


6 Germine frater.

7 An allusion to the well-known Pastor or Shepherd of Hermas.

8 Our author makes the name Anicetus. Rig. (as quoted by
Oehler) observes that a comparison of the list of bishops of Rome
here given with that given by Terlullian in de Prcescr., c. xxxii.,
seems to show that this metrical piece cannot be his.

9 The state of the text in some parts of this book is frightful. It
has been almost hopeless to extract any sense whatever out of the
Latin in many passages — indeed, the renderings are in these cases
little better than guess-work — and the confusion of images, ideas,
and quotations is extraordinary.

'° See the preceding book.

'' I have changed the imintelligible "daret" of the edd into
"docet." The reference seems to be to Matt, xxiii. 8; Jas. iii. i;
I Pet. V. 2, 3.

'2 Molem belli deducere terrae.

'3 yEmulamenta. Migne seems to think the word refers to Mar-
cion's " Antitheses."

'■» i.e., apparently Marcion's.

'5 Monumenta.


APPENDIX.


157


To the saints' eyes the Bandit's ' covert

plague :
Lest any untrained, daring, ignorant,
Fall therein unawares, and (being caught)
Forfeit celestial gifts.

God, then, is One
20 To mortals all and everywhere ; a Realm
Eternal, Origin of light profound ;
Life's Fount; a Draught fraught^ with all

wisdom. He
Produced the orb whose bosom all things

girds ;
Hlm not a region, not a place, includes
25 In circuit : matter none perennial is,^
So as to be self-made, or to have been
Ever, created by no Maker : heaven's.
Earth's, sea's, and the abyss's •* Settler 5 is
The Spirit ; air's Divider, Builder, Author,
3° Sole God perpetual. Power immense, is He.^
Him had the Law the People ^ shown to be
One God,^ whose mighty voice to Moses

spake

Upon the mount. Him this His Virtue, too,

His Wisdom, Glory, Word, and Son, this

Light

35 Begotten from the Light immense,^ proclaims

Through the seers' voices, to be One : and

Paul,'°
Taking the theme in order up, thus too
Himself delivers ; " Father there is One "
Through whom were all things made : Christ
One, through whom
40 God all things made ; " '^ to whom he plainly
owns
That every knee doth bow itself; '^ of whom
Is every fatherhood '■♦ in heaven and earth
Called : who is zealous with the highest love
Of parent-care His people-ward ; and wills
45 All flesh to live in holy wise, and wills
His people to appear before Him pure
Without a crime. ' With such zeal, by a law '5
Guards He our safety ; warns us /oral be ;
Chastens ; is instant. So, too, has the same
50 Apostle (when Galatian brethren


' See the opening of the preceding book.

2 "Conditus; " i.e., probably (in violation of quantity) the past
part, of " condio" = flavoured, seasoned.

3 I have altered the punctuation here.
* Inferni.

5 Locator.

6 These lines are capable, according to their punctuation, of vari-
ous renderings, which for brevity's sake I must be content to omit.

' i.e., the People of Israel. See the de Idol., p. 148, c. v. note i.

8 See Deut. vi. 3, 4, quoted in Mark xii. 29, 30.

9 This savours of the Nicene Creed

'° Mtgne's pointing is followed, in preference to Oehler's.

'I "Vnjim hunc esse Patrem; " i.e., " that this One (God) is the
Father." But I rather incline to read, " xxnunigiie esse; " or we may
render, " This One is the Sire."

'2 See I Cor. viii. 5, 6 (but notice the prepositions in the Greek;
our author is not accurate in rendering them) ; Eph. iv. 4, 5, 6.

'3 Ad quem se curvare genu plane omne fatetur. The reference is
to Phil. ii. 10; but our author is careless in using the present tense,
" se curvare."

'■* The reference is to Eph. iii. 14, 15; but here again our author
seems in error, as he refers the words to Christ, whereas the mean-
ing of the apostle appears clearly to refer them to the Father,

'j Legitimes. See book iv. 91.


Chiding) — Paul — written that such zeal hath

he.'^-
The fathers' sins God freely rendered, then,
Slaying in whelming deluge utterly
Parents alike with progeny, and e'en
55 Grandchildren in " fourth generation " '7 now
Descended from the parent-stock, when He
Has then for nearly these nine hundred years
Assisted them. Hard does the judgment

seem?
The sentence savage? And in Sodom, too,
60 That the still guiltless little one unarmed
And tender should lose life : for what had e'er
The infant sinned ? What cruel thou mayst

think,
Is parent-care's true duty. Lest misdeed
Should further grow, crime's authors He did
quench,
65 And sinful parents' brood. But, with his sires.
The harmless infant pays not penalties
Perpetual, ignorant and not advanced
In crime : but lest he partner should become
Of adult age's guilt, death immature
70 Undid spontaneous future ills.

Why, then,
Bids God libation to be poured to Him
With blood of sheep ? and takes so stringent

means
By Law, that, in the People, none transgress
Erringly, threatening them with instant death
75 By stoning? and why reprobates, again.
These gifts of theirs, and says they are to

Him
Unwelcome, while He chides a People prest
With swarm of sin ? ^'^ Does He, the truthful,

bid,
And He, the just, at the same time repel ?
So The causes if thou seekst, cease to be moved
Erringly : for faith's cause is weightier
Than fancied reason. '^ Through a mirror ^° —

shade
Of fulgent light ! — behold what the calf s

blood.
The heifer's ashes, and each goat, do mean :
85 The one dismissed goes off, the other falls
A victim at the temple.

With calf s blood
With water mixt the seer ^' (thus from on high
Bidden) besprinkled People, vessels all,
Priests, and the written volumes of the Law.
90 See here not their true hope, nor yet a mere
Semblance devoid of virtue ; ^^ but behold


But here, again, " Galatas "seems rather like
an error; for in s,)eaking to the Corinthi


See Gal. . „ .

St. Paul uses an ex-
pression more like our author's: see 2 Cor. xi. 2. The Latin, too, is
faulty: " Talem se Paulus zelum se scripsit habere," where, perhaps,
for the first " se" we should read " sic."

'7 Comp. Ex. XX. 5; Deut. v. 9.

18 See Jsa. i. 10-15; J<^''- vi. 20.

'9 Causa etenim fidei rationis imagine major.

20 Comp. I Cor. xiii. 12; Heb. x. i.

2t Moses. See Heb. ix. 19-22, and the references there.

22 Comp. Heb. ix. 13.


158


APPENDIX.


In the calfs type Christ destined bodily
To suffer ; who upon His shoulders bare
The plough-beam's hard yokes,' and with
fortitude
95 Brake His own heart with the steel share, and
poured
Into the furrows water of His own
Life's blood. For these " temple-vessels " do
Denote our bodies : God's true temple ^ He,
Not dedicated erst ; for to Himself
i°° He by His blood associated men,

And willed them be His body's priests,

Himself
The Supreme Father's perfect Priest by right.
Hearing, sight, step inert. He cleansed ; and,

for a " book," ^
Sprinkled, by speaking^ words of presage,
those
105 His witnesses : demonstrating the Law
Bound by His holy blood.

This cause withal
Our victim through " the heifer'''' manifests
From whose blood taking for the People's sake
Piacular drops, them the first Levite s bare
"o Within the veil ; and, by God's bidding,
burned
Her corse without the camp's gates ; with

whose ash
He cleansed lapsed bodies.

Thus our Lord (who us
By His own death redeemed), without the

camp ^
Willingly suffering the violence
"5 Of an iniquitous People, did fulfil

The Law, by facts predictions proving ; 7 who
A people of contamination full
Doth truly cleanse, conceding all things, as
The body's Author rich ; within heaven's veil
120 Gone with the blood which — One for niany's
deaths —
He hath outpoured.

A holy victim, then,
Is meet for a great priest ; which worthily
He, being perfect, may be proved to have,
And offer. He a body hath : this is
125 For mortals a live victim ; worthy this


' Alluding probably to our Lord's bearing of the cross-beam of
His cross — the beam being the " yokes," and the upright stem of the
cross the " plough-beam " — on His shoulders. — See John xix. 17.

2 Templum. Comp. John ii. 19-22; Col. ii. 9.

3 Librq. The reference is to the preceding lines, esjaecially 89,
and Heb. ix. 19, avrb to ^i^kiov. The use of " libro " is curious,
as it seems to be used partly as if it would be equivalent lo pro libra,
" in the place of a book," partly in a more truly datival sense, " to
serve the purposes of a book; " and our " for" is capable of the two
senses.

■» For this comparison of "speaking" to "sprinkling," comp.
Deut. xxxii. 2, " My doctrine shall drop as the rain ; my speech
shall distil as the dew" etc.; Job xxix. 22, " My j/crfA dropped
upon them; " with Eph. v. 26, and with our Lord's significant action
(recorded in the passage here alluded to, Johnxx. 22) of" breathing
on" (evc0iicr7)o-6>') His disciples. Comp., too, for the "witnesses
and "words of presage," Luke xxiv. 48. 49; Acts i. 6-8.

5 i.e., the chief of the Levites, the high priest

6 Comp. Heb. xiii. 12, 13; John xix. 19, 20.
1 Comp. the preceding book, 355.


Of great price did He offer. One for all.

The ^ semblance of the " goats " teaches

that they
Are men exiled out of the " peoples twain " 9
As barren ; '° fruitless both ; (of whom the

Lord
130 Spake also, in the Gospel, telling how

The kids are severed from the sheep, and

stand
On the left hand") : that some indeed there

are
Who for the Lord's Name's sake have

suffered : thus
That fruit has veiled their former barrenness :
135 And such, the prophet teaches, on the ground
Of that their final merit worthy are
Of the Lord's altar : others, cast away
(As was th' iniquitous rich man, we read,
By Lazarus '^), are such as have remained
•4° Exiled, persistent in their stubbornness.
Now a veil, hanging in the midst, did both
Dissever, '3 and had into portions twain
Divided the one shrine. '■+ The inner parts
Were called " Holies of holies." Stationed

there
'45 An altar shone, noble with gold ; and there,
At the same time, the testaments and ark
Of the Law's tablets ; covered wholly o'er
With lambs' skins '5 dyed with heaven's hue ;

within
Gold-clad ; '^ and all between of wood. Here

are
'5° The tablets of the Law; here is the urn
Replete with manna ; here is Aaron's rod
Which puts forth germens of the cross '7 —

unlike


^ The passage which follows is almost unintelligible. The sense
which I have offered in my text is so offered with great diffidence, as
I am far from certain of having hit the meaning; indeed, the state of
the text is such, that any meaning must be a matter of some uncer-
tainty.

9 i.e., perhaps the Jewish and Christian peoples. Comp. adv.
Jud., c. I.

'° i.e., "barren" of faith and good works The "goats" being
but " kids " (see Lev xvi. 8), would, of course, be barren. "Exiled"
seems to mean " excommunicated." But the comparison of the sacri-
ficed goat to a penitent, and of the scapegoat to an impenitent, excom-
municate, is extravagant. Yet I see no other sense.

" See Matt. xxv. 31-33.

'^ i e., Lazarus was not allowed to help him. In that sense he may
be said to have been " cast away; " but it is Abraham, not Lazarus,
who pronounces his doom. See Luke xvi. 19-31.

'3 i.e., in that the blood of the one was brought within the veil;
the other was not.

''' ^dem.

'5 The meaning seems to be, that the ark, when it had to be
removed from place to place, had (as we learn from Num. iv. 5) to
be covered with" the .second veil " (as it is called in Heb. ix. 3), which
was " of blue," etc. But that this veil was made "of lambs' skins"
does not appear, on the contrary, it was made of" linen." The outer
veil, indeed (not the OMiinost, which was of " badgers' skins," accord-
ing to the Eng. ver. ; but of " uaKiVSiva Sep/xara" — of what mate-
rial is not said — according to the LXX.), ivas made " of rams'
skins; " but then they were " dyed red" (rjpvdpoSavcoiJiei'a, LXX.),
not " blue." So there is some confusion in our author.

"i The ark was overlaid with gold without as well as within. (See
Ex. xxv. 10, II, xxxvii. 1,2; and this is referred to in Heb. ix. 3, 4
— KifiioTov . . . n-epi/ce/coAu/a^iei'Tji' Trdi'Toeei' )(pv<riti> — where our
Eng. ver. rendering is defective, and in the context as well.) This,
however, rnay be said to be implied in the following words: " and all
between," i.e., between the layers above and beneath, " of wood."

'7 Migne supposes some error in these words, Certainly the sense
is dark enough ; but see lower down.


APPENDIX.


159


The cross itself, yet born of storax-tree ' —
And over it — in uniformity
155 Fourfold — the cherubim their pinions spread,
And the inviolable sanctities ^
Covered obediently.^ Without the veil
Part of the shrine stood open : facing it,
Heavy with broad brass, did an altar stand ;
160 And with two triple sets (on each side one)
Of branches woven with the central stem,
A lanipstand, and as many •♦ lamps :
The golden substance wholly filled with light
The temple. 5

Thus the temple's outer face,
1^5 Common and open, does the ritual
Denote, then, of a people lingering
Beneath the Law ; amid whose ^ gloom there

shone
The Holy Spirit's sevenfold unity
Ever, the People sheltering.^ And thus
170 The Lampstand True and living Lamps do

shine
Persistently throughout the Law and Seers
On men subdued in heart. And for a type
Of earth^ the altar — so tradition says —
Was made. Here constantly, in open space,
175 Before all eyes were visible of old

The People's " works," ^ which ever — "not

without
Blood " '° — it did offer, shedding out the gore
Of lawless life." There, too, the Lord — •

Himself
Made victim on behalf of all — denotes
iSo The whole earth '^ — altar in specific sense.
Hence likewise that new covenant author,

whom
No language can describe, Disciple John,
Testifies that beneath such altar he
Saw souls which had for Christ's name suf-
fered,
185 Praying the vengeance of the mighty God
Upon their slaughter.'^ There,'-* meantime, is

rest.
In some unknown part there exists a spot
Open, enjoying its own light ; 'tis called
" Abraham's bosom ; " high above the

glooms, '5


1 It yielded " almonds," according to the Eng. ver. (Num. xvii.
8). But see the LXX.

2 Sagmina. But the word is a very strange one to use indeed.
See the Latin Lexicons, s.v.

3 It might be questionable whether " jussa " refers to " cherubim "
or to " sagmina." ,

* i.e., twice three -j- the central one = 7.

5 Our author persists in calling the tabernacle temple.

6 i.e., the Law's.

' " Tegebat," i e., with the " fiery-cloudy pillar," unless it be an
error for " tegebat," which still might apply to the pillar.

8 Terrs.

9 "Operas," i.e., sacrifices. The Latin is a hopeless jumble of
words without grammatical sequence, and any rendering is mere guess-
work.

10 Heb. ix. 7.

" i.e., of animals which, as irrational, were "without the Law."

'- Terram.

■3 Rev. vi. 9, 10.

■■» i.e., beneath the altar. See the nth verse ih.

'5 Or possibly, " deeper than the glooms; " " altior a tenebris."


190 And far removed from fire, yet 'neath the
earth.'^
The brazen altar this is called, whereon
(^Ve have recorded) was a dusky veil.'?
This veil divides both parts, and leaves the

one
Open, from the eternal one distinct
195 In worship and time's usage. To itself
'Tis not unfriendly, though of fainter love,
By time and space divided, and yet linked
By reason. 'Tis one house, though by a veil
Parted it seems : and thus (when the veil
burst,
200 On the Lord's passion) heavenly regions
oped
And holy vaults,'^ and what was double erst
Became one house perennial.

Order due
Traditionally has interpreted
The inner temple of the people called
205 After Christ's Name, with worship heavenly,
God's actual mandates following; (no

" shade "
Is herein bound, but persons real ; "?) com-
plete
By the arrival of the "perfect things." ^°
The ark beneath a type points out to us
210 Christ's venerable body, joined, through
"wood," 21
AVith sacred Spirit : the aerial^^ skins
Are flesh not born of seed, outstretcht on

"wood ; " ^3
At the same time, with golden semblance

fused,^-*
Within, the glowing Spirit joined is
215 Thereto; that, with peace ^5 granted, flesh
might bloom
With Spirit mixt. Of the Lord's flesh, again,
The //;-;/, golden and full, a type doth bear.
Itself denotes that the new covenant's Lord
Is majma ; in that He, true heavenly Bread,
220 Is, and hath by the Father been transfused ^^
Into that bread which He hath to His saints


16 Terra.

'7 See 141, 142, above.

13 C^lataque sancta. We might conjecture " cHataque sancta," =:
" and the sanctuaries formerly hidden.'

'9 This sense appears intelligible, as the writer^s aim seems to be
to distinguish between the " actual " commands of God, i.e., the spir-
itual, essential ones, which the spiritual people "follow," and which
"bind" — not the ceremonial observance of a "shadow of the
future blessings" (see Heb. x. i), but " real persons," i.e., living
souls. But, as Migne has said, the passage is probably faulty and
mutilated.

^° Comp. Heb. vii. 19, x. i, ix. 11, n.

2' " Lignum: " here probably = " the flesh," which He took from
Mary; the "rod" (according to our author) which Isaiah had fore-
told.

22 Aerial, i.e., as he said above, " dyed with heaven's hue."

23 " Ligno," i.e., " the cross," represented by the " wood "of which
the tabernacle's boards, on which the coverings were stretched (but
comp. 147-8, above), were made.

24 As the flame of the lamps appeared to grow out of and be fused
with the " golden semblance ' or " form " of the lampstand or candle-
stick.

=5 Of which the olive — of which the pure oil for the lamps was to
be made: Ex. xxvii. 20; Lev. xxiv. 2 — is a type. "I'eace" is
granted to " the flesh" through Christ's work and death in flesh.

26 Traditus.


[6o


APPENDIX.


Assigned for a pledge : this Bread will He
Give perfectly to them who (of good works
The lovers ever) have the bonds of peace
225 Kept. And the double tablets of the Law
Written all over, these, at the same time,
Signify that that Law was ever hid
In Christ, who mandate old and new ful-
filled,
Ark of the Supreme Father as He is,
230 Through whom He, being rich, hath all things

given.
The storax-rod, too, nut's fruit bare itself;
(The virgin's semblance this, who bare in

blood
A body :) on the "wood " ' conjoined 'twill

lull
Death's bitter, which within sweet fruit doth

lurk,
23s By virtue of the Holy Spirit's grace :
Just as Isaiah did predict " a rod "
From Jesse's seed^ — Mary — from which a

flower
Issues into the orb.

The altar bright with gold

Denotes the heaven on high, whither ascend

240 Prayers holy, sent up without crime : the

Lord
This " altar " spake of, where if one doth gifts
Offer, he must first reconciliate
Peace with his brother : 3 thus at length his

prayers
Can flame unto the stars, Christ, Victor sole
245 And foremost 4 Priest, thus offered incense

born
Not of a tree, but prayers. 5

The cherubiyn ^
Being, with twice two countenances, one.
And are the one word through fourfold order

led ; ^
The hoped comforts of life's mandate new,
250 Which in their plenitude Christ bare Himself
Unto us from the Father. But the wings
In number four times six^ the heraldings
Of the old world denote, witnessing things
Which, we are taught, were after done. On

these 9
255 The heavenly words fly through the orb :

with these


* In ligno. The passage is again in an almost desperate state.

* Isa. xi. I, 2.

3 Matt. V. 23, 24.

* Primus.

5 See Rev. viii. 3, 4.

6 Here ensues a confused medley of all the cherubic figures of
Moses, Ezekiel, and St. John.

7 i.e., by the four evangelists.

8 The cherubim, (or "seraphim" rather,) of Isa. vi. have each
six wings. Ezekiel mentions yo7<r cherubim, or " living creatures."
St. John likewise mentions yo?(r "living creatures." Our author,
combining the passages, and thrusting them into the subject of the
Mosaic cherubim, multiplies the six (wings) by x\\^ four (cherubs),
and so attains his end — the desired number " tweniy-foiir" — to
represent the books of the Old Testament, which (by combining
certain books) may be reckoned to be twenty-four in number.

9 These wings.


Christ's blood is hkewise held context, so

.told
Obscurely by the seers' presaging mouth.
The 7iuniber of the wings doth set a seal
Upon the ancient volumes ; teaching us
260 Those tiuenty-four have certainly enough
Which sang the Lord's ways and the times

of peace :
These all, we see, with the new covenant
Cohere. Thus also John ; the Spirit thus
To him reveals that in that number stand
265 The enthroned elders white '° and crowned,
who (as
With girding-rope) all things surround, be-
fore
The Lord's throne, and upon the glassy sea
Subigneous : and four living creatures, winged
And full of eyes within and outwardly,
270 Do signify that hidden things are oped.

And all things shut are at the same time seen,
In the word's eye. The glassy flame-mixt

sea
Means that the laver's gifts, with Spirit fused
Therein, upon believers are conferred.
275 Who could e'en tell what the Lord's parent-
care
Before His judgment-seat, before His bar.
Prepared hath ? that such as willing be
His forum and His judgment for themselves
To antedate, should 'scape ! that who thus
hastes
280 Might find abundant opportunity !

Thus therefore Law and wondrous
prophets sang ;
Thus all parts of the covenant old and new,
Those sacred rights and pregnant utterances
Of words, conjoined, do flourish. Thus
withal,
285 Apostles' voices witness everywhere ;
Nor aught of old, in fine, but to the new
Is joined.

Thus err they, and thus facts retort
Their sayings, who to false ways have de-
clined ;
And from the Lord and God, eternal King,
290 Who such an orb produced, detract, and
seek
Some other deity 'neath feigned name,
Bereft of minds, which (frenzied) they have

lost;
Willing to affirm that Christ a stranger is
To the Law ; nor is the world's " Lord ; nor
doth will
295 Salvation of the flesh ; nor was Himself
The body's Maker, by the Father's power.'^


1° There is again some great confusion in the text. The elders
could not " siatici enthroned :" nor do they stand "over," but
" around " God's throne ; so that the " insuper solio " could not apply
to that.

" Mundi.

" Virtute.


APPENDIX.


i6i


Them must we flee, stopping (unasked) our
ears ;

Lest with their speech they stain innoxious
hearts.

Let therefore us, whom so great grace ' of
God
300 Hath penetrated, and the true celestial words
- Of the great Master- Teacher in good ways

Have trained, and given us right monu-
ments ; 2

Pay honour ever to the Lord, and sing

Endlessly, joying in pure faith, and sure
305 Salvation. Born of the true God, with bread

Perennial are we nourished, and hope

With our whole heart after eternal life.


BOOK V.

GENERAL REPLY TO SUNDRY OF MARCION'S
HERESIES.^

1l\\q first Book did the enemy's words recall
In order, which the senseless renegade
Composed and put forth lawlessly ; hence,

too.
Touched briefly flesh's hope, Christ's victory,
5 And false ways' speciousness. The 7iext doth
. teach

The Law's conjoined mysteries, and what
In the new covenant the one God hath
Delivered. The third shows the race, create
From freeborn mother, to be ministers
10 Sacred to seers and patriarchs ; ■♦ whom Thou,
O Christ, in number twice six out of all,5
Chosest ; and, with their names, the lustral ^

times
Of our own elders noted, (times preserved
On record,) showing in whose days appeared
>5 The author 7 of this wickedness, unknown.
Lawless, and roaming, cast forth ^ with his

brood.
ll\i& fourth, too, the piacular rites recalls
Of the old Law themselves, and shows them

types
In which the Victim True appeared, by saints
20 Expected long since, with the holy Seed.
Thisyf///i doth many twists and knots untie.
Rolls wholly into sight what ills soe'er


' Honestas.

2 Or, " records:" " monumenta," i.e., the written word, according
to the canon.

•5 I make no apology for the ruggedness of the versification and
the obscurity of the sense in this book, further than to say that the
state of the I.atin text is such as to render it almost impossible to find
any sense at all in many places, while the grammar and metre are not
reducible to any known laws. It is about the hardest and most unin-
teresting book of the five.

< Or, " consecrated by seers and patriarchs."

5 i.e , all the number of Thy disciples.

' Tempora lustri, i.e., apparently the times during which these
"elders" (i.e., the bishops, of whom a list is given at the end of
book iii.) held office. " Lustrum" is used of other periods than it
strictly implies, and this seems to give some sense to this difficult
passage.

' te., Marcion.

* i.e., excommunicated.


Were lurking ; drawing arguments, but not
Without attesting prophet.

And although
25 With strong arms fortified we vanquish foes,
Yet hath the serpent mingled so at once
All things polluted, impious, unallowed,
Commaculate, — the blind's path without

light !
A voice contaminant ! — that, all the while
30 We are contending the world's Maker is
Himself sole God, who also spake by voice
Of seers, and proving that there is none else
Unknown ; and, while pursuing Him with

praise.
Who is by various endearment ^ known,
35 Are blaming — among other fallacies —
The Unknown's tardy times : our subject's

fault
W^ill scarce keep pure our tongue. Yet, for

all that.
Guile's many hidden venoms us enforce
(Although with double risk ■") to ope our
words.
40 Who, then, the God whom ye say is the true.
Unknown to peoples, alien, in a word,
To all the world? " Him whom none knew

before ?
Came he from high? If 'tis his own '^ he

seeks.
Why seek so late ? If not his own, why rob
45 Bandit-like? and why ply with words un-
known
So oft throughout Law's rein a People still
Lingering 'neath the Law? If, too, he comes
To pity and to succour all combined,
And to re-elevate men vanquisht quite
5° By death's funereal weight, and to release
Spirit from flesh's bond obscene, whereby
The inner man (iniquitously dwarfed)
Is held in check ; why, then, so late appear
His ever-kindness, duteous vigilance ?
55 How comes it that he ne'er at all before
Offered himself to any, but let slip
Poor souls in numbers? '^ and then with his

mouth
Seeks to regain another's subjects : ne'er
Expected ; not known ; sent into the orb.
60 Seeking the " ewe " he had not lost before.
The Shepherd ought '•* to have disrobed him-
self
Of flesh, as if his victor-self withal
Had ever been a spirit, and as such'S
Willbd to rescue all expelled souls.


9 Complexu vario.

'0 Ancipiti quamquam cum crimine. The last word seems almost
= " discrmivae.; " just as our author uses " cemo" ^ " <i'/.yccrno."

" Mundo.

'2 Cf John i. II, and see the Greek.

'3 Whether this be the sense I know not. The passage is a mass
of confusion.

'■* i.e., according to Marcion's view.

'i i.e, as spirits, hke himself.


l62


APPENDIX.


65 Without a body, ever)^vhere, and leave
The spoiled flesh to earth ; wholly to fill
The world ' on one day equally with corpses
To leave the orb void ; and to raise the souls
To heaven. Then would human progeny
7° At once have ceased to be born ; nor had
Thereafter any scion oi yoiir^ kith
Been born, or spread a new pest^ o'er the orb.
Or (since at that time"* none of all these

things
Is shown to have been done) he should have

set
75 A bound to future race ; with solid heart
Nuptial embraces would he, in that case.
Have sated quite ; s made men grow torpid,

reft
Of fruitful seed ; made irksome intercourse
With female sex ; and closed up inwardly
So The flesh's organs genital : our mind
Had had no will, no potent faculty
Our body : after this the " inner man "
Could withal, joined with blood,*^ have been

infused
And cleaved to flesh, and would have ever

been
85 Perishing. Ever perishes the " ewe : "
And is there then no power of saving her?
Since man is ever being born beneath
Death's doom, what is the Shepherd's work,

if thus
The "ewe" is stated ^ to be found? Un-
sought,
90 In that case, but not rescued, she is proved.
But now choice is allowed of entering
Wedlock, as hath been ever ; and that choice
Sure progeny hkth yoked : nations are born
And folk scarce numerable, at whose birth
95 Their souls by living bodies are received ;
Nor was it meet that Paul (though, for the

time.
He did exhort some few, discerning well
The many pressures of a straitened time)
To counsel men in like case to abide
100 As he himself : ^ for elsewhere he has bidden


* Mundum.

2 le., M;

3 See book li. 3.

* i.e., apparently on the day of Christ's resurrection.

5 Rep/esset, i.e., replevisset. If this be the right reading, the
meaning would seem to be, " would have taken away all further de-
sire for" them, as satiety or repletion takes away all appetite for
food. One is almost inchned to hazard the suggestion " represset,"
i.e., repressisset, "he would have repressed" but that such a con-
traction would be irregular. Yet, with an author who takes such
liberties as the present one, perhaps that might not be a decisive
objection.

^ " Junct?<j'," for the edd 's " junct;>," which, if retained, will
mean " in the case of beings still joined with (or to) blood."

^ " Doct'tur," for the edd.'s " doc«/tur." The sense seems to be,
if there be any, exceedingly obscure; but for the idea of a half-salva-
tion— the salvation of the "inner man" without the outer — being
no salvation at all, and unworthy of " the Good Shepherd" and His
work, we may compare the very difficult passage in the de Pitdic.,
C. xiii. ad Jin.

5 This sense, which I deduce from a transposition of one line and
the supplying of the words " he did exhort" which are not ex-
pressed, but seem necessary, in the original, agrees well with i Cor.
vii., which is plainly the passage referred to.


The tender ages marry, nor defraud
Each other, but their compact's dues dis-
charge.
But say, whose suasion hath, with fraud astute.
Made you " abide," and in divided love
105 Of offspring live secure, and commit crime
Adulterous, and lose your life ? and, though
'Tis perishing, belie (by verbal name)
That fact. For which cause all the so sweet

sounds
Of his voice pours he forth, that " you must
do,
1 10 Undaunted, whatsoever pleases you ; "

Outwardly chaste, stealthily stained with

crime !
Of honourable wedlock, by this plea,*?
He hath deprived you. But why more ? 'Tis

well
(Forsooth) to be disjoined ! for the world,
too,
"5 Expedient 'tis ! lest any of your seed

Be born ! Then will death's organs '° cease
at length !

The while you hope salvation to retain.
Your " total man " quite loses part of man,
With mind profane : but neither is man said
120 To be sole spirit, nor the. flesh is called

" The old man ; " nor unfriendly are the flesh
And spirit, the true man combined in one.
The inner, and he whom you call " old

foe;"'^
Nor are they seen to have each his own set
125 Of senses. One is ruled ; the other rules,
Groans, joys, grieves, loves; himself'^ to his

own flesh
Most dear, too ; through which '^ his human-
ity
Is visible, with which commixt he is
Held ever : to its wounds he care applies ;
130 And pours forth tears ; and nutriments of
food
Takes, through its limbs, often and eagerly :
This hopes he to have ever with himself
Immortal ; o'er its fracture doth he groan ;
And grieves to quit it limb by limb : fixt time
135 Death lords it o'er the unhappy flesh ; that
so
From light dust it may be renewed, and

death
Unfriendly fail at length, when flesh, released.
Rises again. This will that victory be
Supreme and long expected, wrought by
Him,
'40 The aye-to-be-revered, who did become


9 " Causa; " or perhaps "means." It is, of course, the French
"chose."

'° i.e., you and your like, through whom sin, and in consequence
death, is disseminated.

" Here, again, for the sake of the sense, I have transposed a line.

'- i.e., " the other," the '' inner man," or spirit.

'•3 i.e., through flesh.


APPENDIX.


163


True man ; and by His Father's virtue won :
Who man's redeemed Hmbs unto the heavens
Hath raised,' and richly opened access up
Thither in hope, first to His nation ; then
145 To those among all tongues in whom His

work
Is ever doing : Minister intbued
With His Sire's parent-care, seen by the eye
Of the Illimitable, He performed,
By suffering. His missions.^

What say now
15° The impious voices? Avhat th' abandoned

crew ?
If He Himself, God the Creator's self,
Gave not the Law,^ He who from Egypt's

vale'*
Paved in the waves a path, and freely gave
The seats which He had said of old, why

comes
155 He in that very People and that land
Aforesaid ? and why rather sought He not
Some others peoples or some rival ^ realms?
• Why, further, did He teach that, through the

seers,
(With Name foretold in full, yet not His

own,)
160 He had been often sung of? Whence, again,
Could He have issued baptism's kindly gifts.
Promised by some one else, as His own

works ?
These gifts men who God's mandates had

transgressed,
And hence were found polluted, longed for,
165 And begged a pardoning rescue from fierce

death.
Expected long, they ^ came : but that to

those
Who recognised them when erst heard, and

now
Have recognised them, when in due time

found,
Christ's true hand is to give them, this, with

voice
170 Paternal, the Creator-Sire Himself
Warns ever from eternity, and claims ;
And thus the work of virtue which He

framed,
And still frames, arms, and fosters, and doth

now
Victorious look down on and reclothe
'73 With His own light, should with perennial

praise
Abide.^


' i.e., in His own person.

^ I hope I have succeeded in giving some intelligible sense; but
the passage as it stands in the Latin is nearly hopeless.
^ I read " legew " for " legei."

* 1 read " i/alle " for " calle."
5 Alios.

* Altera.

' i.e., " the gifts of baptism."

8 This seems to give sense to a very obscure passage, in which
I have been guided more by Migne's pointing than by Oehler's.


What '' hath the Living Power done
To make men recognise what God can give
And man can suffer, and thus live ? '° But

since
Neither predictions earlier nor facts
The latest can suade senseless frantic " men .
That God became a man, and (after He
Had suffered and been buried) rose; that

they
May credit those so many witnesses
Harmonious,'- who of old did cry aloud
With heavenly word, let them both '^ learn

to trust
At least terrestrial reason.

When the Lord
Christ came to be, as flesh, born into the

orb
In time of king Augustus' reign at Rome,
First, by decree, the nations numbered are
By census everywhere : this measure, then,
This same king chanced to pass, because the

Will
Supreme, in whose high reigning hand doth

He
The king's heart, had impelled him : '^ he

was first
To do it, and the enrolment was reduced
To orderly arrangement. Joseph then
Likewise, with his but just delivered wife
Mary, '5 with her celestial Son alike,.
Themselves withal are numbered. Let, then,

such
As trust to instruments of human skill,
W'ho may (approving of applying them
As attestators of the holy word)
Inquire into this census, if it be
But found so as we say, then afterwards
Repent they and seek pardon while time still
Is had.'^


9 I read here "qu/d " for " quod."

'° i.e., to make men live by recognising that. Comp. the Psalm-
ist's prayer: " Give me mtder standing and I shall Ih'c" (Ps. cxix.
144; in LXX., Ps. cxviii. 144).

" The "f^rentes" of Pam. and Rig. is preferred to Oehler's
" fcrentes."

"2 " Complexis," lit. " embracing."

'3 i.e., both Jews and Gentile heretics, the " senseless frantic men "
just referred to probably: or possibly the " ambo " may mean "both
sects" viz., the Marcionites and Manichees, against whom the writer
whom Oehler supposes to be the probable author of these " Five
Books," Victorinus, a rhetorician of Marseilles, directed his efforts.
But it may again be the ace. neut. pL, and mean "let them" — i.e.,
the " senseless frantic men " — " learn to believe as to both facts,"
i.e., the incarnation and the resurrection; (see vers. 179, 180;) " the
testimony at least of human reason."

'* I would suggest here, for

"... quia summa voluntas
In cujus manu rcgnantis co\ Icgibus cssct"
something like this,

"... quia summa voluntas,
In cujus manu regnantis cor regis, egisset,"
which would only add one more to our author's false quantities.
" Regum egisset" would avoid even that, while it would give some
sense. Comp. Prov. xxi. i. .

'5 Maria cum conjuge feta. What follows seems to decide the
meaning of " feta," as a child could hardly be included in a census
before birth. r . t • •

'6 Again I have had to attempt to amend the text of the Latin m
I order to extract any sense, and am far from sure that I have extracted
I the right one.


1 64


APPENDIX.


The Jews, who own ' to having wrought
A grave crime, while in our disparagement
They glow, and do resist us, neither call
Christ's family unknown, nor can = affirm
They hanged a man, who spake truth, on a

tree : 3
210 Ignorant that the Lord's flesh which they

bound ■+
Was not seed-gendered. But, while partially
They keep a reticence, so partially
They triumph ; for they strive to represent
God to the peoples commonly as man.
215 Behold the error which o'ercomes you both ! 5
This error will our cause assist, the while.
We prove to you those things which certain

are.
They do deny Him God ; you falsely call
Him man, a body bodiless ! and ah !
220 A various insanity of mind

Sinks you ; which him who hath presumed to

hint
You both do, sinking, sprinkle : ^ for His deeds
Will then approve Him man alike and God
Commingled, and the world 7 will furnish signs
225 No few.

While then the Son Himself of God
Is seeking to regain the flesh's limbs,^
Already robed as King, He doth sustain
Blows from rude palms ; with spitting covered

is
His face ; a thorn-inwoven crown His head
230 Pierces all round ; and to the tree 9 Himself
Is fixed ; wine drugged with myrrh,'° is drunk,

and gall "
Is mixt with vinegar ; parted His robe,'^
And in it '^ lots are cast ; what for himself
Each one hath seized he keeps ; in murky

gloom,
235 As God from fleshly body silently

Outbreathes His soul, in darkness trembling

day
Took refuge with the sun ; twice dawned one

day;


' " Fatentur," unless our author use it passively = " are con-
fessed."

2 " Possunt," i.e., probably " have the hardihood."

3 Because Christ plainly, as they understood Him, " made Him-
self the Son of God; " and hence, if they confessed that He had said
the truth, and yet that they hanged Him on a tree, they would be
pronouncing their own condemnation.

* " Vi7;ctam " for " victam" I read here.

5 i.e., you and the Jews. See above on 185.

6 Quod qui pr^esumpsit mergentes spargitis ambo. What the
meaning is 1 know not, unless it be this: if any one hints to you that
you are in an error which is sinking you into perdition, you both join
ui trying to sink /u'/;i (if" mergentes" be active; or " while you are
sinkmg," if neuter), and in sprinkling him with your doctrine (or be-
sprinklmg him with abuse).

7 Mundus.

8 " Dum carnis membra requirit," i.e , seeking to regain /or God
all the limbs of the flesh as His instruments. Comp. Rom. vi. 13, 19.

9 Ligno.

1° " Scriblita," a curious word.

'J Fel miscetur aceio. The reading may have arisen — and it is
not confined to our author — from confounding of os with olvos.
Comp. ^Iatt. xxvii. 33 with Mark xv. 23.

'' This is an error, if the " coat" be meant.

'3 Perhaps for " in ilia " we should read " in illa>« " — " on it," for
"in it."


Its centre black night covered : from their base
Mounts move in circle, wholly moved was
earth,
240 Saints' sepulchres stood ope, and all things
joined
In fear to see His passion whom they knew !
His lifeless side a soldier with bare spear
Pierces, and forth flows blood, nor water less
Thence followed. These facts they "• agree
to hide,
245 And are unwilling the misdeed to own.
Willing to blink the crime.

Can spirit, then,
Without a body wear a robe ? or is't
Susceptible of penalty? the wound
Of violence does it bear? or die? or rise?
250 Is blood thence poured? from what flesh,
since ye say
He had none ? or else, rather, feigned He ? if
'Tis safe for you to say so ; though you do
(Headlong) so say, by passing over more
In silence. Is not, then, faith manifest?
255 And are not all things fixed? The day befdft
He then 's should suffer, keeping Passover,
And handing down a memorable rite '^
To His disciples, taking bread alike
And the vine's juice, " My body, and My
blood
260 Which is poured '7 for you, this is," did He
say ;
And bade it ever afterward be done.
Of what created elements were made.
Think ye, the bread and wine which were

(He said)
His body with its blood ? and what must be
265 Confessed? Proved He not Himself the
world's '^
Maker, through deeds? and that He bore at

once
A body formed from flesh and blood ?

This God,
This true Man, too, the Father's Virtue 'neath
An Image, '9 with the Father ever was,
270 United both in glory and in age ; ^°
Because alone He ministers the words
Of the All- Holder; whom He^' upon earth
Accepts ; ^^ through whom He all things did

create :
God's Son, God's dearest Minister, is He !
275 Hence hath He generation, hence Name too,
Hence, finally, a kingdom ; Lord from Lord ;
Stream from perennial Fount ! He, He it was


U The Jews.

'5 For " ante diem qurtw; ctim pateretur " I have read " qua turn."

16 Or, "deed" — "factum."

'7 Or, " is being poured " — " funditur."

'3 Mundi.

'9 I read with Migne, " Patris sub imagine virtus," in preference
to the conjecture which Oehler follows, " Christist:^ imagine virtus."
The reference seems clearly to be to Heb. i. 3.

2° yEvo. Perhaps here = " eternity."

21 ie.," The All-Holder."

22 Capit.


APPENDIX.


165


Who to the holy fathers (whosoe'er
Among them doth profess to have "seen

God'")—
280 God is our witness — since the origin
Of this our world,^ appearing, opened up
The Father's words of promise and of charge
From heaven high : He led the People out ;
Smote through th' iniquitous nation; was

Himself
285 The column both of hght and of cloud's

shade ;
And dried the sea ; and bids the People go
Right through the waves, the foe therein in-
volved
And covered with the flood and surge : a way
Through deserts made He for the followers
290 Of His high biddings ; sent down bread in

showers ^
From heaven for the People ; brake the rock ;
Bedewed with wave the thirsty ; ■♦ and from

God
The mandate of the Law to Moses spake
With thunder, trumpet-sound, and flamey

column
295 Terrible to the sight, while men's hearts

shook.
After twice twenty years, with months com-
plete,
Jordan was parted ; a way oped ; the wave
Stood in a mass ; and the tribes shared the

land,
Their fathers' promised boons ! The Father's

word,
300 Speaking Himself by prophets' mouth, that

He 5
Would come to earth and be a man. He did
Predict ; Christ manifestly to the earth
Foretelling.

Then, expected for our aid.
Life's only Hope, the Cleanser of our flesh,^
305 Death's Router, from th' Almighty Sire's

empire
At length He came, and with our human

limbs
He clothed Him. Adam — virgin — dragon

— tree,7


' Cf. Jacob's words in Gen. xxxii. 30; Manoah's ia Judg. xiii.
22; etc.

2 Mundi.

3 For " i/imhit in 7<wbris" I read here " ^/^-misit in z'wbris." If
we retain the former reading, it will then mean, " dispersed during the
shades of night," during which it was that the manna seems always to
have fallen.

■* " Sitient/V" in Oehler must be a misprint for " sitient«."

5 There ought to be a " se " in the Latin if this be the meaning.

^ For"Mundator carnis sera^"=:"the Cleanser oi iate flesh"
(which would seem, if it mean anything, to mean that the flesh had
to wait long for its cleansing) , I have read " carnis nostra."

7 Lignum.


The cause of ruin, and the way whereby
Rash death us all had vanquisht ! by the same
3'° Our Shepherd treading, seeking to regain
His sheep — with angel — virgin — His own

flesh —
And the " tree's " remedy ; ^ whence van-
quisht man
And doomed to perish was aye wont to go
To meet his vanquisht peers ; hence, inter-
posed,
3'5 One in all captives' room. He did sustain
In body the unfriendly penalty
With patience; by His own death spoiling

death ;
Becomes salvation's cause ; and, having paid
Throughly our debts by throughly suffering
320 On earth, in holy body, everything,

Seeks the infern ! here souls, bound for their

crime.
Which shut up all together by Law's weight,
Without a guard,9 were asking for the boons
Promised of old, hoped for, and tardy. He
325 To the saints' rest admitted, and, with light,
Brought back. For on the third day mount-
ing up,'°
A victor, with His body, by His Sire's
Virtue immense, (salvation's pathway made,)
And bearing God and man is form create,
330 He clomb the heavens, leading back with Him
Captivity's first-fruits (a welcome gift
And a dear figure " to the Lord), and took
His seat beside light's Father, and resumed
The virtue and the glory of which, while
335 He was engaged in vanquishing the foe,
He had been stripped ; '^ conjoined with

Spirit ; bound
With flesh, on our part. Him, Lord, Christ,

King, God,
Judgment and kingdom given to His hand.
The father is to send unto the orb.

(N.B. — It has been impossible to note the
changes which I have had to make in the text
of the Latin. In some cases they will suggest
themselves to any scholar who may compare the
translation with the original ; and in others I
must be content to await a more fitting oppor-
tunity, if such ever arise, for discussing them.)


8 I have followed the disjointed style of the Latin as closely as I
could here.

9 Here we seem to see the idea of the " limbus patnim."

'° " Subiens " = " going beneath," i.e., apparently coming beneath
the ivnils of heaz'cn.

" i.e., a figure of the future harvest.

"^ I have hazarded the conjecture " m/«ttlus" here for the edd.'s
" m7<;//tus." It add's one more, it is true, to our author's false quan-
tities, but that is a minor difficulty, while it improves (to my mind)
the sense vastly.


i66 ELUCIDATIONS.


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(Appendix, p. 127.)

AtouT these versifications, which are "poems" only as mules are horses, it is enough to say
of them, with Dupin, " They are no more TertuUian's than they are Virgil's or Homer's. The
poem called Genesis seems to be that which Gennadius attributes to Salvian, Bishop of Marseilles.
That concerning the Judgment of God was, perhaps, composed by Verecundus, an African bishop.
In the books Against Marcion there are some opinions different from those of Tertullian. There
is likewise a poem To a Senator in Pamelius' edition, one of Sodom, and in the Bibliotheca
Patrum one oi Jonas and Nineve ; the first of which is ancient, and the other two seem to be
by the same author."

It is worth while to observe that this rhymester makes two bishops out of one.' Cletus and
Anacletus he supposes different persons, which brings Clement into the fourth place in the see of
Rome. Our author elsewhere makes St. Clement the immediate successor of the apostles.*


n.

(Or is there ought, etc., 1. 136, p. 137.)

In taking leave of Tertullian, it may be well to say a word of his famous saying. Cerium est
quia i7npossibile est. It occurs in the tract De Came Christi,^ and is one of those startling
epigrammatic dicta of our author which is no more to be pressed in argument than any other
bon-mot of a wit or a poet. It is evidently designed as a rhetorical climax, to enforce the same
idea which we find in the hymn of Aquinas : —

" Et si sensus deficit,
Ad firmandum cor sincerum
Sola fides sufficit."

As Jeremy Taylor ^ argues, the condition is, that holy Scripture affirms it. If that be the
case, then " all things are possible with God : " I believe ; but I do not argue, for it is impossible
with men. This is the plain sense of the great Carthaginian doctor's pithy rhetoric. But Dr.
Bunsen sets it on all-fours, and treats it as if it were soberly designed to defy reason, — that
reason to which Tertullian constantly makes his appeal against Marcion, and in many of his
sayings 5 hardly less witty. Speaking of Hippolytus, that writer remarks,^ " He might have said
on some points, Credibile licet ineptum : he would never have exclaimed with Tertullian, ' Credi-
bile quia ineptum.' " Why attempt to prove the absurdity of such a reflection? As well attempt
to defend St. John's hyperbole 7 against a mind incapable of comprehending a figure of speech.

' See p. 156, supra. 4 Christ in the Holy Sacrament, § xi. 6.

2 See De Pra;scrip., cap. xxxii. vol. iii. p. 258. S De Anuna, cap. xvii.

3 Cap. V. vol. iii. p. 525. 6 Vol. i. p. 304.

7 Chap. xxi. verse 25.


MINUCIUS FELIX.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. ROBERT ERNEST WALLIS, Ph.D.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTE


MINUCIUS FELIX.


[a.d. 2IO.] Though Tertullian is the founder of Latin Christianity, his contemporary Minu-
cius Felix gives to Christian thought its earhest clothing in Latinity. The harshness and provin-
cialism, with the Grcecistns, if not the mere Tertuliiafiism, of Tertullian, deprive him of high claims
to be classed among Latin writers, as such ; but in Minucius we find, at the very fountain-head of
Christian Latinity, a disciple of Cicero and a precursor of Lactantius in the graces of style. The
question of his originality is earnestly debated among moderns, as it was in some degree with the
ancients. It turns upon the doubt as to his place with respect to Tertullian, whose Apology he
seems to quote, or rather to abridge. But to me it seems evident that his argument reflects so
strikingly that of TertuUian's Testimo?iy of the Soul, coincident though it be with portions of the
Apology, that we must make the date of the Testimony the pivot of our inquiry concerning Minu-
cius. Now, TertuUian's Apology preceded the Testbnony, and the latter preceded the essay on
the Flesh of Christ. If the Testimony was quoted or employed by Minucius, therefore, he could
not have written before ' a.d. 205 ; and the statement of Jerome is confirmed, which makes our
author, and not Tertullian, the copyist. The modem discussion of the matter is an interesting
literary controversy ; not yet settled, perhaps, though the dip of the balance just now sustains my
own impressions.^ But it is a very unimportant matter in itself, the primary place in Latin Chris-
tianity being necessarily adjudged to the commanding genius and fertile mind of Tertullian, while
it is no discredit to assign to Minucius his proper but secondary credit, of showing, at the very
outset of the literature of Western Christianity, that believers were not all illiterate men, nor des-
titute of polite erudition, and that the language of the Tusculan philosopher was not degraded by
its new destination to the higher and holier service of the faith.

Like Tertullian, our author appears to have been a jurisconsult, at Rome, at some period of
his history. Beautiful glimpses of his life and character and surroundings are gained from his own
pages, and nearly all we know about him is to be found therein. So far, he is his own biographer.
He probably continued a layman, and may have lived, as some suppose, till the middle of the
third century.

It is not unimportant to note that we are still dealing with " the North- African school," and
that Rome has nothing to do with the birth of Latin Christianity, as such. We have entered upon
the third Christian century, and as yet the venerable apostolic see of the West has made no
movement whatever towards the creation of a Latin literature among Christians. So far from
being " the mother and mistress " of the churches, she is yet voiceless in Christendom ; while

' Possibly as late as a.d. 230. Comp. Wordsworth, HippoL, p. 126.

* A condensed and valuable view of this matter may be seen in Dr. Schaff's History, etc., vol. iii. pp. 834-841.

169


I70 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

Africa holds the mastery of Christian thought alike in her schools of Alexandria and Carthage.
This, although it is our fourth volume, contains nothing to modify this fact ; and yet the whole lit-
erature of early Christianity is contained in our series. Well said ^neas Sylvius, who afterwards
became Pope Pius the Second, " Verily, before the Council of Nice, some regard there was unto
the Bishops of Rome, althoiigh but sf?ialL" Holy men as most of them were, they are invisible
and unfelt in the formation of Christian theology.'

In our author's style and thought there is a charm and a fragrance which associate him, in my
mind, with the pure spirit of " Mathetes," with whose Epistle to Dlognetiis, written nearly a hun-
dred years before, it may be profitably compared. See also my prefatory remarks to Mathetes,
and the reference to Bunsen which I have suffixed to the Notice of the Edinburgh editors.^

In the Edinburgh series, Minucius comes into view after Cyprian, and not till the end of the
thirteenth volume of that edition. It will gratify the scholar to find it here where it belongs,
and not less to note that it has an index of its own, while in the Edinburgh edition its contents
are indexed with those of Cyprian. Consequently, the joint index is rendered nearly worthless,
and the injury and confusion resulting to the Contents of Cyprian are not inconsiderable.

Here follows the valuable Prefatory Notice of Dr. Wallis : —

Minucius Felix is said by Jerome ^ to have been an advocate at Rome prior to his conversion
to Christianity.'* Very litde else is known, however, of his history ; and of his writings nothing
with any certainty, except the following dialogue ; although Jerome speaks of another tract as
having, probably without reason, been ascribed to him.

The Octavius, which is here translated, is a supposed argument between the heathen Csecilius
and the Christian Octavius — the writer being requested to arbitrate between the disputants. The
date of its composition is still a matter of keen dispute. The settlement of the point hinges upon
the answer to the question — Whether, in the numerous passages which are strikingly similar,
occurring in the Apologeticiis and the Octavius, Tertullian borrowed from Minucius, or Minucius
borrowed from Tertullian ? If Minucius borrowed from Tertullian, he must have flourished in the
commencement of the third century, as the Apologeticus was written about the year 198 a.d. If,
on the other hand, Tertullian borrowed from Minucius, the Octavius was written probably about
the year 166, and Minucius flourished in the reign of Marcus Aurelius. The later date was the
one adopted by earlier critics, and the reasons for it are well given by Mr. Holden in his introduc-
tion. The earlier date was suggested by Rosier, maintained by Niebuhr, and elaborately defended
by Muralto. An exhaustive exhibition of arguments in favour of the earlier date has been given
by Adolf Ebert in his paper, Te?-tullian''s Verhdltniss zu Minucius Felix, Leipzig, 1868.

Of the literary character of the dialogue, it is sufficient to quote the testimony of the late
Dean Milman : " Perhaps no late work, either Pagan or Christian, reminds us of the golden days
of Latin prose so much as the Octavius of Minucius Felix." s

In considering the claim of the dialogue to such praise as this, it must be borne in mind that
the text as we have it is very uncertain, and often certainly corrupt ; so that many passages seem
to us confused, and some hopelessly obscure. Only one manuscript of the work has come down
to us, which is now in the Imperial Library in Paris. It is beautifully written. Some editors have
spoken of two other mss. ; but it is now known that they were wrong. They supposed that the
first edition was taken from a different ms. than the Codex Regius, and they were not aware that
a codex in Brussels was merely a transcript of the one in Paris.

The Octavius appears in the MS. as the eighth book of Arnobius, and at first it was published
as such. To Franciscus Balduinus (1560) is due the merit of having discovered the real author.

' See Bishop Jewell, Works, vol. i. pp. 386, 441. Cambridge, 1845.

2 Vol. I. of this series, pp. 23, 24. See also Bunsen, Hippol., i. p. 244. 3 J)e Viris Illustribus, c. 58.

4 [His connection with the Roman courts is inferred from cap. ii. irifrai\

5 Milman's Hist, of Christianity, vol. iii. book iv. ch. iii.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 171

There are very many editions of the Octavius. Among the earlier, those of Gronovius (i 709)
and Davies (1712) are valuable. Among the later, Lindner (1760), Eduard de Muralto (1836),
and Oehler (1847) "^^.y be mentioned. There is a very good English edition by the Rev. H. A.
Holden, M.A., Cambridge, 1853. The most recent edition is that of Carl Halm, published under
the auspices of the Imperial Academy of Letters in Vienna ; Vindobonce, 1867. Both Holden and
Halm give new recensions of the Codex Regius.'

' [Dr. Wallis, the learned translator of the Octavius, is described in the Edinburgh edition as " Senior Priest- Vicar of Wells Cathedral,,
and incumbent of Christ Church, Coxley, Somerset."]


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


CHAP. I. — ARGUMENT : MINUCIUS RELATES HOW
DELIGHTFUL TO HIM IS THE RECOLLECTION OF
THE THINGS THAT HAD HAPPENED TO HIM WITH
OCTAVIUS WHILE HE WAS ASSOCIATED WITH HIM
AT ROME, AND ESPECIALLY OF THIS DISPUTATION.

When I consider and mentally review my re-
membrance of Octavius, my excellent and most
faithful companion, the sweetness and charm of
the man so clings to me, that I appear to myself
in some sort as if I were returning to past times,
and not merely recalling in my recollection
things which have long since happened and gone
by. Thus, in the degree in which the actual
contemplation of him is withdrawn from my
eyes, it is bound up in my heart and in my most
intimate feelings. And it was not without reason
that that remarkable and holy man, when he de-
parted this life, left to me an unbounded regret
for him, especially since he himself also glowed
with such a love for me at all times, that, whether
in matters of amusement or of business, he agreed
with me in similarity of will, in either liking or
disliking the same things.' You would think
that one mind had been shared between us two.
Thus he alone was my confidant in my loves, my
companion in my mistakes ; and when, after the
gloom had been dispersed, I emerged from the
abyss of darkness into the light of wisdom and
truth, he did not cast off his associate, but —
what is more glorious still — he outstripped him.
And thus, when my thoughts were traversing the
entire period of our intimacy and friendship, the
direction of my mind fixed itself chiefly on that
discourse of his, wherein by very weighty argu-
ments he converted Csecilius, who was still cleav-
ing to superstitious vanities, to the true religion.^

CHAP. II. — ARGUMENT : THE ARRIVAL OF OCTAVIUS
AT ROME DURING THE TIME OF THE PUBLIC HOLI-
DAYS WAS VERY AGREEABLE TO MINUCIUS. BOTH
OF THEM WERE DESIROUS OF GOING TO THE MA-
RINE BATHS OF OSTIA, WITH CiECILIUS ASSOCIATED


'_ [Sallust, Catiline, " Idem facere atque sentire," etc. Also, Cat-
iline's speech, p. 6 of T/ie Conspiracy.']

^ [Beautiful tribute to Christian friendship, in a primitive ex-
ample. We must bear in mind that the story is of an earlier period
than that of the work itself, written at Cirta.]


WFTH THEM AS A COMPANION OF MINUCIUS. ON
THEIR WAY TOGETHER TO THE SEA, CvECILIUS,
SEEING AN IMAGE OF SERAPIS, RAISES HIS HAND
TO HIS MOUTH, AND WORSHIPS IT.

For, for the sake of business and of visiting
me, Octavius had hastened to Rome, having left
his home, his wife, his children, and that which
is most attractive in children, while yet their in-
nocent years are attempting only half-uttered
words, — a language all the sweeter for the very
imperfection of the faltering tongue. And at
this his arrival I cannot express in words with
how great and with how impatient a joy I ex-
ulted, since the unexpected presence of a man
so very dear to me greatly enhanced my glad-
ness. Therefore, after one or two days, when
the frequent enjoyment of our continual asso-
ciation had satisfied the craving of affection, and
when we had ascertained by mutual narrative
all that we were ignorant of about one another
by reason of our separation, we agreed to go to
that very pleasant city Ostia, that my body
might have a soothing and appropriate remedy
for drying its humours from the marine bathing,
especially as the holidays of the courts at the
vintage-time had released me from my cares.
For at that time, after the summer days, the
autumn season was tending to a milder tempera-
ture. And thus, when in the early morning we
were going towards the sea along the shore (of
the Tiber), that both the breathing air might
gently refresh our limbs, and that the yielding
sand might sink down under our easy footsteps
with excessive pleasure ; C?ecilius, observing an
image of Serapis, raised his hand to his mouth,
as is the custom of the superstitious common
people, and pressed a kiss on it with his lips.

CHAP. III. — ARGUMENT: OCTAVIUS, DISPLEASED AT
THE ACT OF THIS SUPERSTITIOUS MAN, SHARPLY
REPROACHES MINUCIUS, ON THE GROUND THAT
THE DISGRACE OF THIS WICKED DEED IS RE-
FLECTED NOT LESS ON HIMSELF, AS C/ECILIUS'
HOST, THAN ON C^CILIUS.

Then Octavius said : " It is not the part of a
good man, my brother Marcus, so to desert a
173


174


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


man who abides by your side at home and
abroad, in this bhndness of vulgar ignorance, as
that you should suffer him in such broad daylight
as this to give himself up to stones, however
they may be carved into images, anointeft and
crowned ; since you know that the disgrace of
this his error redounds in no less degree to your
discredit than to his own." With this discourse
of his we passed over the distance between the
city and the sea, and we were now walking on
the broad and open shore. There the gently
rippling wave was smoothing the outside sands,
as if it would level them for a promenade ; and
as the sea is always restless, even when the winds
are lulled, it came up on the shore, although not
with waves crested and foaming, yet with waves
crisped and curling. Just then we were exces-
sively delighted at its vagaries, as on the very
threshold of the water we were wetting the soles
of our feet, and it now by turns approaching
broke upon our feet, and now the wave retiring
and retracing its course, sucked itself back into
itself. And thus, slowly and quietly going along,
we tracked the coast of the gently bending
shore, beguiling the way with stories. These
stories were related by Octavius, who was dis-
coursing on navigation. But when we had occu-
pied a sufficiently reasonable time of our walk
with discourse, retracing the same way again,
we trod the path with reverted footsteps. And
when we came to that place where the little
ships, drawn up on an oaken framework, were
lying at rest supported above the (risk of)
ground-rot, we saw some boys eagerly gesticulat-
ing as they played at throwing shells into the
sea. This play is : To choose a shell from the
shore, rubbed and made smooth by the tossing
of the waves ; to take hold of the shell in a
horizontal position with the fingers ; to whirl it
along sloping and as low down as possible upon
the waves, that when thrown it may either skim
the back of the wave, or may swim as it glides
along with a smooth impulse, or may spring up
as it cleaves the top of the waves, and rise as
if lifted up with repeated springs. That boy
claimed to be conqueror whose shell both went
out furthest, and leaped up most frequently.

CHAP". IV. ARGUMENT : C^CILIUS, SOMEWHAT

GRIEVED AT THIS KIND OF REBUKE WHICH FOR
HIS SAKE MINUCIUS HAD HAD TO BEAR FROM
OCTAVIUS, BEGS TO ARGUE WITH OCTAVIUS ON
THE TRUTH OF HIS RELIGION. OCTAVIUS WITH
HIS COMPANION CONSENTS, AND MINUCIUS SITS
IN THE MIDDLE BETWEEN C^CILIUS AND OCTA-
VIUS.

And thus, while we were all engaged in the
enjoyment of this spectacle, Cfecilius was paying
no attention, nor laughing at the contest; but


silent, uneasy, standing apart, confessed by his
countenance that he was grieving for I knew not
what. To whom I said : " What is the matter ?
Wherefore do I not recognise, Caecilius, your
usual liveliness? and why do I seek vainly for
that joyousness which is characteristic of your
glances even in serious matters?" Then said
he : " For some time our friend Octavius' speech
has bitterly vexed and worried me, in which he,
attacking you, reproached you with negligence,
that he might under cover of that charge more
seriously condemn me for ignorance. Therefore
I shall proceed further : the matter is now wholly
and entirely between me and Octavius. If he is
willing that I, a man of that form of opinion,
should argue with him, he will now at once per-
ceive that it is easier to hold an argument among
his comrades, than to engage in close conflict
after the manner of the philosophers. Let us be
seated on those rocky barriers that are cast there
for the protection of the baths, and that run far
out into the deep, that we may be able both to
rest after our journey, and to argue with more
attention." And at his word we sat down, so
that, by covering me on either side, they shel-
tered me in the midst of the three." Nor was
this a matter of observance, or of rank, or of
honour, because friendship always either receives
or makes equals ; but that, as an arbitrator, and
being near to both, I might give my attention,
and being in the middle, I might separate the
two. Then Caecilius began thus : —

CHAP. V. ARGUMENT : C/ECILTUS BEGINS HIS AR-
GUMENT FIRST OF ALL BY REMINDING THEM THAT
IN HUMAN AFFAIRS ALL THINGS ARE DOUBTFUL
AND UNCERTAIN, AND THAT THEREFORE IT IS
TO BE LAMENTED THAT CHRISTIANS, WHO FOR
THE MOST PART ARE UNTRAINED AND ILLITERATE
PERSONS, SHOULD DARE TO DETERMINE ON ANY-
THING WITH CERTAINTY CONCERNING THE CHIEF
OF THINGS AND THE DIVINE MAJESTY : HENCE
HE ARGUES THAT THE WORLD IS GOVERNED BY
NO PROVIDENCE, AND CONCLUDES THAT IT IS
BETTER TO ABIDE BY THE RECEIVED FORMS OF
RELIGION.

"Although to you, Marcus my brother, the
subject on which especially we are inquiring is
not in doubt, inasmuch as, being carefully in-
formed in both kinds of life, you have rejected
the one and assented to the other, yet in the
present case your mind must be so fashioned
that you may hold the balance of a most just
judge, nor lean with a disposition to one side
(more than another), lest your decision may
seem not to arise so much from our arguments,
as to be originated from your own perceptions.


Ita ut me ex tribus mjdium lateris ambitione protegerent.'


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


175


Accordingly, if you sit in judgment on me, as a
person who is new, and as one ignorant of either
side, there is no difficulty in making plain that
all things in human affairs are doubtful, uncer-
tain, and unsettled, and that all things are rather
probable than true. Wherefore it is the less '
wonderful that some, from the weariness of thor-
oughly investigating truth, should rashly succumb
to any sort of opinion rather than persevere in
exploring it with persistent diligence. And thus
alKmen must be indignant, all men must feel
pain,^ that certain persons — and these unskilled
in learning, strangers to literature, without knowl-
edge even ^ of sordid arts — should dare to deter-
mine on any certainty concerning the nature at
large, and the (divine) majesty, of which so
many of the multitude of sects in all ages (still
doubt), and philosophy itself deliberates still.
Nor without reason ; since the mediocrity of
human intelligence is so far from (the capacity
of) divine investigation, that neither is it given
us to know, nor is it permitted to search, nor is
it religious to ravish,+ the things that are sup-
ported in suspense in the heaven above us, nor
the things which are deeply submerged below
the earth ; and we may rightly seem sufficiently
happy and sufficiently prudent, if, according to
that ancient oracle of the sage, we should know
ourselves intimately. But even if we indulge in
a senseless and useless labour, and wander away
beyond the limits proper to our humility, and
though, inclined towards the earth, we transcend
with daring ambition heaven itself, and the very
stars, let us at least not entangle this error with
vain and fearful opinions. Let the seeds of all
things have been in the beginning condensed by
a nature combining them in itself — what God
is the author here? Let the members of the
whole world be by fortuitous concurrences united,
digested, fashioned — what God is the contriver?
Although fire may have lit up the stars ; although
(the lightness of) its own material may have sus-
pended the heaven ; although its own material
may have established the earth by its weight ; 5
and although the sea may have flowed in from
moisture,'^ whence is this religion? Whence this
fear? What is this superstition? Man, and
every animal which is born, inspired with life,
and nourished,^ is as a voluntary concretion of
the elements, into which again man and every


;; " Ursinus suggested
be indig-


' The MS. and first edition read
tntnus instead of magi's.

^ This lI.iusc is otherwise read: "Therefore we
nant, nay, must lie grieved."

■3 OthurwisL lor "even," "except."

* The reading of the MS. is " stuprari," as above. " Scrutari,"
"sciari," or " lustrare " and " suspicari," are proposed emenda-
tions.

5 Or, " although its weight may have established the earth."

*" Or, " although the moisture may have flowed into the sea."

7 Variously read, " is raised up, ' or " and is raised up." The
MS. has " attollitur," which by some is amended into " et alitur," or
" et tolhtur."


animal is divided, resolved, and dissipated. So
all things flow back again into their source, and
are turned again into themselves, without any
artificer, or judge, or creator. Thus the seeds
of fires, being gathered together, cause other
suns, and again others, always to shine forth.
Thus the vapours of the earth, being exhaled,
cause the mists always to grow, which being con-
densed and collected, cause the clouds to rise
higher; and when they fall,- cause the rains to
flow, the winds to blow, the hail to rattle down ;
or when the clouds clash together, they cause
the thunder to bellow, the lightnings to grow
red, the thunderbolts to gleam forth. Therefore
they fall everywhere, they rush on the mountains,
they strike the trees ; without any choice,^ they
blast places sacred and profane ; they smite mis-
chievous men, and often, too, religious men.
Why should I speak of tempests, various and
uncertain, wherein the attack upon all things is
tossed about without any order or discrimina-
tion?— in shipwrecks, that the fates of good and
bad men are jumbled together, their deserts con-
founded?— in conflagrations, that the destruc-
tion of innocent and guilty is united ? — and
when with the plague-taint of the sky a region
is stained, that all perish without distinction? —
and when the heat of war is raging, that it is
the better men who generally fall? In peace
also, not only is wickedness put on the same
level with (the lot of) those who are better, but
it is also regarded in such esteem,? that, in the
case of many people, you know not whether
their depravity is most to be detested, or their
felicity to be desired. But if the world were
governed by divine providence and by the au-
thority of any deity, Phalaris and Dionysius
would never have deserved to reign, Rutilius
and Camillus would never have merited banish-
ment, Socrates would never have merited the
poison. Behold the fruit-bearing trees, behold
the harvest already white, the vintage, already
dropping, is destroyed by the rain, is beaten
down by the hail. Thus either an uncertain
truth is hidden from us, and kept back ; or,
which is rather to be believed, in these various
and wayward chances, fortune, unrestrained by
laws, is ruling over us.

CHAP. VI. ARGUMENT : THE OBJECT OF ALL NA-
TIONS, AND ESPECIALLY OF THE ROMANS, IN
WORSHIPPING THEIR DIVINITIES, HAS liEEN TO
AITAIN FOR THEIR WORSHIP THE SUPRE.ME DO-
MINION OVER THE WHOLE EARTH.

" Since, then, either fortune is certain or na-
ture is uncertain, how much more re\erential and


8 Either " delectu " or " dilectu."

9 Or, " it is extolled."


176


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


better it is, as the high priests of truth, to receive
the teaching of your ancestors, to cultivate the
rehgions handed down to you, to adore the gods
whom you were first trained by your parents to
fear rather than to know ' with famiHarity ; not
to assert an opinion concerning the deities, but
to beheve your forefathers, who, while the age
was still untrained in the birth-times of the world
itself, deserved to have gods either propitious to
them, or as their kings.^ Thence, therefore, we
see through all empires, and provinces, and
cities, that each people has its national rites of
worship, and adores its local gods : as the Eleu-
sinians worship Ceres ; the Phrygians, Mater ; 3
the Epidaurians, ^sculapius ; the Chaldaeans,
Belus ; the Syrians, Astarte ; the Taurians, Diana ;
the Gauls, Mercurius ; the Romans, all divinities.
Thus their power and authority has occupied the
circuit of the whole world : thus it has propa-
gated its empire beyond the paths of the sun,
and the bounds of the ocean itself; in that in
their arms they practise a religious valour ; in
that they fortify their city with the religions of
sacred rites, with chaste virgins, with many hon-
ours, and the names of priests ; in that, when
besieged and taken, all but the Capitol alone,
they worship the gods which when angry any
other people would have despised ; ^ and through
the lines of the Gauls, marvelling at the audacity
of their superstition, they move unarmed with
weapons, but armed with the worship of their
religion ; while in the city of an enemy, when
taken while still in the fury of victory, they
venerate the conquered deities ; while in all di-
rections they seek for the gods of the strangers,
and make them their own ; while they build
altars even to unknown divinities, and to the
Manes. Thus, in that they acknowledge the
sacred institutions of all nations, they have also
deserved their dominion. Hence the perpetual
course of their veneration has continued, which
is not weakened by the long lapse of time, but
increased, because antiquity has been accustomed
to attribute to ceremonies and temples so much
of sanctity as it has ascribed of age.

CHAP. VII. ARGUMENT : THAT THE ROMAN AU-
SPICES AND AUGURIES HAVE BEEN NEGLECTED
WITH ILL CONSEQUENCES, BUT HAVE BEEN OB-
SERVED WITH GOOD FORTUNE.

" Nor yet by chance (for I would venture in
the meantime even to take for granted the point
in debate, and so to err on the safe side) have
our ancestors succeeded in their undertakings


' "To think of rather than to know " in some texts.

2 Neander quotes this passage as illustrating the dissatisfied state
of the pagan mind with the prevailing infidelity at that time.

3 Or, " the great mother" [i.e., Cybele. S.].

* Or, " which another people, when angry, would have despised,"


either by the observance of auguries, or by con-
sulting the entrails, or by the institution of sacred
rites, or by the dedication of temples. Consid-
er what is the record of books. You will at
once discover that they have inaugurated the
rites of all kinds of religions, either that the
divine indulgence might be rewarded, or that
the threatening anger might be averted, or that
the wrath already swelling and raging might be
appeased. Witness the Idaean mother,5 who at
her arrival both approved the chastity of the
matron, and delivered the city from the fear of
the enemy. Witness the statues of the eques-
trian brothers,^ consecrated even as they had
showed themselves on the lake, who, with horses
breathless,^ foaming, and smoking, announced
the victory over the Persian on the same day on
which they had gained it. Witness the renewal
of the games of the offended Jupiter,^ on ac-
count of the dream of a man of the people.
And an acknowledged witness \% the devotion
of the Decii. Witness also Curtius, who filled
up the opening of the profound chasm either
with the mass, or with the glory of his knight-
hood. Moreover, more frequently than we
wished have the auguries, when despised, borne
witness to the presence of the gods : thus AUia
is an unlucky name ; thus the battle of Claudius
and Junius is not a battle against the Carthagin-
ians, but a fatal shipwreck. Thus, that Thrasy-
menus might be both swollen and discoloured
with the blood of the Romans, Flaminius de-
spised the auguries ; and that we might again
demand our standards from the Parthians, Cras-
sus both deserved and scoffed at the impreca-
tions of the terrible sisters. I omit the old
stories, which are many, and I pass by the songs
of the poets about the births, and the gifts, and
the rewards of the gods. Moreover, I hasten over
the fates predicted by the oracles, lest antiquity
should appear to you excessively fabulous. Look
at the temples and fanes of the gods by which
the Roman city is both protected and armed :
they are more august by the deities which are
their inhabitants, who are present and constantly
dwelling in them, than opulent by the ensigns
and gifts "of worship. Thence therefore the
prophets, filled with the god, and mingled with
him, collect futurity beforehand, give caution for
dangers, medicine for diseases, hope for the af-
flicted, help to the wretched, solace to calami-
ties, alleviation to labours. Even in our repose
we see, we hear, we acknowledge the gods, whom
in the day-time we impiously deny, refuse, and
abjure.


5 Otherwise, " the goddess mother."

* Soil. Castor and Pollux.

1 Otherwise, " who breathless with horses foaming," etc.

8 Otherwise, " the offence of Jupiter, the renewal of the games,'


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


j CHAP. VIII. — ARGUMENT : THE IMPIOUS TEMERITY
OF THEODORUS, DIAGOR-AS, AND PROTAGOR.4S IS
NOT AT ALL TO BE ACQUIESCED IN, WHO WISHED
EITHER ALTOGETHER TO GET RID OF THE RELI-
GION OF THE GODS, OR AT LEAST TO WEAKEN
IT. BUT INFINITELY LESS TO BE ENDURED IS
THAT SKULKING AND LIGHT-SHUNNING PEOPLE
OF THE CHRISTIANS, WHO REJECT THE GODS,
AND WHO, FEARING TO DIE AFTER DEATH, DO
NOT IN THE MEANTIME FEAR TO DIE.

" Therefore, since the consent of all nations
concerning the existence of the immortal gods
remains established, although their nature or
their origin remains uncertain, I suffer nobody
swelling with such boldness, and with I know
not what irreligious wisdom, who would strive to
undermine or weaken this religion, so ancient, so
useful, so wholesome, even although he may be
Theodoras of Cyrene, or one who is before him,
Diagoras the Melian,' to whom antiquity applied
the surname of Atheist, — both of whom, by
asseverating that there were no gods, took away
all the fear by which humanity is ruled, and all
veneration absolutely ; yet never will they prevail
in this discipline of impiety, under the name and
authority of their pretended philosophy. When
the men of Athens both expelled Protagoras of
Abdera, and in public assembly burnt his writ-
ings, because he disputed deliberately- rather
than profanely concerning the divinity, why is it
not a thing to be lamented, that men (for you
will bear with my making use pretty freely of the
force of the plea that I have undertaken) — that
men, I say, of a reprobate, unlawful, and desper-
j ate faction, should rage against the gods? who,
having gathered together from the lowest dregs
the more unskilled, and women, credulous and,
by the facility of their sex, yielding, establish a
herd of a profane conspiracy, which is leagued
together by nightly meetings, and solemn fasts,
and inhuman meats — not by any sacred rite, but
by that which requires expiation — a people
skulking and shunning the light, silent in public,
but garrulous in corners. They despise the tem-
ples as dead-houses, they reject the gods, they
laugh at sacred things ; wretched, they pity, if
they are allowed, the priests ; half naked them-
selves, they despise honours and purple robes.
Oh, wondrous folly and incredible audacity !
they despise present torments, although they
fear those which are uncertain and future ; and
while they fear to die after death, they do not
fear to die for the present : so does a deceit-


' According to the codex, " the Milesian." [See note in Reeves's
Apologies of Justin Martyr^ TerttiUian, and Minucius Felix,
vol. ii. p. 59. S.]

2 Some have corrected this word, reading " without considera-
tion," scil. " inconsiilte;" and the four first editions omit the subse-
quent words, " concerning the divinity."


ful hope soothe their fear with the solace of a
revival.^

CHAP. IX. ARGUMENT : THE RELIGION OF THE

CHRISTIANS IS FOOLISH, INASMUCH AS THEY WOR-
SHIP A CRUCIFIED MAN, AND EVEN THE INSTRU-
MENT ITSELF OF HIS PUNISHMENT. THEY ARE
SAID TO WORSHIP THE HEAD OF AN ASS, AND
EVEN THE NATURE OF THEIR FATHER. THEY ARE
INITIATED BY THE SLAUGHTER AND THE BLOOD
OF AN INFANT, AND IN SHAMELESS DARKNESS
THEY ARE ALL MIXED UP IN AN UNCERTAIN
MEDLEY.

" And now, as wickeder things advance more
fruitfully, and abandoned manners creep on day
by day, those abominable shrines of an impious
assembly are maturing themselves throughout the
whole world. Assuredly this confederacy ought
to be rooted out and execrated. They know one
another by secret marks and insignia, and they
love one another almost before they know one
another. _ Everywhere also there is mingled
among them a certain religion of lust, and they
call one another promiscuously brothers and sis-
ters, that even a not unusual debauchery may by
the intervention of that sacred name become
incestuous : it is thus that their vain and sense-
less superstition glories in crimes. Nor, con-
cerning these things, would intelligent report
speak of things so great and various,"* and requir-
ing to be prefaced by an apology, unless truth
were at the bottom of it. I hear that they adore
the head of an ass, that basest of creatures, con-
secrated by 1 know not what silly persuasion, —
a worthy and appropriate religio^^.for such man-
ners. Some say that they worship the virilia of
their pontiff and priest,5 and adore the nature, as
it were, of their common parent. I know not
whether these things are false ; certainly suspi-
cion is applicable to secret and nocturnal rites ;
and he who explains their ceremonies by refer-
ence to a man punished by extreme suffering for
his wickedness, and to the deadly wood of the
cross, appropriates fitting altars for reprobate and
wicked men, that they may worship what the)-
deserve. Now the story about the initiation of
young novices is as much to be detested as it is
well known. An infant covered over with meal,
that it may deceive the unwary, is placed before
him who is to be stained with their rites : this
infant is slain by the young pupil, who has been
urged on as if to harmless blows on the surface
of the meal, with dark and secret wounds.


3 There are various emendations of this passage, but their mean-
ing is somewhat obscure. One is elaborately ingenious: " Ita illis
pavorum fallax spes solatio redivivo blanditur," which is said to iniply,
" Thus the hope that deceives their fears, soothes them with the hope
of living again."

* Otherwise read " abominable." ■ , ,■

5 This charge, as Oehler thinks, refers apparently to the kneeling
posture in which penitents made confession before their bishop.


178


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


Thirstily — O horror ! — they Uck up its blood ;
eagerly they divide its limbs. By this victim
they are pledged together ; with this conscious-
ness of wickedness they are covenanted to mutual
silence.' Such sacred rites as these are more
foul than any sacrileges. And of their banquet-
ing it is well known all men speak of it every-
where ; even the speech of our Cirtensian ^
testifies to it. On a solemn day they assemble
at the feast, with all their children, sisters, moth-
ers, people of every sex and of every age.
There, after much feasting, when the fellowship
has grown warm, and the fervour of incestuous
lust has grown hot with drunkenness, a dog that
has been tied to the chandelier is provoked, by
throwing a small piece of offal beyond the length
of a line by which he is bound, to rush and
spring ; and thus the conscious light being over-
turned and extinguished in the shameless dark-
ness, the connections of abominable lust involve
them in the uncertainty of fate. Although not
all in fact, yet in consciousness all are alike in-
cestuous, since by the desire of all of them every-
thing is sought for which can happen in the act
of each individual.


CHAP. X. ARGUMENT : WHATEVER THE CHRIS-

TL4NS WORSHIP, THEY STRIVE IN EVERY WAY TO
CONCEAL : THEY HAVE NO ALTARS, NO TEMPLES,
NO ACKNOWLEDGED IMAGES. THEIR GOD, LIKE
THAT OF THE JEWS, IS SAID TO BE ONE, WHOM,
ALTHOUGH THEY ARE NEITHER ABLE TO SEE NOR
TO SHOW, THEY THINK NEVERTHELESS TO BE
]\IISCHIEVOUS, RESTLESS, AND UNSEASONABLY IN-
QUISITIVE.

" I purposely pass over many things, for those
that I have mentioned are already too many ;
and that all these, or the greater part of them,
are true, the obscurity of their vile' religion de-
clares. For why do they endeavour with such
pains to conceal and to cloak whatever they wor-
ship, since honourable things always rejoice in
publicity, while crimes are kept secret? Why
have they no altars, no temples, no acknowledged
images ? 3 Why do they never speak openly, never
congregate freely, unless for the reason that what
they adore and conceal is either worthy of pun-
ishment, or something to be ashamed of? More-
over, whence or who is he, or where is the one
God, solitary, desolate, whom no free people, no
kingdoms, and not even Roman superstition,
have known ? The lonely and miserable nation-
ahty of the Jews worshipped one God, and one
peculiar to itself; but they worshipped him open-


' This calumny seems
the Eucharist.


have originated from the sacrament of


Sell. Fronto of Cirta, spoken of again in ch. xxxi. [A recent
very interesting discovery goes to show that our author vifas the chief
magistrate of Cirta, in Algeria, from a.d. 2io to 217. See Schaff,
vol. iii. p. 841.]

3 Otherwise, " no consecrated images."


ly, with temples, with altars, with victims, and with
ceremonies ; and he has so little force or power,
that he is enslaved, with his own special nation,
to the Roman deities. But the Christians, more-
over, what wonders, what monstrosities do they
feign ! — that he who is their God, whom they
can neither show nor behold, inquires diligently
into the character of all, the acts of all, and, in
fine, into their words and secret thoughts ; that
he runs about everywhere, and is everywhere
present : they make him out to be troublesome,
restless, even shamelessly inquisitive, since he is
present at everything that is done, wanders in
and out in all places, although, being occupied
with the whole, he cannot give attention to par-
ticulars, nor can he be sufficient for the whole
while he is busied with particulars. What ! be-
cause they threaten conflagration to the whole
world, and to the universe itself, with all its stars,
are they meditating its destruction? — as if
either the eternal order constituted by the divine
laws of nature would be disturbed, or the league
of all the elements would be broken up, and the
heavenly structure dissolved, and that fabric in
which it is contained and bound together •* would
be overthrown.5


CHAP. XI. — ARGUMENT : BESIDES ASSERTING THE
FUTURE CONFLAGRATION OF THE WHOLE WORLD,
THEY PROMISE AFTERWARDS THE RESURRECTION
OF OUR BODIES : AND TO THE RIGHTEOUS .■\N
ETERNITY OF MOST BLESSED LIFE ; TO THE UN-
RIGHTEOUS, OF EXTREME PUNISHMENT.

" And, not content with this wild opinion, they
add to it and associate with it old women's
fables : ^ they say that they will rise again after
death, and ashes, and dust ; and with I know
not what confidence, they believe by turns in
one another's lies : you would think that they
had already lived again. It is a double evil and
a twofold madness to denounce destruction to
the heaven and the stars, which we leave just as
we find them, and to promise eternity to our-
selves, who are dead and extinct — who, as we
are born, so also perish ! It is for this cause,
doubtless, also that they execrate our funeral
piles, and condemn our burials by fire, as if
every body, even although it be withdrawn from
the flames, were not, nevertheless, resolved into
the earth by lapse of years and ages, and as if
it mattered not whether wild beasts tore the
body to pieces, or seas consumed it, or the
ground covered it, or the flames carried it away ;
since for the carcases every mode of sepulture
is a penalty if they feel it; if they feel it not,

■• Otherwise, " we are contained and bound together."

5 [These very accusations, reduced back to Christian language,
show that much of the Creed was, in fact, known to the heathen at
this period.]

6 [I Tim. iv. 7.]


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


1/9


in the very quickness of their destruction there
is rehef. Deceived by this error, they promise
to themselves, as being good, a blessed and per-
petual life after their death ; to others, as being
unrighteous, eternal punishment. Many things
occur to me to say in addition, if the hmits of
my discourse did not hasten me. I have already
shown, and take no more pains to prove,' that
they themselves are unrighteous ; although, even
if I should allow them to be righteous, yet your
agreement also concurs with the opinions of many,
that guilt and innocence are attributed by fate.
For whatever we do, as some ascribe it to fate,
so you refer it to God : thus it is according to
your sect to believe that men will, not of their
own accord, but as elected to will. Therefore
you feign an iniquitous judge, who punishes in
men, not their will, but their destiny. Yet I
should be glad to be informed whether or no you
rise again with bodies ; ^ and if so, with what
bodies — whether with the same or with renewed
bodies? Without a body? Then, as far as I
know, there will neither be mind, nor soul, nor
life. With the same body? But this has already
been previously destroyed. With another body?
Then it is a new man who is born, not the former
one restored ; and yet so long a time has passed
away, innumerable ages have flowed by, and
what single individual has returned from the
dead either by the fate of Protesilaus, with per-
mission to sojourn even for a few hours, or that
we might believe it for an example ? All such
figments of an unhealthy belief, and vain sources
of comfort, with which deceiving poets have
trifled in the sweetness of their verse, have been
disgracefully remoulded by you, believing un-
doubtingly ^ on your God.

CHAP. XII. ARGUMEXT : MOREOVER, WHAT WILL

HAPPEN TO THE CHRISTIANS THEMSELVES AFTER
DEATH, MAY BE ANIICIPATED FROM THE FACT
THAT EVEN NOW THEY ARE DESTITUTE OF ALL
MEANS, AND ARE AFFLICTED WITH THE HEAVIEST
CALAMITIES AND MISERIES.

" Neither do you at least take experience
from things present, how the fruitless expecta-
tions of vain promise deceive you. Consider,
wretched creatures, (from your lot) while you
are yet living, what is threatening you after
death.-* Behold, a portion of you — and, as you
declare, the larger and better portion — are in
want, are cold, are labouring in hard work and
hunger ; and God suffers it. He feigns ; He either
is not willing or not able to assist His people ;
and thus He is either w^eak or inequitable.


' " And I have already shown, without any trouble," is another
reading

- Otherwise, " without a body or with."

3 Otherwise, " too credulous."

■* Otherwise, " while you consider, while you are yet alive, poor
wretches, what is threatening after death."


Thou, who dreamest over a posthumous immor-
tality, when thou art shaken by danger,5 when
thou art consumed with fever, when thou art
torn with pain, dost thou not then feel thy real
condition? Dost thou not then acknowledge
thy frailty? Poor wretch, art thou unwillingly
convinced of thine infirmity, and wilt not confess
it? But I omit matters that are common to all
alike. Lo, for you there are threats, punish-
ments, tortures, and crosses ; and that no longer
as objects of adoration, but as tortures to be
undergone ; fires also, which you both predict
and fear. Where is that God who is able to
help you when you come to life again, since he
cannot help you while you are in this life ? Do
not the Romans, without any help from your
God, govern, reign, have the enjoyment of the
whole world, and have dominion over you ? But
you in the meantime, in suspense and anxiety,
are abstaining from respectable enjoyments.
You do not visit exhibitions ; you have no con-
cern in public displays ; you reject the public
banquets, and abhor the sacred contests ; the
meats previously tasted by, and the drinks made
a libation of upon, the altars. Thus you stand
in dread of the gods whom you deny. You do
not wreath your heads with flowers ; you do not
grace your bodies with odours ; you reserve
unguents for funeral rites ; you even refuse
garlands to your sepulchres — pallid, trembling
beings, worthy of the pity even of our gods !
Thus, wretched as you are, you neither rise
again, nor do you live in the meanwhile. There-
fore, if you have any wisdom or modesty, cease
from prying into the regions of the sky, and the
destinies and secrets of the world : it is sufificient
to look before your feet, especially for untaught,
uncultivated, boorish, rustic people : they who
have no capacity for understanding civil matters,
are much more denied the ability to discuss
divine.

CHAP. XIII. ARGUMENT : C/ECILIUS AT LENGTH

CONCLUDES THAT THE NEW RELIGION IS TO EE
REPUDIATED ; AND THAT WE MUST NOT RASHLY
PRONOUNCE UPON DOUBTFUL MATTERS.

" However, if you have a desire to philoso-
phize, let any one of you who is sufficiently great,
imitate, if he can, Socrates the prince of wisdom.
The answer of that man, whenever he was asked
about celestial matters, is well known : ' IVha/ is
above us is nothing to us.' Well, therefore, did
he deserve from the oracle the testimony of
singular wisdom, which oracle he himself had a
presentiment of, that he had been preferred to
all men for the reason, not that he had dis-
covered all things, but because he had learnt
that he knew nothing. And thus the confession

5 Some read, " with shivering."


i8o


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


of ignorance is the height of wisdom. From
this source flowed the safe doubting of Arcesilas,
and long after of Carneades, and of very many
of the Academics,' in questions of the highest
moment, in which species of philosophy the un-
learned can do much with caution, and the
learned can do gloriously. What ! is not the
hesitation of Simonides the lyric poet to be
admired and followed by all ? Which Simonides,
when he was asked by Hiero the tyrant what,
and what like he thought the gods to be, asked
first of all for a day to deliberate ; then post-
poned his reply for two days ; and then, when
pressed, he added only another; and finally,
when the tyrant inquired into the causes of such
a long delay, he replied that, the longer his re-
search continued, the obscurer the truth became
to him.^ In my opinion also, things which are
uncertain ought to be left as they are. Nor,
while so many and so great men are deliberat-
ing, should we rashly and boldly give an opinion
in another direction, lest either a childish super-
stition should be introduced, or all religion
should be overthrown."


CHAP. XIV. — ARGUMENT : WITH SOMETHING OF
THE PRIDE OF SELF-SATISFACTION, C^CILIUS
URGES OCTAVIUS TO REPLY TO HIS ARGUMENTS ;
AND MINUCIUS WITH MODESTY ANSWERS HIM,
THAT HE MUST NOT EXULT AT HIS OWN BY NO
MEANS ORDINARY ELOQUENCE, AND AT THE
HARMONIOUS VARIETY OF HIS ADDRESS.

Thus far Csecilius ; and smiling cheerfully (for
the vehemence of his prolonged discourse had
relaxed the ardour of his indignation), he added :
" And what does Octavius venture to reply to
this, a man of the race of Plautus,^ who, while
he was chief among the millers, was still the
lowest of philosophers?" "Restrain," said I,
" your self-approval against him ; for it is not
worthy of you to exult at the harmony of your
discourse, before the subject shall have been
more fully argued on both sides ; especially since
your reasoning is striving after truth, not praise.
And in however great a degree your discourse
has delighted me by its subtile variety, yet I am
very deeply moved, not concerning the present
discussion, but concerning the entire kind of
disputation — that for the most part the condi-
tion of truth should be changed according to
the powers of discussion, and even the faculty of
perspicuous eloquence. This is very well known
to occur by reason of the facility of the hearers.


* This is otherwise read, " Academic Pyrrhonists."

2 Cicero, de Natiira Deorum, \. 22.

3 " Plautinae prosapise." The expression is intended as a reproach
against the humble occupations of many of the Christian professors.
Plautus is said, when in need, to have laboured at a baker's hand-mill.
Csecilius tells Octavius that he may be the first among the millers, but
he is the last among the philosophers. Stieber proposes " Christiano-
rum " instead of " pistorum " — " Christians " instead of " millers."


who, being distracted by the allurement of words
from attention to things, assent without distinc-
tion to everything that is said, and do not sepa-
rate falsehood from truth ; unaware that even in
that which is incredible there is often truth,
and in verisimilitude falsehood. Therefore the
oftener they believe bold assertions, the more
frequently they are convinced by those who are
more clever, and thus are continually deceived
by their temerity. They transfer the blame of
the judge to the complaint of uncertainty ; so
that, everything being condemned, they would
rather that all things should be left in suspense,
than that they should decide about matters of
doubt. Therefore we must take care that we
do not in such sort suffer from the hatred at
once of all discourses, even as very many of the
more simple kind are led to execration and
hatred of men in general. For those who are
carelessly credulous are deceived by those whom
they thought worthy ; and by and by, by a kin-
dred error, they begin to suspect every one as
wicked, and dread even those whom they might
have regarded as excellent. Now therefore we
are anxious — because in everything there may
be argument on. both sides ; and on the one
hand, the truth is for the most part obscure ;
and on the other side there is a marvellous
subtlety, which sometimes by its abundance of
words imitates the confidence of acknowledged
proof — as carefully as possible to weigh each
particular, that we may, while ready to applaud
acuteness, yet elect, approve, and adopt those
things which are right." •

CHAP. XV. — ARGUMENT : CSECILIUS RETORTS UPON
MINUCIUS, WITH SOME LITTLE APPEARANCE OF
BEING HURT, THAT HE IS FOREGOING THE OF-
FICE OF A RELIGIOUS UMPIRE, WHEN HE IS
WEAKENING THE FORCE OF HIS ARGUMENT. HE
SAYS THAT IT SHOULD BE LEFT TO OCTAVIUS
TO CONFUTE ALL THAT HE HAD ADV.ANCED.

"You are withdrawing," says Csecilius, "from
the office of a religious judge ; for it is very un-
fair for you to weaken the force of ray pleading
by the interpolation of a very important argu-
ment, since Octavius has before him each thing
that I have said, sound and unimpaired, if he can
refute it." " What you are reproving," said I,
" unless I am mistaken, I have brought forward
for the common advantage, so that by a scrupu-
lous examination we might weigh our decision,
not by the pompous style of the eloquence, but
by the solid character of the matter itself. Nor
must our attention, as you complain, be any
longer called away, but with absolute silence let
us listen to the reply of our friend Januarius,-*
who is now beckoning to us."


Scil, " Octavius."


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


i8i


CHAP. XVI. ARGUMENT : OCTAVIUS ARR.\NGES HIS

REPLY, AND TRUSTS THAT HE SHALL BE ABLE TO
DILUTE THE BITTERNESS OF REPROACH WITH
THE RIVER OF TRUTHFUL WORDS. HE PRO-
CEEDS TO WEAKEN THE INDIVIDUAL ARGUMENTS
OF CtECILIUS. NOBODY NEED COMPLAIN THAT
THE CHRISTIANS, UNLEARNED THOUGH THEY
MAY BE, DISPUTE ABOUT HEAVENLY THINGS,
BECAUSE IT IS NOT THE AUTHORITY OF HIM
WHO ARGUES, BUT THE TRUTH OF THE ARGU-
MENT ITSELF, THAT SHOULD BE CONSIDERED.

And thus Octavius began : " I will indeed
speak as I shall be able to the best of my pow-
ers, and you must endeavour with me to dilute
the very offensive strain of recriminations in the
river ' of veracious words. Nor will I disguise
in the outset, that the opinion of my friend Na-
talis ^ has swayed to and fro in such an erratic,
vague, and slippery manner, that we are com-
pelled to doubt whether your ^ information was
confused, or whether it wavered backwards and
forwards ^ by mere mistake. For he varied at
one time from believing the gods, at another
time to being in a state of hesitation on the sub-
ject ; so that the direct purpose of my reply was
established with the greater uncertainty,^ by rea-
son of the uncertainty of his proposition. But
in my friend Natalis — I will not allow, I do not
believe in, any chicanery — far from his sim-
plicity is crafty trickery.^ What then? As he
who knows not the right way, when as it happens
one road is separated into many, because he
knows not the way, remains in anxiety, and dares
neither make choice of particular roads, nor try
them all ; so, if a man has no stedfast judgment
of truth, even as his unbelieving suspicion is
scattered, so his doubting opinion is unsettled.
It is therefore no wonder if Caecilius in the same
way is cast about by the tide, and tossed hither
and thither among things contrary and repug-
nant to one another ; but that this may no longer
be the case, I will convict and refute all that has
been said, however diverse, confirming and ap-
proving the truth alone ; and for the future he
must neither doubt nor waver. And since my
brother broke out in such expressions as these,
that he was grieved, that he was vexed, that he
was indignant, that he regretted that illiterate,
poor, unskilled people should dispute about
heavenly things ; let him know that all men are
begotten alike, with a capacity and ability of
reasoning and feeling, without preference of age,
sex, or dignity. Nor do they obtain wisdom by


' Some read, " in the light."

2 Csecilius.

^ Otherwise " his."

read " cavillaverit " instead of " v.iclllaverit," which


Some


- oome reaa cavillavent instead
would give the sense, " rnake captious objections."

5 This is otherwise given " certainty," which helps the meaning
of the passage.

*■ Otherwise, " Far from his guileless subtlety is so crafty a trick-
ery." But the readings are very unsettled.


fortune, but have it implanted by nature ; more-
over, the very philosophers themselves, or any
others who have gone forth unto celebrity as dis-
coverers of arts, before they attained an illustri-
ous name by their mental skill, were esteemed
plebeian, untaught, half-naked. Thus it is, that
rich men, attached to their means, have been
accustomed to gaze more upon their gold than
upon heaven, while our sort of people, though
poor, have both discovered wisdom, and have
delivered their teaching to others ; whence it
appears that intelligence is not given to wealth,
nor is gotten by study, but is begotten with the
very formation of the mind. Therefore it is
nothing to be angry or to be grieved about,
though any one should inquire, should think,
should utter his thoughts about divine things ;
since what is wanted is not the authority of the
arguer, but the truth of the argument itself : and
even the more unskilled the discourse, the more
evident the reasoning, since it is not coloured by
the pomp of eloquence and grace ; but as it is,
it is sustained by the rule of right.

CHAP. XVII. ARGUMENT : MAN OUGHT INDEED TO

KNOW HIMSELF, BUT THIS KNOWLEDGE CANNOT
BE ATTAINED BY HIM UNLESS HE FIRST OF ALL
ACKNOWLEDGES THE ENTIRE SCOPE OF THINGS,
AND GOD HIMSELF. AND FROM THE CONSTITU-
TION AND FURNITURE OF THE WORLD ITSELF,
EVERY ONE ENDOWED WITH REASON HOLDS
THAT IT WAS ESTABLISHED BY GOD, AND IS
GOVERNED AND ADMINISTERED BY HIM.

" Neither do I refuse to admit what Csecilius
earnestly endeavoured to maintain among the
chief matters, that man ought to know himself,
and to look around and see what he is, whence
he is, why he is ; whether collected together from
the elements, or harmoniously formed of atoms,
or rather made, formed, and animated by God.
And it is this very thing which we cannot seek
out and investigate without inquiry into the uni-
verse ; since things are so coherent, so linked
and associated together, that unless you diligently
examine into the nature of divinity, you must be
ignorant of that of humanity. Nor can you well
perform your social duty unless you know that
community of the world which is common to all,
especially since in this respect we differ from the
wild beasts, that while they are prone and tend-
ing to the earth, and are born to look upon noth-
ing but their food, we, whose countenance is
erect, whose look is turned towards heaven, as
is our converse and reason, whereby we recog-
nise, feel, and imitate God,'' have neither right
nor reason to be ignorant of the celestial glory
which forms itself into our eyes and senses.
For it is as bad as the grossest sacrilege e\-en,


^ Some read, " the Lord God.'


l82


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


to seek on the ground for what you ought to
find on high. Wherefore the rather, they who
deny that this furniture of the whole world was
perfected by the divine reason, and assert that
it was heaped together by certain fragments '
casually adhering to each other, seem to me not
to have either mind or sense, or, in fact, even
sight itself. For what can possibly be so mani-
fest, so confessed, and so evident, when you lift
your eyes up to heaven, and look into the things
which are below and around, than that there is
some Deity of most excellent intelligence, by
whom all nature is inspired, is moved, is nour-
ished, is governed? Behold the heaven itself,
how broadly it is expanded, how rapidly it is
whirled around, either as it is distinguished in
the night by its stars, or as it is lightened in the
day by the sun, and you will know at once how
the marvellous and divine balance of the Supreme
Governor is engaged therein. Look also on the
year, how it is made by the circuit of the sun ;
and look on the month, how tlie moon drives it
around in her increase, her decline, and decay.
What shall I say of the recurring changes of
darkness and light ; how there is thus provided
for us an alternate restoration of labour and .rest ?
Truly a more prolix discourse concerning the
stars must be left to astronomers, whether as to
how they govern the course of navigation, or
bring on ^ the season of ploughing or of reap-
ing, each of which things not only needed a
Supreme Artist and a perfect intelligence, nor
only to create, to construct, and to arrange ; but,
moreover, they cannot be felt, peceived and
understood without the highest intelligence and
reason. What ! when the order of the seasons
and of the harvests is distinguished by stedfast
variety, does it not attest its Author and Parent?
As well the spring with its flowers, and the sum-
mer with its harvests, and the grateful maturity
of autumn, and the wintry olive-gathering,^ are
needful ; and this order would easily be dis-
turbed unless it were established by the highest
intelligence. Now, how great is the providence
needed, lest there should be nothing but winter
to blast with its frost, or nothing but summer to
scorch with its heat, to interpose the moderate
temperature of autumn and spring, so that the
unseen and harmless transitions of the year re-
turning on its footsteps may glide by ! Look
attentively at the sea ; it is bound by the law of
its shore. Wherever there are trees, look how
they are animated from the bowels of the earth !
Consider the ocean ; it ebbs and flows with
alternate tides. Look at the fountains, how they
gush in perpetual streams ! Gaze on the rivers ;
they always roll on in regular courses. Why


1 Scil. " atoms."

2 According to some, " point ont " or " indicat<

3 Olives ripen in the month of December.


should I speak of the aptly ordered peaks of
the mountains, the slopes of the hills, the ex-
panses of the plains ? Wherefore should I speak
of the multiform protection provided by ani-
mated creatures against one another ? — some
armed with horns, some hedged with teeth, and
shod with claws, and barbed with stings, or with
freedom obtained by swiftness of feet, or by the
capacity of soaring furnished by wings? The
very beauty of our own figure especially con-
fesses God to be its artificer : our upright stat-
ure, our uplooking countenance, our eyes placed
at the top, as it were, for outlook ; and all the
rest of our senses as if arranged in a citadel.

CHAP. XVIII. ARGUMENT : MOREOVER, GOD NOT

ONLY TAKES CARE OF THE UNIVERSAL WORLD,
BUT OF ITS INDIVIDUAL PARTS. THAT BY THE
DECREE OF THE ONE GOD ALL THINGS ARE GOV-
ERNED, IS PROVED BY THE ILLUSTRATION OF
EARTHLY EMPIRES. BUT ALTHOUGH HE, BEING

INFINITE AND IMMENSE AND HOW GREAT HE

IS, IS KNOWN TO HIMSELF ALONE CANNOT

EITHER BE SEEN OR NAjMED BY US, YET HIS
GLORY IS BEHELD MOST CLEARLY WHEN THE
USE OF ALL TITLES IS LAID ASIDE.

" It would be a long matter to go through
particular instances. There is no member in
man which is not calculated both for the sake
of necessity and of ornament ; and what is more
wonderful still, all have the same form, but each
has certain lineaments modified, and thus we
are each found to be unlike to one another,
while we all appear to be like in general. What
is the reason of our being born ? what means the
desire of begetting? Is it not given by God,
and that the breasts should become full of milk
as the offspring grows to maturity, and that the
tender progeny should grow up by the nourish-
ment afforded by the abundance of the milky
moisture? Neither does God have care alone
for the universe as a whole, but also for its parts.
Britain is deficient in sunshine, but it is refreshed
by the warmth of the sea that flows around it.
The river Nile tempers the dryness of Egypt;
the Euphrates cultivates Mesopotamia ; the river
Indus makes up for the want of rains, and is said
both to sow and to water the East. Now if, on
entering any house, you should behold everything
refined, well arranged, and adorned, assuredly
you would believe that a master presided over
it, and that he himself was much better than all
those excellent things. So in this house of the
world, when you look upon the heaven and the
earth, its providence, its ordering, its law, believe
that there is a Lord and Parent of the universe
far more glorious than the stars themselves, and
the parts of the whole world. Unless, per-
chance — since there is no doubt as to the ex-


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


istence of providence — you think that it is a
subject of inquiry, whether the celestial kingdom
is governed by the power of one or by the rule
of many ; and this matter itself does not involve
much trouble in opening out, to one who con-
siders earthly empires, for which the examples
certamly are taken from heaven. When at any
time was there an alliance in royal authority
which either began with good faith or ceased
without bloodshed? I pass over the Persians,
who gathered the augury for their chieftainship
from the neighing of horses ; ' and I do not quote
that absolutely dead fable of the Theban broth-
ers.^ The story about the twins (Romulus and
Remus), in respect of the dominion of shepherds,
and of a cottage, is very well known. The wars
of the son-in-law and the father-in-law ^ were
scattered over the whole world ; and the fortune ■♦
of so great an empire could not receive two
rulers. Look at other matters. The bees have
one king ; the flocks one leader ; among the herds
there is one ruler. Canst thou believe that in
heaven there is a division of the supreme power,
and that the whole authority of that true and
divine empire is sundered, when it is manifest
that God, the Parent of all, has neither begin-
ning nor end — that He who gives birth to all
gives perpetuity to Himself — that He who was
before the world, was Himself to Himself instead
of the world? He orders everything, whatever
it is, by a word ; arranges it by His wisdom ;
perfects it by His power. He can neither be
seen — He is brighter than light ; nor can be
grasped — He is purer than touch ; 5 nor esti-
mated ; He is greater than all perceptions ; in-
finite, immense, and how great is known to
Himself alone. But our heart is too limited
to understand Him, and therefore we are then
worthily estimating Him when we say that He
is beyond estimation. I will speak out in what
manner I feel. He who thinks that he knows
the magnitude of God, is diminishing it ; he who
desires not to lessen it, knows it not. Neither
must you ask a name for God. God is His
name. We have need of names when a multi-
tude is to be separated into individuals by the
special characteristics of names ; to God, who is
alone, the name God is the whole. If I were
to call Him Father, you would judge Him to be
earthly ; if a King, you would suspect Him to
be carnal ; if a Lord, you will certainly under-
stand Him to be mortal. Take away the addi-
tions of names, and you will behold His glory.
What ! is it not true that I have in this matter
the consent of all men? I hear the common
people, when they lift their hands to heaven, say


' [In the case of Darius Hystaspes.]

^ Eteocles and Polynices.

3 Pompey and Csesar.

* According to some, " one fate."

S These words are omitted by some editors.


nothing else but Oh God, and God is great, and
God is true, and if God shall permit. Is this
the natural discourse of the common people, or
is it the prayer of a confessing Christian ? And
they who speak of Jupiter as the chief, are mis-
taken in the name indeed, but they are in agree-
ment about the unity of the power.

CHAP. XIX. ARGUMENT : MOREOVER, THE POETS

HAVE CALLED HLM THE PARENT OF GODS AND
MEN, THE CREATOR OF ALL THINGS, AND THEIR
MIND AND SPIRIT. AND, BESIDES, EVEN THE
MORE EXCELLENT PHILOSOPHERS HAVE COME
ALMOST TO THE SAME CONCLUSION AS THE
CHRISTIANS ABOUT THE UNITY OF GOD.

" I hear the poets also announcing ' the One
Father of gods and men ; ' and that such is the
mind of mortal men as the Parent of all has
appointed His day.^ What says the Mantuan
Maro ? Is it not even more plain, more apposite,
more true ? ' In the beginning,' says he, ' the
spirit within nourishes, and the mind infused
stirs the heaven and the earth,' and the other
members ' of the world. Thence arises the race
of men and of cattle,' ? and every other kind of
animal. The same poet in another place calls
that mind and spirit God. For these are his
words : '^ ' For that God pervades all the lands,
and the tracts of the sea, and the profound hea-
ven, from whom are men and cattle ; from whom
are rain and fire.' ^ What else also is God an-
nounced to be by us, but mind, and reason, and
spirit? Let us review, if it is agreeable, the
teaching of philosophers. Although in varied
kinds of discourse, yet in these matters you will
find them concur and agree in this one opinion.
I pass over those untrained and ancient ones
who deserved to be called wise men for their
sayings. Let Thales the Milesian be the first of
all, for he first of all disputed about heavenly
things. That same Thales the Milesian said
that water was the beginning of things, but that
God was that mind which from water formed all
things. Ah ! a higher and nobler account of
water and spirit than to have ever been discovered
by man. It was delivered to him by God. You
see that the opinion of this original philosopher
absolutely agrees with ours. Afterwards Anaxim-
enes, and then Diogenes of Apollonia, decide
that the air, infinite and unmeasured, is God.
The agreement of these also as to the Divinity
is like ours. But the description of Anaxagoras
also is, that God is said to be the motion of an
infinite mind ; and the God of Pythagoras is the
soul passing to and fro and intent, throughout
the universal nature of things, from whom also


6 Homer, Odyss., xviii. 136, 137.

7 Virgil, yEueid, vi. 724.

8 Some re-id, " For these things are true."

9 Virgil, Georgics, iv. 221 ; Aineid, i. 743.


1 84


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


the life of all animals is received. It is a known
fact, that Xenophanes delivered that God was all
infinity with a mind ; and Antisthenes, that there
are many gods of the people, but that one God
of Nature was the chief of all ; that Xeuxippus '
acknowledged as God a natural animal force,
whereby all things are governed. What says
Democritus? Although the first discoverer of
atoms, does not he especially speak of nature,
which is the basis of forms, and intelligence, as
God? Strato also himself says that God is
nature. Moreover, Epicurus, the man who feigns
either otiose gods or none at all, still places
above all. Nature. Aristotle varies, but never-
theless assigns a unity of power : for at one time
he says that Mind, at another the World, is God ;
at another time he sets God above the world.==
Heraclides of Pontus also ascribes, although in
various ways, a divine mind to God. Theophras-
tus, and Zeno, and Chrysippus, and Cleanthes
are indeed themselves of many forms of opinion ;
but they are all brought back to the one fact
of the unity of providence. For Cleanthes dis-
coursed of God as of a mind, now of a soul,
now of air, but for the most part of reason.
Zeno, his master, will have the law of nature and
of God, and sometimes the air, and sometimes
reason, to be the beginning of all things. More-
over, by interpreting Juno to be the air, Jupiter
the heaven, Neptune the sea, Vulcan to be fire,
and in like manner by showing the other gods
of the common people to be elements, he forci-
bly denounces and overcomes the public error.
Chrysippus says almost the same. He believes
that a divine force, a rational nature, and some-
times the world, and a fatal necessity, is God ;
and he follows the example of Zeno in his physio-
logical interpretation of the poems of Hesiod, of
Homer, and of Orpheus. Moreover, the teaching
of Diogenes of Babylon is that of expounding
and arguing that the birth of Jupiter, and the
origin of Minerva, and this kind, are names for
other things, not for gods. For Xenophon the
Socratic says that the form of the true God
cannot be seen, and therefore ought not to be
inquired after. Aristo the Stoic ^ says that He
cannot at all be comprehended. And both of
them were sensible of the majesty of God, while
they despaired of understanding Him. Plato
has a clearer discourse about God, both in the
matters themselves and in the names by which
he expresses them ; and his discourse would be
altogether heavenly, if it were not occasionally
fouled by a mixture of merely civil belief.
Therefore in his Timmis Plato's God is by His


1 Otherwise, " Speusippus."

2 The MS. here inserts, " Aristoteles of Pontus varies, at one tim.
attributing the supremacy to the world, at another to the divine mind.
Some think that this is an interpolation, others transfer the words t
Theophrastus below.

•3 Otherwise, " Aristo the Chian."


very name the parent of the world, the artificer
of the soul, the fabricator of heavenly and earthly
things, whom both to discover he declares is
difficult, on account of His excessive and in-
credible power ; and when you have discovered
Him, impossible to speak of in public. The
same almost are the opinions also which are ours.
For we both know and speak of a God who is
parent of all, and never speak of Him in public
unless we are interrogated.'^

CHAP. XX. ARGUMENT : BUT IF THE WORLD IS

RULED BY PROVIDENCE AND GOVERNED BY THE
WILL OF ONE GOD, AN IGNORANT ANTIP.-^THY
OUGHT NOT TO CARRY US AWAY INTO THE ERROR
OF AGREEMENT WITH IT : ALTHOUGH DELIGHTED
WITH nS OWN FABLES, IT HAS BROUGHT IN
RIDICULOUS TRADITIONS. NOR IS IT SHOWN LESS
PLAINLY THAT THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS HAS
ALWAYS BEEN SILLY AND IMPIOUS, IN TH.\T THE
MOST ANCIENT OF MEN HAVE VENERATED THEIR
KINGS, THEIR ILLUSTRIOUS GENERALS, AND IN-
VENTORS OF ARTS, ON ACCOUNT OF THEIR
REMARIC^BLE DEEDS, NO OTHERWISE THAN AS
GODS.

" I have set forth the opinions almost of all
the philosophers whose more illustrious glory it
is to have pointed out that there is one God,
although with many names ; so that any one
might think either that Christians are now phi-
losophers, or that philosophers were then already
Christians. But if the world is governed by
providence, and directed by the will of one God,
antiquity of unskilled people ought not, how-
ever delighted and charmed with its own fables,
to carry us away into the mistake of a mutual
agreement, when it is rebutted by the opinions
of its own philosophers, who are supported by
the authority both of reason and of antiquity.
For our ancestors had such an easy faith in
falsehoods, that they rashly believed even other
monstrosities as marvellous wonders ; 5 a mani-
fold Scylla, a Chimcera of many forms, and a
Hydra rising again from its auspicious wounds,
and Centaurs, horses entwined with their riders ;
and whatever Report was allowed ^ to feign, they
were entirely willing to listen to. Wliy should I
refer to those old wives' fables, that men were
changed from men into birds and beasts, and
from men into trees and flowers? — which things,
if they had happened at all, would happen again ;
and because they cannot happen now, therefore
never happened at all. In like manner with
respect to the gods too, our ancestors believed
carelessly, credulously, with untrained simplicity ;
while worshipping their kings religiously, desiring


"l [See note on Plato, chap, xxvi.]

5 Some editors read, " mere wonders," apparently on conjecture

V.


only.

^ Otherwise, " was pleased.


THE OGTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


185


I to look upon them when dead in outward forms,
anxious to preserve their memories in statues,"
those things became sacred which had been
taken up merely as consolations. Thereupon,
and before the world was opened up by com-
merce, and before the nations confounded their
rites and customs, each particular nation vener-
ated its Founder, or illustrious Leader, or modest
Queen braver than her sex, or the discoverer of
any sort of faculty or art, as a citizen of worthy
memory ; and thus a reward was given to the
deceased, "and an example to those who were to
follow.

CHAP. XXI. — ARGUMENT : OCTAVIUS ATTESTS THE
FACT THAT .MEN WERE ADOFrED AS GODS, BY
THE TESTIMONY OF EUHEMERUS, PRODICUS, PER-
SEUS, AND ALEXANDER THE GREAT, WHO ENU-
MER.ATE THE COUNTRY, THE BIRTHDAYS, AND
THE BURIAL-PLACES OF THE GODS. MOREOVER
HE SETS FORTH THE MOURNFUL ENDINGS, MIS-
FORTUNES, AND DEATHS OF THE GODS. AND, IN
! ADDITION, HE LAUGHS AT THE RIDICULOUS AND

DISGUSTING ABSURDITIES WHICH THE HEATHENS
CONTINUALLY ALLEGE ABOUT THE FORM AND
APPEARANCE OF THEIR GODS.

" Read the writings of the Stoics,^ or the writ-
ings of wise men, you will acknowledge these
facts with me. On account of the merits of their
virtue or of some gift, Euhemerus asserts that
they were esteemed gods ; and he enumerates
their birthdays, their countries, their places of sep-
ulture, and throughout various provinces points
out these circumstances of the Dictfean Jupiter,
and of the Delphic Apollo, and of the Pharian
Isis, and af the Eleusinian Ceres. Prodicus
speaks of men who were taken up among the
gods, because they were helpful to the uses of
men in their wanderings, by the discovery of new
kinds of produce. Persseus philosophizes also
to the same result ; and he adds thereto, that
the fruits discovered, and the discoverers of those
same fruits, were called by the same names ; as
the passage of the comic writer runs, that Ve-
nus freezes without Bacchus and Ceres. Alex-
ander the Great, the celebrated Macedonian,
wrote in a remarkable document ^ addressed to
his mother, that under fear of his power there
had been betrayed to him by the priest the
secret of the gods having been men : to her he
makes Vulcan the original of all, and then the
race of Jupiter. And you behold the swallow
I and the cymbal of Isis,-* and the tomb of your
Serapis or Osiris empty, with his limbs scattered


' Four early editions read " instantius " for " in statuls," making
the meaning probably, " more keenly," " more directly."

' Otherwisej according to some, " of the historians."

3 This treatise is mentioned by Athenagoras, Legal, pro Christ.,
ch. xxviii. [See vol. ii. p. 143, this series ] Also by Augustine, dc
Civ. Dei, lib. viii. ch. iii. and xxvii. In the fifth chapter Augustine
calls the priest by the name of Leo.

* This passage is very doubtful both in its text and its meaning.


about. Then consider the sacred rites them-
selves, and their very mysteries : you will find
mournful deaths, misfortunes, and funerals, and
the griefs and wailings of the miserable gods.
Isis bewails, laments, and seeks after her lost
son, with her Cynocephalus and her bald priests ;
and the wretched Isiacs beat their breasts, and
imitate the grief of the most unhappy mother.
By and by, when the little boy is found, Isis re-
joices, and the priests exult, Cynocephalus the
discoverer boasts, and they do not cease year by
year either to lose what they find, or to find what
they lose. Is it not ridiculous either to grieve
for what you worship, or to worship that over
which you grieve? Yet these were formerly
Egyptian rites, and now are Roman ones. Ceres
with her torches lighted, and surrounded 5 with
a serpent, with anxiety and solicitude tracks the
footsteps of Proserpine, stolen away in her wan-
dering, and corrupted. These are the Eleusi-
nian mysteries. And what are the sacred rites
of Jupiter? His nurse is a she-goat, and as an
infant he is taken away from his greedy father,
lest he should be devoured ; and clanging up-
roar ^ is dashed out of the cymbals of the Cory-
bantes, lest the father should hear the infant's
wailing. Cybele of Dindymus — I am ashamed
to speak of it — who could not entice her adul-
terous lover, who unhappily was pleasing to her,
to lewdness, because she herself, as being the
mother of many gods, was ugly and old, muti-
lated him, doubdess that she might make a god
of the eunuch. On account of this story, the
Galli also worship her by the punishment of their
emasculated body. Now certainly these things
are not sacred rites, but tortures. What are the
very forms and appearances (of the gods) ? do
they not argue the contemptible and disgraceful
characters of your gods?^ Vulcan is a lame
god, and crippled ; Apollo, smooth-faced after
so many ages ; ^Esculapius well bearded, not-
withstanding that he is the son of the ever
youthful Apollo ; Neptune with sea-green eyes ;
Minerva with eyes bluish grey ; Juno with ox-
eyes ; Mercury with winged feet ; Pan with
hoofed feet ; Saturn with teet in fetters ; Janus,
indeed, wears two faces, as if that he might walk
with looks turned back ; Diana sometimes is a
huntress, with her robe girded up high ; and as
the Ephesian she has many and fruitful breasts ;
and when exaggerated as Trivia, she is horrible
with three heads and with many hands. AVhat
is your Jupiter himself? Now he is represented
in a statue as beardless, now he is set up as
bearded ; and when he is called Hammon, he
has horns ; and when Capitolinus, then he wields


5 Otherwise, " carried about."
*> Otherwise, " his approach is drowned."

7 Other^vise, " do they not show what are the sports and tl>e
honours of your gods? "


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


the thunderbolts ; and when Latiaris, he is sprin-
kled with gore ; and when Feretrius, he is not
approached ; ' and not to mention any further
the multitude of Jupiters, the monstrous appear-
ances of Jupiter are as numerous as his names.
Erigone was hanged from a noose, that as a
virgin she might be glowing^ among the stars.
The Castors die by turns, that they may live,
^sculapius, that he may rise into a god, is
struck with a thunderbolt. Hercules, that he
may put off humanity, is burnt up by the fires
of GEta.3


CHAP. XXII. ARGUMENT : MOREOVER, THESE FA-
BLES, WHICH AT FIRST WERE INVENTED BY
IGNOR-ANT MEN, WERE AFTERWARDS CELEBRATED
BY OTHERS, AND CHIEFLY BY POETS, WHO DID
NO LIITLE MISCHIEF TO THE TRUTH BY THEIR
AUTHORITY. BY FICTIONS OF THIS KIND, AND
BY FALSEHOODS OF A YET MORE ATTRACTIVE
NATURE, THE MINDS OF YOUNG PEOPLE ARE
CORRUPTED, AND THENCE THEY MISERABLY GROW
OLD IN THESE BELIEFS, ALTHOUGH, ON THE
OTHER HAND, THE TRUTH IS OBVIOUS TO THEM
IF THEY WILL ONLY SEEK AFTER IT.

" These fables and errors we both learn from
ignorant parents, and, what is more serious still,
we elaborate them in our very studies and in-
structions, especially in the verses of the poets,
who as much as possible have prejudiced ^ the
truth 5 by their authority. And for this reason
Plato rightly expelled from the state which he
had founded in his discourse, the illustrious
Homer whom he had praised and crowned.^
For it was he especially who in the Trojan war
allowed your gods, although he made jests of
them, still to interfere in the affairs and doings
of men : he brought them together in contest ;
he wounded Venus ; he bound, wounded, and
drove away Mars. He relates that Jupiter was
set free by Briareus, so as not to be bound fast
by the rest of the gods ; and that he bewailed in
showers of blood his son Sarpedon, because he
could not snatch him from death ; and that, en-
ticed by the girdle of Venus, he lay more eagerly
with his wife Juno than he was accustomed to do
with his adulterous loves. Elsewhere Hercules
threw out dung, and Apollo is feeding cattle for
Admetus. Neptune, however, builds walls for
Laomedon, and the unfortunate builder did not


1 These words are very variously read. Davis conjectures that
they should be, " When Feretrius, he does not hear," and explains
the allusion as follows: that Jupiter Feretrius could only be ap-
proached with the spolia opima ; and IMinucius is covertly ridiculing
the Romans, because, not having taken spolia opivia for so long a
time, they could not approach Feretrius.

2 Otherwise, " pointed out," or " designated."

3 Otherwise corrupted into yEtna.

* Some read, " and it is marvellous how these have prejudiced,"
etc.

5 Some read, " the truth itself."

6 Plat., de Rep , lib. iii.


receive the wages for his work. Then Jupiter's
thunderbolt is fabricated 7 on the anvil with the
arms of ^'Eneas, although there were heaven, and
thunderbolts, and lightnings long before Jupiter
was born in Crete ; and neither could the Cyclops
imitate, nor Jupiter himself help fearing, the
flames of the real thunderbolt. Why should I
speak of the detected adultery of Mars and
Venus, and of the violence of Jupiter against
Ganymede, — a deed consecrated, (as you say,)
in heaven ? And all these things have been put
forward with this view, that a certain authority
might be gained for the vices ^ of men. By these
fictions, and such as these, and by lies of a more
attractive kind, the minds of boys are corrupted ;
and with the same fables clinging to them, they
grow up even to the strength of mature age ;
and, poor wretches, they grow old in the same
beliefs, although the truth is plain, if they will
only seek after it. For all the writers of anti-
quity, both Greek and Roman, have set forth
that Saturn, the beginner of this race and multi-
tude, was a man. Nepos knows this, and Cas-
sius in his history ; and Thallus and Diodorus
speak the same thing. This Saturn then, driven
from Crete by the fear of his raging son, had
come to Italy, and, received by the hospitality
of Janus, taught those unskilled and rustic men
many things, — as, being something of a Greek,
and polished, — to print letters for instance, to
coin money, to make instruments. Therefore
he preferred that his hiding-place, because he
had been safely hidden (latent) there, should be
called Latium ; and he gave a city, from his own
name, the name of Saturnia, and Janus, Janicu-
lum, so that each of them left their names to the
memory of posterity. Therefore it was certainly
a man that fled, certainly a man who was con-
cealed, and the father of a man, and sprung from
a man. He was declared, however, to be the son
of earth or of heaven, because among the Ital-
ians he was of unknown parents ; as even to this
day we call those who appear unexpectedly, sent
from heaven, those who are ignoble and unknown,
sons of the earth. His son Jupiter reigned at
Crete after his father was driven out. There he
died, there he had sons. To this day the cave
of Jupiter is visited, and his sepulchre is shown,
and he is convicted of being human by those
very sacred rites of his.

CHAP. XXIII. — ARGUMENT : ALTHOUGH THE HEATH-
ENS ACKNOWLEDGE THEIR KINGS TO BE MORTAL,
YET THEY FEIGN THAT THEY ARE GODS EVEN
AGAINST THEIR OWN WILL, NOT BECAUSE OF
THEIR BELIEF IN THEIR DIVINITY, BUT IN HON-
OUR OF THE POWER THAT THEY. HAVE EXERTED.


7 Otherwise, " Then Vulcan fabricates," etc.
^ Otherwise, "judgments."


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


187


NEITHER RISING NOR SET- j polislied by some abandoned man, nor feels the
injury done to him in his nativit)-, any more than
afterwards it feels the worship flowing from your
veneration ; unless perhaps the stone, or the
wood, or the silver is not yet a god. When,
therefore, does the god begin his existence?
Lo, it is melted, it is wrought, it is sculptured —
it is not yet a god ; lo, it is soldered, it is built
together — it is set up, and even yet it is not a
god ; lo, it is adorned, it is consecrated, it is
prayed to — then at length it is a god, when
man has chosen it to be so, and for the purpose
has dedicated it.


YET A TRUE GOD HAS

TING. THENCE OCTAVIUS CRITICISES THE IM.A.GES

AND SHRINES OF THE GODS.

" It is needless to go through each individual
case, and to develope the entire series of that
race! since in its first parents their mortality is
proved, and must have flowed down into the !
rest by the very law of their succession, unless
perhaps you fancy that they were gods after
death ; as by the perjury of Proculus, Romulus
became a god; and by the good-will of the
Mauritanians, Juba is a god ; and other kings
are divine who are consecrated, not in the faith
of their divinity, but in honour of the power that
they exercised. Moreover, this name is ascribed
to those who are unwilling to bear it. They
desire to persevere in their human condition.
They fear that they may be made gods; al-
though they are already old men, they do not
wish it. Therefore neither are gods made from
dead people, since a god cannot die; nor of
people that are born, since everything which is
born dies. But that is divine which has neither
rising nor setting. For why, if they were born,
are they not born in the present day also ? —
unless, perchance, Jupiter has already grown
old, and child-bearing has failed in Juno, and

Minerva has grown grey before she has borne

children. Or has that process of generation | ^^^ tliinks that he ought to know God before
ceased, for the reason that no assent is any j^g worships Him; desiring without considera-
longer yielded to fables of this kind? Besides, ^-^^ ^^ ^l^^y ^j^^jj. ancestors, choosing rather to
if the gods could create,' they could not perish : i^gcome an addition to the error of others, than
we should have more gods than all men together ; ^^ ^^^^^^ themselves ; in that they know nothing
so that now, neither would the heaven contain ^^ ^^,^^^^ ^j^^y fg^j._ ^p^us avarice has been con
them, nor the air receive them, nor the earth
bear them. Whence it is manifest, that those
were men whom we both read of as having been
born, and know to have died. Who therefore
doubts that the common people pray to and
publicly worship the consecrated images of these
men ; in that the belief and mind of the ignorant
is deceived by the perfection of art, is blinded
by the glitter of gold, is dimmed with the shining
of silver and the whiteness of ivory ? But if any
one were to present to his mind with what in-
struments and with what machinery every image
is formed, he would blush that he had feared
matter, treated after his fancy by the artificer to
make a god.^ For a god of wood, a portion
])erhaps of a pile, or of an unlucky log, is hung
up, is cut, is hewn, is planed ; and a god of
brass or of silver, often from an impure vessel,
as was done by the Egyptian king,^ is fused, is
beaten with hammers and forged on anvils ; and
the god of stone is cut, is sculptured, and is


CHAP. XXIV. ARGUMENT : HE BRIEFLY SHOWS,

MOREOVER, WHAT RIDICULOUS, OBSCENE, AND
CRUEL RITES WERE OBSERVED IN CELEBRATING
THE MYSTERIES OF CERTAIN GODS.

" How much more truly do dumb animals
naturally judge concerning your gods? Mice,
swallows, kites, know that they have no feeling :
they gnaw them, they trample on them, they sit
upon them ; and unless you drive them off, they
build their nests in the very mouth of your god.
Spiders, indeed, weave their webs over his face,
and suspend their threads from his very head.
You wipe, cleanse, scrape, and you protect and
fear those whom you make ; while not one of


'" Be created " is a more probable reading. .

2 Otherwise, " that he had rashly been so deceived by the artificer
I the material, as to make a god."

3 [Footbaths. See vol. ii., Theophiliis, p. 92, and Athetiagoras,


secrated in gold and silver; thus the form of
empty statues has been established; thus has
arisen Roman superstition. And if you recon-
sider the rites of these gods, how many things
are laughable, and how many also pitiable !
Naked people run about in the raw winter;
some walk bonneted, and carry around old
bucklers, or beat drums, or lead their gods
a-begging through the streets. Some fanes it
is permitted to approach once a year, some it is
forbidden to visit at all. There is one place
where a man may not go, and there are some
that are sacred from women : it is a crime need-
ing atonement for a slave even to be present
at some ceremonies. Some sacred places are
crowned by a woman having one husband, some
by a woman with many ; and she who can reckon
up most adulteries is sought after with most re-
ligious zeal. What ! would not a man who makes
libations of his own blood, and supplicates (his
god) by his own wounds, be better if he were
altogether profane, than religious in such a way
as this? And he whose shameful parts are cut
off, how greatly does he wrong God in seeking
to propitiate Him in this manner ! since, if God


i88


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


wished for eunuchs, He could bring them as
such into existence, and would not make them
so afterwards. Who does not perceive that
people of unsound mind, and of weak and de-
graded apprehension, are foolish in these things,
and that the very multitude of those who err
affords to each of them mutual patronage ? Here
the defence of the general madness is the multi-
tude of the mad people.

CHAP. XXV. — argument: then he shows that
c^ciLius had been wrong in asserting that

the ROMANS HAD GAINED THEIR POWER OVER
THE WHOLE WORLD BY MEANS OF THE DUE OB-
SERVANCE OF SUPERSTITIONS OF THIS KIND.
RATHER THE ROMANS IN THEIR ORIGIN WERE
COLLECTED BY CRIME, AND GREW BY THE TER-
RORS OF THEIR FEROCITY. AND THEREFORE THE
ROMANS WERE NOT SO GREAT BECAUSE THEY
WERE RELIGIOUS, BUT BECAUSE THEY WERE SAC-
RILEGIOUS WITH IMPUNITY.

"Nevertheless, you will say that that very
superstition itself gave, increased, and estab-
lished their empire for the Romans, since they
prevailed not so much by their valour as by
their religion and piety. Doubdess the illustri-
ous and noble justice of the Romans had its
beginning from the very cradle of the growing
empire. Did they not in their origin, when
gathered together and fortified by crime, grow
by the terror of their own fierceness? P'or the
first people were assembled together as to an
asylum. Abandoned people, profligate, incest-
uous, assassins, traitors, had flocked together ;
and in order that Romulus himself, their com-
mander and governor, might excel his people in
guilt, he committed fratricide.' These are the
first auspices of the religious state ! By and by
they carried off", violated, and ruined foreign
virgins, already betrothed, already destined for
husbands, and even some young women from
their marriage vows — a thing unexampled ^ —
and then engaged in war with their parents, that
is, with their fathers-in-law, and shed the blood
of their kindred. What more irreligious, what
more audacious, what could be safer than the
very confidence of crime ? Now, to drive their
neighbours from the land, to overthrow the
nearest cities, with their temples and altars, to
drive them into captivity, to grow up by the
losses of others and by their own crimes, is
the course of training common to the rest of the
kings and the latest leaders with Romulus.
Thus, whatever the Romans hold, cultivate, pos-
sess, is the spoil of their audacity. All their
temples are built from the spoils of violence,
that is, from the ruins of cities, from the spoils


of the gods, from the murders of priests. This
is to insult and scorn, to yield to conquered
religions, to adore them when captive, after
having vanquished them. For to adore what
you have taken by force, is to consecrate sacri-
lege, not divinities. ' As often, therefore, as the
Romans triumphed, so often they were polluted ;
and as many trophies as they gained from the
nations, so many spoils did they take from the
gods. Therefore the Romans were not so great
because they were religious, but because they
were sacrilegious with impunity. For neither
were they able in the wars themselves to have
the help of the gods against whom they took up
arms ; and they began to worship those when
they were triumphed over, whom they had pre-
viously challenged. But what avail such gods
as those on behalf of the Romans, who had had
no power on behalf of their own worshippers
against the Roman arms? For we know the
indigenous gods of the Romans — Romulus,
Picus, Tiberinus, and Consus, and Pilumnus,
and Picumnus. Tatius both discovered and
worshipped Cloacina ; Hostilius, Fear and Pal-
lor. Subsequently Fever was dedicated by I
know not whom : such was the superstition that
nourished that city, — diseases and ill states of
health. Assuredly also Acca Laurentia, and
Flora, infamous harlots, must be reckoned among
the diseases 3 and the gods of the Romans.
Such as these doubtless enlarged the dominion
of the Romans, in opposition to others who were
worshipped by the nations : for against their own
people neither did the Thracian Mars, nor the
Cretan Jupiter, nor Juno, now of Argos, now
of Samos, now of Carthage, nor Diana of Tau-
ris, nor the Idaean Mother, nor those Egyptian
— not deities, but monstrosities — assist them ;
unless perchance among the Romans the chas-
tity of virgins was greater, or the religion of the
priests more holy : though absolutely among very
many of the virgins unchastity was punished, in
that they, doubtless without the knowledge of
Vesta, had intercourse too carelessly with men ;
and for the rest their impunity arose not from
the better protection of their chastity, but from
the better fortune of their immodesty. And
where are adulteries better arranged b}' the
priests than among the very altars and shrines?
where are more panderings debated, or more
acts of violence concerted ? Finally, burning lust
is more frequently gratified in the little chambers
of the keepers of the temple, than in the brothels
themselves. And still, long before the Romans,
by the ordering of God, the Assyrians held
dominion, the Medes, the Persians, the Greeks
also, and the Egyptians, although they had not
any Pontiffs, nor Arvales, nor Salii, nor Vestals,


Parricidium.

Virg., ^neid, viii. 635.


Some read " probra" for " morbos," scil. " reproaches.'


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


189


nor Augurs, nor chickens shut up in a coop, by
\\liose feeding or abstinence the highest con-
cerns of the state were to be governed.

CHAP. XXVI. — ARGUMENT : THE WEAPON THAT
C.tCILIUS HAD SLIGHTLY BRANDISHED AGAINST
HIM, TAKEN FROM THE AUSPICES AND AUGURIES
OF BIRDS, OCTAVIUS RETORTS BY INSTANCING
THE CASES OF REGULUS, MANCINUS, PAULUS, AND
CESAR. AND HE SHOWS BY OTHER EXAMPLES,
THAT THE ARGUMENT FROM THE ORACLES IS OF
NO GREATER FORCE THAN THE OTHERS.

" And now I come to those Roman auspices
and auguries which you have collected with
extreme pains, and have borne testimony that
thcv were both neglected with ill consequences,
and observed with good fortune. Certainly
I Clodius, and Flaminius, and Junius lost their
I armies on this account, because they did not
' judge it well to wait for the very solemn omen
1 given by the greedy pecking of the chickens.
' But what of Regulus ? Did he not observe the
auguries, and was taken captive? Mancinus
maintained his religious duty, and was sent under
the yoke, and was given up. Paulus also had
greedy chickens at Cann«, yet he was over-
throwii with the greater part of the republic'
Caius Caesar despised the auguries and auspices
that resisted his making his voyage into Africa
before the winter, and thus the more easily he
both sailed and conquered. But what and how
much shall I go on to say about oracles ? After
his death Amphiaraus answered as to things to
come, though he knew not (while living) that
he should be betrayed by his wife on account of
a bracelet. The blind Tiresias saw the future,
although he did not see the present. Ennius
invented the replies of the Pythian Apollo con-
cerning Pyrrhus, although Apollo had already
ceased to make verses ; and that cautious and
ambiguous oracle of his, failed just at the time
when men began to be at once more cultivated
and less credulous. And Demosthenes, because
he knew that the answers were feigned, com-
plained that the Pythia philippized. But some-
times, it is true, even auspices or oracles have
touched the truth. Although among many false-
hoods chance might appear as if it imitated fore-
thought ; yet I will approach the very source of
error and perverseness, whence all that obscurity
has flowed, and both dig into it more deeply,
and lay it open more manifestly. There are
some insincere and vagrant spirits degraded from
their heavenly vigour by earthly stains and lusts.
Now these spirits, after having lost the simplicity
of their nature by being weighed down and
immersed in vices, for a solace of their calamity,


cease not, now that they are ruined themselves,
to ruin others ; and being depraved themselves,
to infuse into others the error of their depravity ;
and being themselves alienated from God, to
separate others from God by the introduction
of degraded superstitions. The poets know
that those spirits are demons ; the philosophers
discourse of them ; Socrates knew it, who, at
the nod and decision of a demon that was at his
side, either declined or undertook affairs. The
Magi, also, not only know that there are demons,
but, moreover, whatever miracle they affect to
perform, do it by means of demons ; by their
aspirations and communications they show their
wondrous tricks, making either those things ap-
pear which are not, or those things not to appear
which are. Of those magicians, the first both
in eloquence and in deed, Sosthenes,^ not only
describes the true God with fitting majesty, but
the angels that are the ministers and messengers
of God, even the true God. And he knew that
it enhanced His veneration, that in awe of the
very nod and glance of their Lord they should
tremble. The same man also declared that
demons were earthly, wandering, hostile to
humanity. What said Plato,^ who believed that
it was a hard thing to find out God ? Does not
he also, without hesitation, tell of both angels
and demons? And in his Symposium also,
does not he endeavour to explain the nature of
demons? For he will have it to be a substance
between mortal and immortal — that is, mediate
between body and spirit, compounded by a
mingling of earthly weight and heavenly light-
ness ; whence also he warns us of the desire of
love,'* and he says that it is moulded and glides into
the human breast, and stirs the senses, and moulds
the affections, and infuses the ardour of lust.

CHAP. XXVII. ARGUMENT: RECAPITULATION.

DOUBTLESS HERE IS A SOURCE OF ERROR :
DEMONS LURK UNDER THE STATUES AND IM-
AGES, THEY HAUNT THE FANES, THEY ANIMATE
THE FIBRES OF THE ENTRAILS, DIRECT THE
FLIGHTS OF BIRDS, GOVERN THE LOTS, POUR
FORTH ORACLES INVOLVED IN FALSE RESPONSES.
THESE THINGS NOT FROM GOD ; BUT THEY ARE
CONSTRAINED TO CONFESS WHEN THEY ARE AD-
JURED IN THE NAME OF THE TRUE GOD, AND ARE
DRIVEN FROM THE POSSESSED BODIES. HENCE
THEY FLEE HASTILY FROM THE NEIGHBOURHOOD
OF CHRISTIANS, AND STIR UP A HATRED AGAINST
THEM IN THE MINDS OF THE GENTILES WHO BEGIN
TO HATE THEM BEFORE THEY KNOW THEM.

" These impure spirits, therefore — the de-
mons — as is shown by the Magi, by the philos-


it is shrewdly conjectured that the passage was
I written, " cnm majore R. P. parte — " with the greater part of the


' ReipubhccE; bu
itten, " ctim major
Roman people," and the mistake made by the transcriber of the Ms.


2 Otherwise Hostanes.

3 [Octaviusand Minucius had but one mind (see cap. I. SHpra),
and both were philosophers of the Attic Academy reflecting Cicero.
See my remarks on Atlienagoras, vol. ii. p. 126, this series.]

< According to some editors, " warns us that the desire of love is
received."


190


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


ophers, and by Plato, consecrated under statues
and images, lurk there, and by their afflatus
attain the authority as of a present deity ; while
in the meantime they are breathed into the
prophets, while they dwell in the shrines, while
sometimes they animate the fibres of the entrails,
control the flights of birds, direct the lots, are
the cause of oracles involved in many falsehoods.
For they are both deceived, and they deceive ;
inasmuch as they are both ignorant of the simple
truth, and for their own ruin they confess not
that which they know. Thus they weigh men
downwards from heaven, and call them away
from the true God to material things : they dis-
turb the life, render all men ' unquiet ; creeping
also secretly into human bodies, with subtlety,
as being spirits, they feign diseases, alarm the
minds, wrench about the limbs ; that they may
constrain men to worship them, being gorged
with the fumes of altars or the sacrifices of cat-
tle, that, by remitting what they had bound, they
may seem to have cured it. These raging ma-
niacs also, whom you see rush about in public,
are moreover themselves prophets without a
temple ; thus they rage, thus they rave, thus
they are whirled around. In them also there is
a like instigation of the demon, but there is a
dissimilar occasion for their madness. From
the same causes also arise those things which
were spoken of a little time ago by you, that
Jupiter demanded the restoration of his games
in a dream, that the Castors appeared with
horses, and that a small ship was following the
leading of the matron's girdle. A great many,
even some of your own people, know all those
things that the demons themselves confess con-
cerning themselves, as often as they are driven
by us from bodies by the torments of our words
and by the fires of our prayers. Saturn himself,
and Serapis, and Jupiter, and whatever demons
you worship, overcome by pain, speak out what
they are ; and assuredly they do not lie to their
own discredit, especially when any of you are
standing by. Since they themselves are the wit-
nesses that they are demons, believe them when
they confess the truth of themselves ; for when
abjured by the only and true God, unwillingly
the wretched beings shudder in ^ their bodies,
and either at once leap forth, or vanish by
degrees, as the faith of the sufferer assists or the
grace of the healer inspires. Thus they fly from
Christians when near at hand, whom at a dis-
tance they harassed by your means in their assem-
blies. And thus, introduced into the minds of
the ignorant, they secretly sow there a hatred
of us by means of fear. For it is natural both
to hate one whom you fear, and to injure one


Some read " slumbers" for " all men.'
" Cling to " is another reading.


whom you have feared, if you can. Thus they
take possession of the minds and obstruct the
hearts, that men may begin to hate us before
they know us ; lest, if known, they should either
imitate us, or not be able to condemn us.

CHAP. XXVIII. ARGUMENT : NOR IS IT ONLY

HATRED THAT THEY AROUSE AGAINST THE
CHRISTIANS, BUT THEY CHARGE AGAINST THEM
HORRID CRIMES, WHICH UP TO THIS TIME HAVE
BEEN PROVED BY NOBODY. THIS IS THE WORK
OF DEMONS. FOR BY THEM A FALSE REPORT
IS BOTH SET ON FOOT AND PROPAGATED. THE
CHRISTIANS ARE FALSELY ACCUSED OF SACRI-
LEGE, OF INCEST, OF ADULTERY, OF PARRICIDE J
AND, MOREOVER, IT IS CERTAIN AND TRUE THAT
THE VERY SAME, CRIMES, OR CRIMES LIKE TO
OR GREATER THAN THESE, ARE IN FACT COM-
MUTED BY THE GENTILES THEMSELVES.

" But how unjust it is,3 to form a judgment
on things unknown and unexamined, as you do !
Believe us ourselves when penitent, for we also
were the same as you, and formerly, while yet
blind and obtuse, thought the same things as
you ; to wit, that the Christians worshipped mon-
sters, devoured infants, mingled in incestuous
banquets. And we did not perceive that such
fables as these were always set afloat by those
(newsmongers), and were never either inquired
into nor proved ; and that in so long a time no
one had appeared to betray (their doings), to
obtain not only pardon for their crime, but also
favour for its discovery : moreover, that it was
to this extent not evil, that a Christian, when
accused, neither blushed nor feared, and that he
only repented that he had not been one before.
We, however, when we undertook to defend and
protect some sacrilegious and incestuous persons,
and even parricides, did not think that these
(Christians) were to be heard at all. Some-
times even, when we affected to pity them, we
were more cruelly violent against them, so as to
torture them ■♦ when they confessed, that they
might deny, to wit, that they might not perish ;
making use of a perverse inquisition against
them, not to elicit the truth, but to compel a
falsehood. And if any one, by reason of greater
weakness, overcome with suffering, and con-
quered, should deny that he was a Christian, we
showed favour to him, as if by forswearing that
name he had at once atoned for all his deeds
by that simple denial. Do not you acknowledge
that we felt and did the same as you feel and do ?
when, if reason and not the instigation of a de-
mon were to judge, they should rather have been
pressed not to disavow themselves Christians,
but to confess themselves guilty of incests, of


3 Otherwise read, " But how ^reat a fault it is."

4 " To urge them " is the reading in some text;.


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


191


abominations, of sacred rites polluted, of infants
immolated. For with these and such as these 1
stories, did those same demons fill up the ears
of the ignorant against us, to the horror of their j
execration. Nor yet was it wonderful, since the |
common report of men,' which is always fed by
the scattering of falsehoods, is wasted away when
the truth is brought to light. Thus this is the
business of demons, for by them false rumours
are both sown and cherished. Thence arises
what you say that you hear, that an ass's head is
esteemed among us a divine thing. Who is
such a fool as to worship this ? \Vho is so much
more foolish as to believe that it is an object of
worship ? unless that you even consecrate whole
asses in your stables, together with your Epona,^
and religiously devour 3 those same asses with
Isis. Also you offer up and worship the heads i
of oxen and of wethers, and you dedicate gods
mingled also of a goat and a man, and gods with
the faces of dogs and lions. Do you not adore
and feed Apis the ox, with the Egyptians ? And
you do not condemn their sacred rites instituted
in honour of serpents, and crocodiles, and other
beasts, and birds, and fishes, of which if any
one were to kill one of these gods, he is even
punished with death. These same Egyptians,
together with very many of you, are not more
afraid of Isis than they are of the pungency of
onions, nor of Serapis more than they tremble
at the basest noises produced by the foulness of
their bodies. He also who fables against us
about our adoration of the members of the
priest, tries to confer upon us what belongs real-
ly to himself. (Ista enim impudicitise eorum
forsitan sacra sint, apud quos sexus omnis mem-
bris omnibus prostat, apud quos tota impudicitia
vocatur urbanitas ; qui scortorum licentise invi-
dent, qui medios viros lambunt, libidinoso ore
inguinibus inheerescunt, homines malse linguse
etiam si tacerent, quos prius t^descit impudi-
citi^e suae quam pudescit.) Abomination ! they
suffer on themselves such evil deeds, as no age
is so effeminate as to be able to bear, and no
slavery so cruel as to be compelled to endure.

CHAP. XXIX. .-ARGUMENT : NOR IS IT MORE TRUE

THAT A MAN FASTENED TO A CROSS ON ACCOUNT
OF HIS CRIMES IS WORSHIPPED BY CHRISTIANS,
FOR THEY BELIEVE NOT ONLY TH.\T HE WAS
INNOCENT, BUT WITH REASON THAT HE WAS GOD.
BUT, ON THE OTHER HAND, THE HEATHENS IN-
VOKE THE DIVINE POWERS OF KINGS RAISED INTO
GODS BY THEMSELVES ; THEY PRAY TO IMAGES,
AND BESEECH THEIR GENII.

"These, and such as these infamous things,
we are not at liberty even to hear ; it is even
disgraceful with any more words to defend our-


' " Of all men "' is another reading.

^ Otherwise, " Hippona."

3 Otherwise, " devote," and other readings.


selves from such charges. For you pretend that
those things are done by chaste and modest per-
sons, which we should not believe to be done at
all, unless you proved that they were true con-
cerning yourselves. For in that you attribute to
our religion the worship of a criminal and his
cross,4 you wander far from the neighbourhood
of the truth, in thinking either that a criminal
deserved, or that an earthly being was able, to be
believed God. Miserable indeed is that man
whose whole hope is dependent on mortal man,
for all his help is put an end to with the ex-
tinction of the man. 5 The Egyptians certainly
choose out a man for theinselves whom they
may worship ; him alone they propitiate ; him
they consult about all things ; to him they slaugh-
ter victims • and he who to others is a god, to
himself is certainly a man whether he will or no,
for he does not deceive his own consciousness, if
he deceives that of others. Moreover, a false
flattery disgracefully caresses princes and kings,
not as great and chosen men, as is just, but as
gods ; whereas honour is more truly rendered to
an illustrious man, and love is more pleasantly
given to a very good man. Thus they invoke
their deity, they supplicate their images, they
implore their Genius, that is, their demon ; and
it is safer to swear falsely by the genius of Jupi-
ter than by that of a king. Crosses, moreover,
we neither worship nor wish for.^ You, indeed,
who consecrate gods of wood, adore wooden
crosses perhaps as parts of your gods. For your
very standards, as well as your banners, and flags
of your camp, what else are they but crosses
gilded and adorned? Your victorious trophies
not only imitate the appearance of a simple
cross, but also that of a man affixed to it. We
assuredly see the sign of a cross,? naturally, in
the ship when it is carried along with swelling sails,
when it glides forward with expanded oars ; and
when the military yoke is lifted up, it is the sign
of a cross ; and when a man adores God with a
pure mind, with hands outstretched. Thus the sign
of the cross either is sustained by a natural reason,
or your own religion is formed with respect to it.

CHAP. XXX. — ARGUMENT : THE STORY ABOUT
CHRISTIANS DRINKING THE BLOOD OF AN INFANT
THAT THEY HAVE MURDERED, IS a BAREFACED
CALUMNY. BUT THE GENTILES, BOTH CRUELLY
EXPOSE THEIR CHILDREN NEWLY BORN, AND BE-
FORE THEY ARE BORN DESTROY THEM BY A
CRUEL ABORTION. CHRISTIANS ARE NEIIHER AL-
LOWED TO SEE NOR TO HEAR OF MANSLAUGHTER.

"And now I should wish to meet him who
says or believes that we are initiated by the


■* [A reverent allusion to the Crucified, believed in and worshipped
as God. J

5 [Jer. xvii 5-7]

6 [See Justin Martyr's Dialosue ivitk Tryflw, chap. Ixxxix. et
seqq. vol i. p. 244. S |

7 [See Reeves's Apolo^hs (ut supra), vol. u. p. 144, note. b.J


192


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


slaughter and blood of an infant. Think you
that it can be possible for so tender, so little a
body to receive those fatal wounds ; for any one
to shed, pour forth, and drain that new blood of
a youngling, and of a man scarcely come into
existence ? No one can believe this, except one
who can dare to do it. And I see that you at
one time expose your begotten children to wild
beasts and to birds ; at another, that you crush
them when strangled with a miserable kind of
death. There are some women who, by drink-
ing medical preparations,' extinguish the source
of the future man in their very bowels, and thus
commit a parricide before they bring forth.
And these things assuredly come down from the
teaching of your gods. For Saturn did not ex-
pose his children, but devoured them. With
reason were infants sacrificed to him by parents
in some parts of Africa, caresses and kisses re-
pressing their crying, that a weeping victim
might not be sacrificed. Moreover, among the
Tauri of Pontus, and to the Egyptian Busiris, it
was a sacred rite to immolate their guests, and
for the Galli to slaughter to Mercury human, or
rather inhuman, sacrifices. The Roman sacri-
ficers buried living a Greek man and a Greek
woman, a Gallic man and a Gallic woman ; and
to this day, Jupiter Latiaris is worshipped by
them with murder ; and, what is worthy of the
son of Saturn, he is gorged with the blood of an
evil and criminal man. I believe that he him-
self taught Catiline to conspire under a compact
of blood, and Bellona to steep her sacred rites
with a draught of human gore, and taught men
to heal epilepsy with the blood of a man, that
is, with a worse disease. They also are not un-
like to him who devour the wild beasts from the
arena, besmeared and stained with blood, or fat-
tened with the limbs or the entrails of men. To
us it is not lawful either to see or to hear of
homicide ; and so much do we shrink from
human blood, that we do not use the blood even
of eatable animals in our food.

CHAP. XXXI. — ARGUMENT: THE CHARGE OF OUR
ENTERTAINMENTS BEING POLLUTED WITH IN-
CEST, IS ENTIRELY OPPOSED TO ALL PROBA-
BILITY, WHILE IT IS PLAIN THAT GENTILES ARE
ACTUALLY GUILIT OF INCEST. THE BANQUETS
OF CHRISTIANS ARE NOT ONLY MODEST, BUT
TEMPERATE. IN FACT, INCESTUOUS LUST IS SO
UNHEARD OF, THAT WITH MANY EVEN THE
MODEST ASSOCIATION OF THE SEXES GIVES RISE
TO A BLUSH.

" And of the incestuous banqueting, the plot-
ting of demons has falsely devised an enormous
fable against us, to stain the glory of our modesty,
by the loathing excited by an outrageous infamy.


medicaments and drinks.


that before inquiring into the truth it might turn
men away from us by the terror of an abomina-
ble charge. It was thus your own Fronto ' acted
in this respect : he did not produce testimony,
as one who alleged a charge, but he scattered
reproaches as a rhetorician. For these things
have rather originated from your own nations.
Among the Persians, a promiscuous association
between sons and mothers is allowed. Mar-
riages with sisters are legitimate among the
Egyptians and in Athens. Your records and
your tragedies, which you both read and hear
with pleasure, glory in incests : thus also you
worship incestuous gods, who have intercourse
with mothers, with daughters, with sisters. With
reason, therefore, is incest frequently detected
among you, and is continually" permitted. Mis-
erable men, you may even, without knowing it,
rush into what is unlawful : since you scatter
your lusts promiscuously, since you everywhere
beget children, since you frequently expose even
those who are born at home to the mercy of
others, it is inevitable that you must come back
to your own children, and stray to your own
offspring. Thus you continue the story of in-
cest, even although you have no consciousness
of your crime. But we maintain our modesty
not in appearance, but in our heart we gladly
abide by the bond of a single marriage ; in the
desire of procreating, we know either one wife,
or none at all. We practise sharing in banquets,
which are not only modest, but also sober : for
we do not indulge in entertainments nor prolong
our feasts with wine ; but we temper our joyous-
ness with gravity, with chaste discourse, and with
body even more chaste (divers of us unviolated)
enjoy rather than make a boast of a perpetual
virginity of a body. So far, in fact, are they
from indulging in incestuous desire, that with
some even the (idea of a) modest intercourse
of the sexes causes a blush. Neither do we at
once stand on the level of the lowest of the peo-
ple, if we refuse your honours and purple robes ;
and we are not fastidious, if we all have a dis-
cernment of one good, but are assembled to-
gether with the same quietness with which we
live as individuals ; and we are not garrulous in
corners, although you either blush or are afraid
to hear us in public. And that day by day the
number of us is increased, is not a ground for a
charge of error, but is a testimony which claims
praise ; for, in a fair mode of life, our actual
number both continues and abides undimin-
ished, and strangers increase it. Thus, in short,
we do not distinguish our people by some small
bodily mark, as you suppose, but easily enough
by the sign of innocency and modesty. Thus


2 [Fronto is called "our Cirtensian " in cap. ix. supra; and
this suggests that the Octavius was probably written in Cirta, circa
A.D. 210. See supra, p. 178.]


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


19:


we love one another, to your regret, with a mu-
tual love, because we do not know how to hate.
Thus we call one another, to your envy, brethren,
as being men born of one God and Parent, and
companions in faith, and as fellow-heirs in hope.
You, however, do not recognise one another, and
you are cruel in your mutual hatreds ; nor do
you acknowledge one another as brethren, unless
indeed for the purpose of fratricide.

CHAP. XXXII. ARGUMENT : NOR CAN IT BE SAID

THAT THE CHRISTIANS CONCEAL WHAT THEY
WORSHIP BECAUSE THEY HAVE NO TEMPLES AND
NO ALTARS, INASMUCH AS THEY ARE PERSUADED
THAT GOD CAN BE CIRCUMSCRIBED BY NO TEM-
PLE, AND THAT NO LIKENESS OF HIM CAN BE
MADE. BUT HE IS EVERYWHERE PRESENT, SEES
ALL THINGS, EVEN THE MOST SECRET THOUGHTS
OF OUR hearts; AND WE LIVE NEAR TO HIM,
AND IN HIS PROTECTION.

" But do you think that we conceal what we
worship, if we have not temples and altars ? And
yet what image of God shall I make, since, if
you think rightly, man himself is the image of
God? What temple shall I build to Him, when
this whole world fashioned by His work cannot
receive Him? And when I, a man, dwell far
and wide, shall I shut up the might of so great
majesty within one little building? Were it not
better that He should be dedicated in our mind,
consecrated in our inmost heart? Shall I offer
victims and sacrifices to the Lord, such as He
has produced for my use, that I should throw
back to Him His own gift? It is ungrateful
when the victim fit for sacrifice is a good dispo-
sition, and a pure mind, and a sincere judg-
ment.' Therefore he who cultivates innocence
supplicates God ; he who cultivates justice makes
offerings to God ; he who abstains from fraudu-
lent practices propitiates God ; he who snatches
man from danger slaughters the most acceptable
victim. These are our sacrifices, these are our
rites of God's worship ; thus, among us, he who
is most just is he who is most religious. But
certainly the God whom we worship we neither
show nor see. Verily for this reason we believe
Him to be God, that we can be conscious of
Him, but cannot see Him ; for in His works,
and in all the movements of the world, we be-
hold His power ever present when He thunders,
lightens, darts His bolts, or when He makes all
bright again. Nor should you wonder if you do
not see God. By the wind and by the blasts of
the storm all things are driven on and shaken,
are agitated, and yet neither wind nor tempest
comes under our eyesight. Thus we cannot
look upon the sun, which is the cause of seeing
to all creatures : the pupil of the eye is with-


' According to some editions, " conscience."


drawn from his rays, the gaze of the beholder is
dimmed ; and if you look too long, all power of
sight is extinguished. W'hat ! can you sustain
the Architect of the sun Himself, the very source
of light, when you turn yourself away from His
lightnings, and hide yourself from His thunder-
bolts ? Do you wish to see God with your car-
nal eyes, when you are neither able to behold
nor to grasp your own soul itself, by which you
are enlivened and speak? But, moreover, it is
said that God is ignorant of man's doings ; and
being established in heaven. He can neither sur-
vey all nor know individuals. Thou errest, O
man, and art deceived ; for from where is God
afar off, when all things heavenly and earthly,
and which' are beyond this province of the uni-
verse, are known to God, are full of God?
Everywhere He is not only very near to us, but
He is infused into us. Therefore once more
look upon the sun : it is fixed fast in the heaven,
yet it is diffused over all lands equally ; present
everywhere, it is associated and mingled with all
things ; its brightness is never violated. How
much more God, who has made all things, and
looks upon all things, from whom there can be
nothing secret, is present in the darkness, is
present in our thoughts, as if in the deep dark-
ness. Not only do we act in Him, but also, I
had almost said, we live with Hira.

CHAP. XXXIII. ARGUMENT : THAT EVEN IF GOD

BE SAID TO HAVE NOTHING AVAILED THE JEWS,
CERTAINLY THE WRITERS OF THE JEWISH ANNALS
ARE THE MOST SUFFICIENT WITNESSES THAT THEY
FORSOOK GOD BEFORE THEY WERE FORSAKEN BY
HIM.

"Neither let us flatter ourselves concerning
our multitude. We seem many to ourselves,
but to God we are very few. We distinguish
peoples and nations ; to God this whole world
is one family. Kings only know all the matters
of their kingdom by the ministrations of their
servants : God has no need of information. We
not only live in His eyes, but also in His bosom.
But // is objected that it availed the Jews nothing
that they themselves worshipped the one God
with altars and temples, with the greatest super-
stition. You are guilty of ignorance if you are
recalling later events while you are forgetful or
unconscious of former ones. For they them-
selves also, as long as they worshipped our
God — and He is the same God of all — with
chastity, innocency, and religion, as long as they
obeyed His wholesome precepts, from a few be-
came innumerable, from poor became rich, from
being servants became kings • a few overwhelmed
many ; unarmed men overwhelmed armed ones
as they fled from them, following them up by
God's command, and with the elements striving
on their behalf. Carefully read over their Scrip-


194


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


tures, or if you are better pleased with the Ro-
man writings/ inquire concerning the Jews in
the books (to say nothing of ancient documents)
of Flavius Josephus^ or Antoninus Julianus,
and you shall know that by their wickedness
they deserved this fortune, and that nothing hap-
pened which had not before been predicted to
them, if they should persevere in their obstinacy.
Therefore you will understand that they forsook
before they were forsaken, and that they were
not, as you impiously say, taken captive with
their God, but they were given up by God as
deserters from His discipline.

i

\ CHAP. XXXIV. — ARGUMENT : MOREOVER, IT IS NOT

AT ALL TO BE WONDERED AT IF THIS WORLD IS

TO BE CONSUMED BY FIRE, SINCE EVERYTHING

WHICH HAS A BEGINNING HAS ALSO AN END.

AND THE ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS ARE NOT AVERSE

' FROM THE OPINION OF THE PROBABLE BURNING

] UP OF THE WORLD. YET IT IS EVIDENT THAT

■> GOD, HAVING MADE MAN FROM NOTHING, CAN

; RAISE HIM UP FROM DEATH INTO LIFE. AND ALL

NATURE SUGGESTS A FUTURE RESURRECTION.

" Further, in respect of the burning up of the
Avorld, it is a vulgar error not to believe either
that fire will fall upon it in an unforeseen way,
or that the world will be destroyed by it.^ For
who of wise men doubts, who is ignorant, that
all things which have had a beginning perish, all
things which are made come to an end ? The
heaven also, with all things which are contained
in heaven, will cease even as it began. The
nourishment of the seas by the sweet waters
of the springs shall pass away into the power of
fire."* The Stoics have a constant belief that,
the moisture being dried up, all this world will
take fire ; and the Epicureans have the very
same opinion concerning the conflagration of
the elements and the destruction of the world.
Plato speaks, saying that parts of the world are
now inundated, and are now burnt up by alter-
nate changes ; and although he says that the
world itself is constructed perpetual and indisso-
luble, yet he adds that to God Himself, the only
artificer,5 it is both dissoluble and mortal. Thus
it is no wonder if that mass be destroyed by
Him by whom it was reared. You observe that
philosophers dispute of the same things that we
are saying, not that we are following up their
tracks, but that they, from the divine announce-


1 [Minucius is blamed for not introducing more Scripture! He
relates his friend's argument with a scoffing Pagan. ^ How could
Octavius have used the Scriptures with such an antagonist?]

2 [IVars of the JewSj b. v. cap. g, etc.]

3 This passage is very mdefinite, and probably corrupt; the mean-
ing is anything but satisfactory. The general meaning is given
freely thus: " Further, it is a vulgar error to doubt or disbelieve a
future conflagration of the world."

•t This passage is very variously read, without substantial altera-
tion of the sense.

5 Otherwise, " to God Himself alone, the artificer."


ments of the prophets, imitated the shadow of
the corrupted truth. Thus also the most illus-
trious of the wise men, Pythagoras first, and
Plato chiefly, have delivered the doctrine of res-
urrection with a corrupt and divided faith ; for
they will have it, that the bodies being dissolved,
the souls alone both abide for ever, and very
often pass into other new bodies. To these
things they add also this, by way of misrepre-
senting the truth, that the souls of men return
into cattle, birds, and beasts. Assuredly such an
opinion as that is not worthy of a philosopher's
inquiry, but of the ribaldry of a buffoon.^ But
for our argument it is sufficient, that even in this
your wise men do in some measure harmonize with
us. But who is so foolish or so brutish as to
dare to deny that man, as he could first of all be
formed by God, so can again be re-formed ; that
he is nothing after death, and that he was noth-
ing before he began to exist ; and as from noth-
ing it was possible for him to be born, so from
nothing it maybe possible for him to be restored?
Moreover, it is more difficult to begin that which
is not, than to repeat that which has been. Do
you think that, if anything is withdrawn from our
feeble eyes, it perishes to God? Every body,
whether it is dried up into dust, or is dissolved
into moisture, or is compressed into ashes, or is
attenuated into smoke, is withdrawn from us, but
it is reserved for God in the custody of the ele-
ments. Nor, as you believe, do we fear any loss
from sepulture,'' but we adopt the ancient and
better custom of burying in the earth. See,
therefore, how for our consolation all nature
suggests a future resurrection. The sun sinks
down and arises, the stars pass away and return,
the flowers die and revive again, af^ter their win-
try decay the shrubs resume their leaves, seeds
do not flourish again unless they are rotted : ^
thus the body in the sepulchre is like the trees
which in winter hide their verdure with a decep-
tive dryness. Why are you in haste for it to
revive and return, while the winter is still raw?
We must wait also for the spring-time of the
body. And I am not ignorant that many, in the
consciousness of what they deserve, rather desire
than believe that they shall be nothing after
death ; for they would prefer to be altogether
extinguished, rather than to be restored for the
purpose of punishment. And their error also is
enhanced, both by the liberty granted them in
this life, and by God's very great patience,
whose judgment, the more tardy it is, is so much
the more just.

CH.AP. XXXV. — ARGUMENT : RIGHTEOUS AND PIOUS
MEN SHALL BE REWARDED WITH NEVER-ENDING


6 This is otherwise read, " the work of the

7 SciL " by burning."

8 [i Cor. XV. 36, Job xiv. 7-15-1


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


195


FELICITY, BUT UNRIGHTEOUS MEN SHALL BE VIS-
ITED WITH ETERNAL PUNISHMENT. THE MORALS
OF CHRISTIANS ARE FAR MORE HOLY THAN THOSE
OF THE GENTILES.

"And yet men are admonished in the books
and poems of the most learned poets of that
fiery river, and of the heat flowing in manifold
turns from the Stygian marsh, — things which,
prepared for eternal torments, and known to
them by the information of demons and from
the oracles of their prophets, they have delivered
to us. And therefore among them also even
king Jupiter himself swears religiously by the
parching banks and the black abyss ; for, with
foreknowledge of the punishment destined to
him, with his worshippers, he shudders. Nor is
there either measure or termination to these tor-
ments. There the intelligent fire ' burns the
limbs and restores them, feeds on them and
nourishes them. As the fires of the thunder-
bolts strike upon "the bodies, and do not con-
sume them ; as the fires of Mount ^tna and
of Mount Vesuvius, and of burning lands every-
where, glow, but are not wasted ; so that penal
fire is not fed by the waste of those who burn,
but is nourished by the unexhausted eating away
of their bodies. But that they who know not
God are deservedly tormented as impious, as
unrighteous persons, no one except a profane
man hesitates to believe, since it is not less
wicked to be ignorant of, than to offend the
Parent of all, and the Lord of all. And although
ignorance of God is sufficient for punishment,
even as knowledge of Him is of avail for par-
don, yet if we Christians be compared with you,
although in some things our discipline is inferior,
yet we shall be found much better than you.
For you forbid, and yet commit, adulteries ; we
are born^ men only for our own wives: you.
punish crimes when committed ; with us, even
to think of crimes is to sin : you are afraid of
those who are aware of what you do ; we are
even afraid of our own conscience alone, without
which we cannot exist : finally, from your num-
bers the prison boils over ; but there is no Chris-
tian there, unless he is accused on account of
his religion, or a deserter.


CHAP. XXXVI. — ARGUMENT: FATE IS NOTHING, EX-
CEPT SO FAR AS FATE IS GOD. MAN'S MIND IS
FREE, AND THEREFORE SO IS HIS ACTION : HIS
BIRTH IS NOT BROUGHT INTO JUDGMENT. IT IS
NOT A MATTER OF INFAMY, BUT OF GLORY, THAT
CHRISTIANS ARE REPROACHED FOR THEIR POVER-


TY ; AND THE FACT THAT THEY SUFFER BODILY
EVILS IS NOT AS A PENALTY, BUT AS A DISCI-
PLINE.

" Neither let any one either take comfort from,
or apologize for what happens from fate. Let
what happens be of the disposition of fortune,
yet the mind is free ; and therefore man's doing,
not his dignity, is judged. For what else is fate
than what God has spoken ^ of each one of us?
who, since He can foresee our constitution, de-
termines also the fates for us, according to the
deserts and the qualities of individuals. Thus
in our case it is not the star under which we are
born that is punished, but the particular nature
of our disposition is blamed. And about fate
enough is said ; or if, in consideration of the
time, we have spoken too little, we shall argue
the matter at another time more abundantly ^
and more fully. But that many of us are called
poor, this is not our disgrace, but our glory ; for
as our mind is relaxed by luxury, so it is strength-
ened by frugality. And yet who can be poor if
he does not want, if he does not crave for the
possessions of others, if he is rich towards God ?
He rather is poor, who, although he has much,
desires more. Yet I will speak s according as I
feel. No one can be so poor as he is born.
Birds live without any patrimony, and day by
day the cattle are fed ; and yet these creatures
are born for us — all of which things, if we do
not lust after, we possess. Therefore, as he who
treads a road is the happier the lighter he walks,
so happier is he in this journey of life who lifts
I himself along in poverty, and does not breathe
' heavily under the burden of riches. And yet
even if we thought wealth useful to us, we should
ask it of God. Assuredly He might be able to
indulge us in some measure, whose is the whole ;
but we would rather despise riches than possess
them : ^ we desire rather innocency, we rather
entreat for patience, we prefer being good to
being prodigal ; and that we feel and suffer the
human mischiefs of the body is not punishment
— it is warfare. For fortitude is strengthened
by infirmities, and calamity is very often the
discipline of virtue ; in addition, strength both
of mind and of body grows torpid without the
exercise of labour. Therefore all your mighty
men whom you announce as an example have
flourished illustriously by their afflictions. And
thus God is neither unable to aid us, nor does
He despise us, since He is both the ruler of all
men and the lover of His own people. But in
adversity He looks into and searches out each
one ; He weighs the disposition of every indi-


' TTvp (ra)(Jpovovi' is an expression of Clemens Alexandrinus, so
that there is no need for the emendation of "rapiens" instead of


" sapiens," suggested by one editor
' " Are known as " is another re


another reading.


3 Fatus.

■* Otherwise read, " both more truly."

S Some read, " I will speak at length."

^ Probably a better reading is " strive for them.'


196


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


vidual in dangers, even to death at last ; He
investigates tlie will of man, certain that to Him
nothing can perish. Therefore, as gold by the
fires, so are we declared by critical moments.

CHAP. XXXVII. — argument: tortures most un-
justly INFLICTED FOR THE CONFESSION OF

Christ's name are spectacles worthy of

GOD. A comparison INSTITUTED BETWEEN SOME
OF THE BRAVEST OF THE HEATHENS AND THE
HOLY MARTYRS. HE DECLARES THAT CHRISTIANS
DO NOT PRESENT THEMSELVES AT PUBLIC SHOWS
AND PROCESSIONS, BECAUSE THEY KNOW THEM,
WITH THE GREATEST CERTAINTY, TO BE NO
LESS IMPIOUS THAN CRUEL.

" How beautiful is the spectacle to God Avhen
a Christian does battle with pain ; when he is
drawn up against threats, and punishments, and
tortures ; when, mocking ' the noise of death, he
treads under foot the horror of the executioner ;
when he raises up his liberty against kings and
princes, and yields to God alone, whose he is ;
when, triumphant and victorious, he tramples
upon the very man who has pronounced sentence
against him ! For he has conquered who has
obtained that for which he contends. What
soldier would not provoke peril with greater bold-
ness under the eyes of his general ? For no one
receives a reward before his trial, and yet the
general does not give what he has not : he can-
not preserve life, but he can make the warfare
glorious. But God's soldier is neither forsaken
in suffering, nor is brought to an end by death.
Thus the Christian may seem to be miserable ;
he cannot be really found to be so. You your-
selves extol unfortunate men to the skies ; Mucins
Scsevola, for instance, who, when he had failed
in his attempt against the king, would have per-
ished among the enemies unless he had sacrificed
his right hand. And how many of our people
have borne that not their right hand only, but
their whole body, should be burned — burned
up without any cries of pain, especially when
they had it in their power to be sent away ! Do
I compare men with Mucius or Aquilius, or with
Regulus ? Yet boys and young women among
us treat with contempt crosses and tortures, wild
beasts, and all the bugbears of punishments, with
the inspired ^ patience of suffering. And do you
not perceive, O wretched men, that there is no-
body who either is willing without reason to
undergo punishment, or is able without God
to bear tortures ? Unless, perhaps, the fact has
deceived you, that those who know not God
abound in riches, flourish in honours, and excel


1 " Arridens," but otherwise " arripiens," scil. "snatching at,"
suggesting possibly the idea of the martyrs chiding the delays of the
executioners,_ or provoking the rush of the wild beasts.

2 Otherwise. " unhoped-for." [This chapter has been supposed
to indicate that the work was written in a time of persecution. Faint
tokens of the same have been im.igined also, in capp. 29 and 33, supra.]


in power. Miserable men ! in this respect they
are lifted up the higher, that they may fall down
lower. For these are fattened as victims for
punishment, as sacrifices they are crowned for
the slaughter. Thus in this respect some are
lifted up to empires and dominations, that
the unrestrained exercise of power might make
a market of their spirit to the unbridled licence
that is characteristic of a ruined soul.^ For,
apart from the knowledge of God, what solid
happiness can there be, since death must come ?
Like a dream, happiness slips away before it is
grasped. Are you a king? Yet you fear as
much as you are feared ; and however you may
be surrounded with abundant followers, yet you
are alone in the presence of danger. Are you
rich ? But fortune is ill trusted ; and with a large
travelling equipage the brief journey of life is not
furnished, but burdened. Do you boast of the
fasces and the magisterial robes ? It is a vain
mistake of man, and an empty worship of dig-
nity, to glitter in purple and to be sordid in
mind. Are you elevated by nobility of birth? do
you praise your parents ? Yet we are all born
with one lot ; it is only by virtue that we are
distinguished. We therefore, who are estimated
by our character and our modesty, reasonably
abstain from evil pleasures, and from your pomps
and exhibitions, the origin of which in connec-
tion with sacred things we know, and condemn
their mischievous enticements. For in the char-
iot games who does not shudder at the madness
of the people brawling among themselves? or at
the teaching of murder in the gladiatorial games?
In the scenic games also the madness is not less,
but the debauchery is more prolonged : for now
a mimic either expounds or shows forth adul-
teries ; now a nerveless player, while he feigns
lust, suggests it ; the same actor disgraces your
gods by attributing to them adulteries, sighs,
hatreds ; the same provokes your tears with pre-
tended sufferings, with vain gestures and expres-
sions. Thus you demand murder, in fact, while
you weep at it in fiction.

CHAP. XXXVIII. ARGUMENT : CHRISTIANS ABSTAIN

FROM THINGS CONNECTED WITH IDOL SACRI-
FICES, LEST ANY ONE SHOULD THINK EITHER
THAT THEY YIELD TO DEMONS, OR THAT THEY
ARE ASHAMED OF THEIR RELIGION. THEY DO
NOT INDEED DESPISE ALL THE COLOUR AND
SCENT OF FLOWERS, FOR THEY ARE ACCUSTOMED
TO USE THEM SCATTERED ABOUT LOOSELY AND
NEGLIGENTLY, AS WELL AS TO ENTWINE THEIR
NECKS WITH GARLANDS j BUT TO CROWN THE
HEAD OF A CORPSE THEY THINK SUPERFLUOUS
AND USELESS. MOREOVER, WITH THE SAME


3 This passage is peculiar; the original is, " L^t ingenium eorum
perdita; mentis licentiae potestatis liberje nundinentur," with various
modifications of reading.


THE OCTAVIUS OF MINUCIUS FELIX.


197


TRANQUILLITY WITH WHICH THEY LIVE THEY
BURY THEIR DEAD, WAITING WITH A VERY CER-
TAIN HOPE THE CROWN OF ETERNAL FELICITY.
THEREFORE THEIR RELIGION, REJECTING ALL THE
SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GENFILES, SHOULD BE
ADOPTED AS TRUE BY ALL MEN.

" But that we despise the leavings of sacri-
fices, and the cups out of which libations have
been poured, is not a confession of fear, but an
assertion of our true liberty. For although noth-
ing which comes into existence as an inviolable
gift of God is corrupted by any agency, yet we
abstain, lest any should think either that we are
submitting to demons, to whom libation has
been made, or that we are ashamed of our reli-
gion. But who is he who doubts of our indul-
ging ourselves in spring flowers, when we gather
both the rose of spring and the lily, and whatever
else is of agreeable colour and odour among the
flowers ? For these we both use scattered loose
and free, and we twine our necks with them in
garlands. Pardon us, forsooth, that we do not
crown our heads ; we are accustomed to receive
the scent of a sweet flower in our nostrils, not
to inhale it with the back of our head or with
our hair. Nor do we crown the dead. And in
this respect I the more wonder at you, in the
way in which you apply to a lifeless person, or
to one who does not feel, a torch ; or a garland '
to one who does not smell it, when either as
blessed he does not want, or, being miserable, he
has no pleasure in, flowers. Still we adorn our
obsequies with the same tranquillity with which
we live ; and we do not bind to us a withering
garland, but we wear one living with eternal
flowers from God, since we, being both moder-
ate and secure in the liberality of our God, are
animated to the hope of future felicity by the
confidence of His present majesty. Thus we
both rise again in blessedness, and are already
living in contemplation of the future. Then let
Socrates the Athenian buffoon see to it, confess-
ing that he knew nothing, although boastful in
the testimony of a most deceitful demon ; let
Arcesilaus also, and Carneades, and Pyrrho, and
all the multitude of the Academic philosophers,
deliberate ; let Simonides also for ever put off
the decision of his opinion. We despise the
bent brows of the philosophers, whom we know
to be corrupters, and adulterers, and tyrants, and
ever eloquent against their own vices. We who ^
bear wisdom not in our dress, but in our mind,
we do not speak great things, but we live them ;
we boast that we have attained what they have
sought for with the utmost eagerness, and have
not been able to find. Why are we ungrateful?


1 The probable reading here is, " You apply to a lifeless^ person,
either if he has feeling, a torch: or, if he feels not, a garland.'"

2 " We who do not," etc., is a conjectural reading, omitting the
subsequent " we."


why do we grudge if the truth of divinity has
ripened in the age of our time ? Let us enjoy
our benefits, and let us in rectitude moderate
our judgments ; let superstition be restrained ;
let impiety be expiated ; let true religion be
preserved.

CHAP. XXXIX. ARGUMENT : WHEN OCTAVIUS HAD

FINISHED THIS ADDRESS, MINUCIUS AND C/ECIL-
lUS SATE FOR SOME TIME IN ATTENTIVE AND
SILENT WONDER. AND MINUCIUS INDEED KEPT
SILENCE IN ADMIRATION OF OCTAVIUS, SILENTLY
REVOLVING WHAT HE HAD HEARD.

When Octavius had brought his speech to a
close, for some time we were struck into silence,
and held our countenances fixed in attention ;
and as for me, I was lost in the greatness of my
admiration, that he had so adorned those things
which it is easier to feel than to say, both by
arguments and by examples, and by authorities
derived from reading ; and that he had repelled
the malevolent objectors with the very weapons
of the philosophers with which they are armed,
and had moreover shown the truth not only as
easy, but also as agreeable.

CHAP. XL. ARGUMENT : THEN C^CILIUS EXCLAIMS

THAT HE IS VANQUISHED BY OCTAVIUS ; AND
THAT, BEING NOW CONQUEROR OVER ERROR, HE
PROFESSES THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. HE POST-
PONES, HOWEVER, TILL THE MORROW HIS TRAIN-
ING IN THE FULLER BELIEF OF ITS MYSTERIES.

While, therefore, I was silendy turning over
these things in my own mind, C^ecilius broke
forth : "I congratulate as well my Octa\'ius as
myself, as much as possible on that tranquillity
in wLich we live, and I do not wait for the de-
cision. Even thus we have conquered : not
unjustly do I assume to myself the victory. For
even as he is my conqueror, so I am triumphant
over error. Therefore, in what belongs to the
substance of the question, I both confess con-
cerning providence, and I yield to God ; ^ and
I agree concerning the sincerity of the way of
life which is now mine. Yet even still some
things remain in my mind, not as resisting the
truth, but as necessary to a perfect training;*
of which on the morrow, as the sun is already
sloping to his setting, we shall inquire at length
in a more fitting and ready manner."

CHAP. XLL ARGUMENT: FINALLY, ALL ARE

PLEASED, AND JOYFULLY DEPART : C/ECILIUS,
THAT HE HAD BELIEVED ; OCTAVIUS, THAT HE
HAD conquered; AND MINUCIUS, THAT THE
FORMER HAD BELIEVED, AND THE LATTER HAD

conquered.

" But for myself," said I, " I rejoice more
fully on behalf of all of us ; because also Octa-

3 Otherwise read, " and I believe concerning God."
* [i.e., he will become a catechumen on the morrow.]


198 ELUCIDATIONS.


vius has conquered for me, in that the very great
invidiousness of judging is taken away from me.
Nor can I acknowledge by my praises the merit
of his words : the testimony both of man, and
of one man only, is weak. He has an illustri-


ous reward from God, inspired by whom he has one had behaved, and the other had conquered


pleaded, and aided by whom he has gained the
victory."

After these things we departed, glad and cheer-
ful : Caecilius, to rejoice that he had believed ;
Octavius, that he had succeeded : and I, that the


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(Editions, p. 171.)

For an interesting account of the bibliographical history of this work, see Dupin. It passed
for the Eight Book of Arnobius until a.d. 1560, and was first printed in its true character at
Heidelberg in that year, with a learned preface by Balduinus, who restored it to its true author.


IL

(The neighing of horses, note i, p. 183,)

It strikes me as singular that the Edinburgh edition, which gives a note to each of the
instances that follow, should have left me to supply this reference to the case of Darius Hystaspes.
The story is told, as will be remembered by all who have ever read it, by Herodotus, and is cer-
tainly one of the most extraordinary in history, when one reflects that a horse elected a great
monarch, and one whose life not a little affected the fortunes of mankind. A knavish groom was
indeed the engineer of this election, as often, in such events, the secret springs of history are
hidden ; but, if the story is not wholly a fable, the coincidence of thunder in the heavens is most
noteworthy. It seemed to signify the overruling of Providence, and the power of God to turn
the folly, not less than the wrath, of men, to God's praise. See Herod., book iii. cap. Ixxxvi.


III.

(From nothing, p. 194.)

From this chapter, if not from others, it had been rashly affirmed that our author imagined
that the soul perishes with the body, and is to be renewed out of nothing. The argument is
wholly ad ho7ninem, and asserts nothing from the author's own point of view, as I understand it.
He gives what is " sufficient for his argument," and professes nothing more. He was not a
clergyman, nor is his work a sermon to the faithful. He defies any one to deny, that, if God could
form man out of nothing. He can make him anew out of nothing. The residue of the argument
is a brilliant assertion of the imperishability of matter, in terms which might satisfy modern
science ; and the implication is, that the soul no more perishes to the sight of God than does the
body vaporized and reserved in the custody of the elements.


COMMODIANUS.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. ROBERT ERNEST WALLIS, Ph.D.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE


INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


[a.d. 240.] Our author seems to have been a North-African bishop, of whom little is known
save what we learn from his own writings. He has been supposed to incline to some ideas of
Praxeas, and also to the Millenarians, but perhaps on insufficient grounds. His Millenarianism
reflects the views of a very primitive age, and that without the corrupt Chiliasm of a later period,
which brought about a practical repudiation of the whole system.' Of his writings, two poems
only remain, and of these the second, a very recent discovery, has no place in the Edinburgh
series. I greatly regret that it cannot be included in ours.

As a poetical work the following prose version probably does it no injustice. His versification
is pronounced very crabbed, and his diction is the wretched patois of North Africa. But the
piety and earnestness of a practical Christian seem everywhere conspicuous in this fragment of
antiquity.

' He gives us a painful picture of the decline of godliness in his days ; of which see Wordsworth's Hippolyius, p. 140.


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS

IN FAVOUR OF

CHRISTIAN DISCIPLINE.

AGAINST THE GODS OF THE HEATHENS.

(EXPRESSED IN ACROSTICS.)


I. PREFACE.

My preface sets forth the way to the wanderer,
and a good visitation when the goal of hfe shall
have come, that he may become eternal — a
thing which ignorant hearts disbelieve. I in
like manner have wandered for a long time, by
giving attendance upon heathen fanes, my parents
themselves being ignorant.' Thence at length
I withdrew myself by reading concerning the
law. I bear witness to the Lord ; I grieve :
alas, the crowd of citizens ! ignorant of what it
Ipses in going to seek vain gods. Thoroughly
taught by these things, I instruct the ignorant in
the truth.

II. god's INDIGNATION.

In the law, the Lord of heaven, and earth,
and sea has commanded, saying. Worship not
vain gods made by your own hands out of wood
or gold, lest my wrath destroy you for such
things. The people before Moses, unskilled,
abiding without law, and ignorant of God, prayed
to gods that perished, after the likenesses of
which they fashioned vain idols. The Lord
having brought the Jews out of the land of Egypt,
subsequently imposed on t]:ietn a law ; and the
Omnipotent enjoined these things, that they
should serve Him alone, and not those idols.
Moreover, in that law is taught concerning the
resurrection, and the hope of living in happi-
ness again in the world, if vain idols be forsaken
and not worshipped.

III. THE WORSHIP OF DEMONS.

When Almighty God, to beautify the nature
of the world, willed that that earth should be


[Sufficient evidence of his heathen origin.]


visited by angels, when they were sent down
they despised His laws. Such was the beauty
of women, that it turned them aside ; so that,
being contaminated, they could not return to
heaven. Rebels from God, they uttered words
against Him. Then the Highest uttered His
judgment against them ; and from their seed
giants are said to have been born. By them
arts were made known in the earth, and they
taught the dyeing of wool, and everything which
is done ; and to them, when- they died, men
erected images. But the Almighty, because they
were of an evil seed, did not approve that, when
dead, they should be brought back from death.
Whence wandering they now subvert many bodies,
and it is such as these especially that ye this day
worship and pray to as gods.

IV. SATURN.

And Saturn the old, if he is a god, how does
he grow old ? Or if he was a god, why was he
driven by his terrors to devour his children?
But because he was not a god, he consumed the
bowels of his sons in a monstrous madness.
He was a king upon earth, born in the mount
Olympus ; and he was not divine, but called
himself a god. He fell into weakness of mind,
and swallowed a stone for his son. Thus he
became a god ; of late he is called Jupiter.

v. JUPITER.

This Jupiter was born to Saturn in the island
of Breta ; and when he was grown up, he deprived
his father of the kingdom. He then deluded
the wives and sisters of the nobles. Moreover,
Pyracmon, a smith, had made for him a sceptre.
In the beginning God made the heaven, the


204


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


earth, and the sea. But that frightful creature,
born in the midst of time, went forth as a youth
from a cave, and was nourished by stealth.
Behold, that God is the author of all things, not
that Jupiter,

VI. OF THE SAME JUPITER's THUNDERBOLT.

Ye say, O fools, Jupiter thunders. It is he
that hurls thunderbolts ; and if it was childish-
ness that thought thus, why for two hundred years
have ye been babies ? ' And will ye still be so
always? Infancy is passed into maturity, old
age does not enjoy trifles, the age of boyhood
has departed ; let the mind of youth in like
manner depart. Your thoughts ought to belong
to the character of men. Thou art then a fool,
to believe that it is Jupiter that thunders. He,
born on the earth, is nourished with goats' milk.
Therefore if Saturn had devoured him, who was
it in those times that sent rain when he was
dead? Especially, if a god may be thought to
be born of a mortal father, Saturn grew old on
the earth, and on the earth he died. There was
none that predicted his previous birth. Or if
he thunders, the law would have been given by
him. The stories that the poets feign seduce you.
He, however, reigned in Crete, and there died.
He who to you is the Almighty became Alc-
mena's lover ; he himself would in like manner
be in love with living men now if he were alive.
Ye pray to unclean gods, and ye call them heav-
enly who are born of mortal seed from those
giants. Ye hear and ye read that he was born
in the earth : whence was it that that corrupter
so well deserved to ascend into heaven ? And
the Cyclopes are said to have forged him a
thunderbolt ; for though he was immortal, he
received arms from mortals. Ye have conveyed
to heaven by your authority one guilty of so
many crimes, and, moreover, a parricide of his
own relations.

VII. OF THE SEPTIZONIUM AND THE STARS.

Your want of intelligence deceives you con-
cerning the circle of the zone, and perchance
from that you find out that you must pray to
Jupiter. Saturn is told of there, but it is as a
star, for he was driven forth by Jupiter, or let
Jupiter be believed to be in the star. He who
controlled the constellations of the pole, and
the sower of the soil ; he who made war with the
Trojans, he loved the beautiful Venus. Or
among the stars themselves Mars was caught
with her by married jealousy : he is called the
youthful god. Oh excessively foohsh, to think
that those who are born of Maia rule from the
stars, or that they rule the entire nature of the
world ! Subjected to wounds, and themselves


[An index of time. He writes, therefore, in the third century.]


living under the dominion of the fates, obscene,
inquisitive, warriors of an impious life ; and they
made sons, ec^ually mortal with themselves, and
were all terrible, foolish, strong, in the sevenfold
girdle. If ye worship the stars, worship also the
twelve signs of the zodiac, as well the ram, the
bull, the twins, as the fierce lion ; and finally,
they go on into fishes, — cook them and you will
prove them. A law without law is your refuge :
what wishes to be, will prevail. A woman de-
sires to be wanton ; she seeks to live without
restraint. Ye yourselves will be what ye wish
for, and pray to as gods and goddesses. Thus I
worshipped while I went astray, and now I con-
demn it.

VIII. OF THE SUN AND MOON.

Concerning the Sun and Moon ye are in error,
although they are in our immediate presence ;
in that ye, as I formerly did, think that you must
pray to them. They, indeed, are among the
stars ; but they do not run of their own accord.
The Omnipotent, when He established all things
at first, placed them there with the stars, on the
fourth day. . . . And, indeed. He commanded
in the law that none should worship them. Ye
worship so many gods who promise nothing con-
cerning life, whose law is not on the earth, nor
are they themselves foretold. But a few priests
seduce you, who say that any deity destined to
die can be of service. Draw near now, read,
and learn the truth.

IX. MERCURY.

Let your Mercury be depicted with a Sarabal-
lum, and with wings on his helmet or his cap,
and in other respects naked. I see a marvellous
thing, a god flying with a little satchel. Run,
poor creatures, with your lap spread open when
he flies, that he may empty his satchel : do ye
from thence be prepared. Look on the painted
one, since he will thus cast you money from on
high : then dance ye securely. Vain man, art
thou not mad, to worship painted gods in heav-
en ? If thou knowest not how to live, continue
to dwell with the beasts.

X. NEPTUNE.

Ye make Neptlne a god descended from
Saturn ; and he wields a trident that he may
spear the fishes. It is plain by his being thus
provided that he is a sea-god. Did not he him-
self with Apollo raise up walls for the Trojans?
How did that poor stone-mason become a god?
Did not he beget the cyclops-monster? And
was he himself when dead unable to live again,
though his structure admitted of this?^ Thus
begotten, he begot who was already once dead.


^ We have changed marhit
denuo.


et into mortuus, and de suo into


tHe instructions of commodianus.


205


XI. APOLLO THE SOOTHSAYING AND FALSE.

Ye make Apollo a player on the cithara, and
divine. Born at first of Maia, in the isle of
Delos, subsequently, for offered wages, a builder,
obeying the king Laomedon, he reared the walls
of the Trojans. And he established himself, and
ye are seduced into thinking him a god, in whose
bones the love of Cassandra burned, whom the
virgin craftily sported with, and, though a divine
being, he is deceived. By his office of augur he
was able to know the double-hearted one. More-
over rejected, he, though divine, departed thence.
Him the virgin burnt up with her beauty, whom
he ought to have burnt up ; while she ought first
of all to have loved the god who thus lustfully
began to love Daphne, and still follows her up,
wishing to violate the maid. The fool loves in
vain. Nor can he obtain her by running. Sure-
ly, if he were a god, he would come up with her
through the air. She first came under the roof,
and the divine being remained outside. The
race of men deceive you, for they were of a sad
way of life. Moreover, he is said to have fed
the cattle of Admetus. While in imposed sports
he threw the quoit into the air, he could not
restrain it as it fell, and it killed his friend.
That was the last day of his companion Hyacin-
thus. Had he been divine, he would have fore-
known the death of his friend.

XII. FATHER LIBER BACCHUS.

Ye yourselves say that Father Liber was as-
suredly twice begotten. First of all he was born
in India of Proserpine and Jupiter, and waging
war against the Titans, when his blood was shed,
he expired even as one of mortal men. Again
restored from his death, in another womb Semele
conceived him again of Jupiter, a second Maia,
whose womb being divided, he is taken away
near to birth from his dead mother, and as a
nursling is given to be nourished to Nisus. From
this being twice born he is called Dionysus ; and
his religion is falsely observed in vanity ; and
they celebrate his orgies such that now they
themselves seem to be either foolhardy or bur-
lesquers of Mimnermomerus. They conspire in
evil ; they practise beforehand with pretended
heat, that they may deceive others into saying
that a deity is present. Hence you manifestly
see men living a life like his, violently excited
with the wine which he himself had pressed out ;
they have given him divine honour in the midst
of their drunken excess.

XIII. THE UNCONQUERED ONE.

The unconquered one was born from a rock,
if he is regarded as a god. Now tell us, then,
on the other hand, which is the first of these
two. The rock has overcome the god : then
the creator of the rock has to be sou";ht after.


Moreover, you still depict him also as a thief;
although, if he were a god, he certainly did not
live by theft. Assuredly he was of earth, and
of a monstrous nature. And he turned other
people's oxen into his caves ; just as did Cacus,
that son of Vulcan.

XIV. SYLVANTJS.

Whence, again, has Sylvanus appeared to be
a god? Perhaps it is agreeable so to call him
from this, that the pipe sings sweetly because he
bestows the wood ; for, perhaps, it might not be
so. Thou hast bought a venal master, when
thou shalt have bought from him. Behold the
wood fails ! What is due to him ? Art thou
not ashamed, O fool, to adore such pictures?
Seek one God who will alow you to live after
death. Depart from such as have become dead
in life.

XV. HERCULES.

Hercules, because he destroyed the monster
of the Aventine Mount, who had been wont to
steal the herds of Evander, is a god : the rustic
mind of men, untaught also, when they wished
to return thanks instead of praise to the absent
thunderer, senselessly vowed victims as to a god
to be besought, they made milky altars as a
memorial to themselves. Thence it arises that
he is worshipped in the ancient manner. But
he is no god, although he was strong in arms.

XVI. OF THE GODS ANTD GODDESSES.

Ye say that they are gods who are plainly cruel,
and ye say that genesis assigns the fates to you.
Now, then, say to whom first of all sacred rites
are paid. Between the ways on either side im-
mature death is straying. If the fates give the
generations, why do you pray to the god ? Thou
art vainly deceived who art seeking to beseech the
manes, and thou namest them to be lords over
thee who are fabricated. Or, moreover, I know
not what women you pray to as goddesses — Bel-
lona and Nemesis the goddesses, together with
the celestial Fury, the Virgins and Venus, for
whom your wives are weak in the loins. Besides,
there are in the fanes other demons which are
not as yet numbered, and are worn on the neck,
so that they themselves cannot give to them-
selves an account. Plagues ought rather to be
exported to the ends of the earth.

XVII. OF THEIR IMAGES.

A few wicked and empty poets delude you ;
while they seek with difficulty to procure their
living, they adorn falsehood to be for others un-
der the guise of mystery. Thence feigning to
be smitten by some deity, they sing of his ma-
jesty, and weary themselves under his form. Ye
[ have often seen the Dindymarii, with what a din
! they enter upon luxuries while they seek to feign


206


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


the furies, or when they strike their backs with
the fikhy axe, although with their teaching they
keep what they heal by their blood. Behold in
what name they do not compel those who first
of all unite themselves to them with a sound
mind. But that they may take away a gift, they
seek such minds. Thence see how all things
are feigned. They cast a shadow over a simple
people, lest they should believe, while they per-
ish, the thing once for all proceeded in vanity
from antiquity, that a prophet who uttered false
things might be believed ; but their majesty has
spoken nought.

XVIII. OF AMMYDATES AND THE GREAT GOD.

We have already said many things of an abom-
inable superstition, and yet we follow up the
subject, lest we should be said to have passed
anything over. And the worshippers worshipped
their Ammydates after their manner. He was
great to them when there was gold in the tem-
ple. They placed their heads under his power,
as if he were present. It came to the highest
point that Caesar took away the gold. The deity
failed, or fled, or passed away into fire. The
author of this wickedness is manifest who formed
this same god, and falsely prophesying seduces
so many and so great men, and only was silent
about Him who was accustomed to be divine.
For voices broke forth, as if with a changed
mind, as if the wooden god were speaking into
his ear. Say now yourselves if they are not false
deities ? From that prodigy how many has that
prophet destroyed ? He forgot to prophesy
who before was accustomed to prophesy ; so
those prodigies are feigned among those who
are greedy of wine, whose damnable audacity
feigns deities, for they were carried about, and
such an image was dried up. For both he him-
self is silent, and no one prophesies concerning
him at all. But ye wish to ruin yourselves.

XIX. OF THE VAIN NEMESIACI.

Is it not ignominy, that a prudent man should
be seduced and worship such a one, or say that
a log is Diana? You trust a man who in the
morning is drunk, costive, and ready to perish,
who by art speaks falsely what is seen by him.
While he lives strictly, he feeds on his own bow-
els. A detestable one defiles all the citizens ;
and he has attached to himself — a similar gath-
ering being made — those with whom he feigns
the history, that he may adorn a god. He is
ignorant how to prophesy for himself; for others
he dares it. He places it on his shoulder when
he pleases, and again he places it down. AVhirl-
ing round, he is turned by himself with the tree
of the two-forked one, as if you would think that
he was inspired with the deity of the wood. Ye
do not worship the gods whom they themselves


falsely announce ; ye worship the priests them-
selves, fearing them vainly. But if thou art strong
in heart, flee at once from the shrines of death.

XX. THE TITANS.

Ye say that the Titans are to you Tuians. Ye
ask that these fierce ones should be silent under
your roof, as so many Lares, shrines, images
made like to a Titan. For ye foolishly adore
those who have died by an evil death, not read-
ing their own law. They themselves speak not,
and ye dare to call them gods who are melted
out of a brazen vessel ; ye should rather melt
them into little vessels for yourselves.

XXI. THE IMONTESIANI.

Ye call the mountains also gods. Let them
rule in gold, darkened by evil, and aiding with
an averted mind. For if a pure spirit and a
serene mind remained to you, thou thyself ought
to examine for thyself concerning them. Thou
art become senseless as a man, if thou thinkest
that these can save thee, whether they rule or
whether they cease. If thou seekest anything
healthy, seek rather the righteousness of the law,
that brings the help of salvation, and says that
you are becoming eternal. For what you shall
follow in vanity rejoices you for a time. Thou
art glad for a brief space, and afterwards bewail-
est in the depths. Withdraw thyself from these,
if thou wilt rise again with Christ.

XXII. THE DULNESS OF THE AGE.

Alas, I grieve, citizens, that ye are thus blinded
by the world. One runs to the lot ; another
gazes on the birds ; another, having shed the
blood of bleating animals, calls forth the manes,
and credulously desires to hear vain responses.
When so many leaders and kings have taken
counsel concerning life, what benefit has it been
to them to have known even its portents ? Learn,
I beg you, citizens, what is good ; beware of idol-
fanes. Seek, indeed, all of you, in the law of
the Omnipotent. Thus it has pleased the Lord
of lords Himself in the heavens, that demons
should wander in the world for our discipline.
And yet, on the other hand. He has sent out
His mandates, that they who forsake their altars
shall become inhabitants of heaven, ^^']'lence I
am not careful to argue this in a small treatise.
The law teaches ; it calls on you in your midst.
Consider for yourselves. Ye have entered upon
two roads \ decide upon the right one.'

XXIII. OF THOSE WHO ARE EVERYWHERE READY.

While thou obeyest the belly, thou sayest that
thou art innocent ; and, as if courteously, makest
thyself everywhere ready. Woe to thee, fooHsh
man ! thou thyself lookest around upon death.


[He defers to the Canon Law and notes the Dua Via.\


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


207


Thou seekest in a barbarous fashion to hve with- 1
out law. Thou thyself hymnest thyself also to '
play upon a word, who feignest thyself simple.
I live in simplicity with such a one. Thou be-
lievest that thou livest, whilst thou desirest to
fill thy belly. To sit down disgracefully of no
account in thy house, ready for feasting, and to
run away from precepts. Or because thou be-
lievest not that God will judge the dead, thou
foolishly makest thyself ruler of heaven instead
of Him. Thou regardest thy belly as if thou ^
canst provide for it. Thou seemest at one time
to be profane, at another to be holy. Thou ap-
pearest as a suppliant of God, under the aspect
of a tyrant. Thou shalt feel in thy fates by
whose law thou art aided.

XXIV. OF THOSE WHO LIVE BETWEEN THE TWO.

Thou who thinkest that, by living doubtfully
between the two, thou art on thy guard, goest
on thy way stript of law, broken down by luxury.
Thou art looking forward vainly to so many
things, why seekest thou unjust things? And
whatever thou hast done shall there remain to
thee when dead. Consider, thou foolish one,
thou wast not, and lo, thou art seen. Thou
knowest not whence thou hast proceeded, nor
whence thou art nourished. Thou avoidest the
excellent and benignant God of thy life, and thy
Governor, who would rather wish thee to live.
Thou turnest thyself to thyself, and givest thy
back to God. Thou drownest thyself in dark-
ness, whilst thou thinkest thou art abiding in
light. Why runnest thou in the synagogue to
the Pharisees, that He may become merciful
to thee, whom thou of thy own accord deniest ?
Thence thou goest abroad again ; thou seekest
healthful things. Thou wishest to live between ,
both ways, but thence thou shalt perish. And, 1
moreover, thou sayest. Who is He who has re-
deemed from death, that we may believe in
Him, since there punishments are awarded ?
Ah ! not thus, O malignant man, shall it be as i
thou thinkest. For to him who has lived well |
there is advantage after death. Thou, however,
when one day thou diest, shalt be taken away in i
an evil place. But they who believe in Christ :
shall be led into a good place, and those to
whom that delight is given are ca'ressed ; but '
to you who are of a double mind, against you is !
punishment without the body. The course of
the tormentor stirs you up to cry out against
your brother.

XXV. THEY WHO FEAR AND WILL NOT BELIEVE, j

How long, O foolish man, wilt thou not ac-
knowledge Christ? Thou avoidest the fertile'
field, and castest thy seeds on the sterile one.
Thou seekest to abide in the wood where the
thief is delaying. Thou sayest, I also am of


God ; and thou wanderest out of doors. Now
at length, after so many invitations, enter within
the palace. Now is the harvest ripe, and the
time so many times prepared. Lo, now reap !
What ! dost thou not repent? Thence now, if
thou hast not, gather the seasonable wines. The
time of believing to life is present in the time of
death. The first law of God is the foundation
of the subsequent law. Thee, indeed, it assigned
to believe in the second law. Nor are threats
from Himself, but from it, powerful o\"er thee.
Now astounded, swear that thou wilt believe in
Christ ; for the Old Testament proclaims con-
cerning Him. For it is needful only to believe
in Him who was dead, to be able to rise again
to live for all time. Therefore, if thou art one
who disbelievest that these things shall be, at
length he shall be overcome in his guilt in the
second death. I will declare things to come in
few words in this little treatise. In it can be
known when hope must be preferred. Still I
exhort you as quickly as possible to believe in
Christ.

XXVI. TO THOSE WHO RESIST THE LAW OF CHRIST
THE LIVING GOD.

Thou rejectest, unhappy one, the advantage
of heavenly discipline, and rushest into death
while wishing to stray without a bridle. Luxury
and the shortlived joys of the world are ruining
thee, whence thou shalt be tormented in hell for
all time. They are vain joys with which thou
art foolishly delighted. Do not these make thee
to be a man dead? Cannot thirty years at
length make thee a wise man? Ignorant how
thou hast first strayed, look upon ancient time,
thou thinkest now to enjoy here a joyous life in
the midst of wrongs. These are the ruins of thy
friends, wars, or wicked frauds, thefts with blood-
shed : the body is vexed with sores, and groan-
ing and wailing is indulged ; whether a slight
disease invade thee, or thou art held down by
long sickness, or thou art bereaved of thy chil-
dren, or thou mournest over a lost wife. All is
a wilderness : alas, dignities are hurried down
from their height by vices and poverty ; doubly
so, assuredly, if thou languishest long. And
callest thou it life when this life of glass is
mortal? Consider now at length that this time
is of no avail, but in the future you have hope
without the craft of living. Certainly the litde
children which have been snatched awa_\- desired
to live. Moreover, the young men who have
been deprived of life, perchance were preparing
to grow old, and they themselves were making
ready to enjoy joyful days ; and yet we unwill-
ingly lay aside all things in the world. I have
delayed with a perverse mind, and I have
thought that the life of this world was a true
one ; and I judged that death would come in


208


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF ■ COMMODIANUS.


like manner as ye did — that when once hfe had
departed, the soul also was dead and perished.
These things, however, are not so ; but the
Founder and Author of the world has certainly
required the brother slain by a brother. Impious
man, say, said He, where is thy brother ? and he
denied. For the blood of thy brother has cried
aloud to Me to heaven. Thou art tormented, I
see, when thou thoughtest to feel nothing ; but
he lives and occupies the place on the right
hand. He enjoys delights which thou, O wicked
one, hast lost ; and when thou hast called back
the world, he also has gone before, and will be
immortal : for thou shalt wail in hell. Certainly
God lives, who makes the dead to live, that He
may give worthy rewards to the innocent and to
the good ; but to the fierce and impious, cruel
hell. Commence, O thou who art led away, to
perceive the judgments of God.

XXVII. O FOOL, THOU DOST NOT DIE TO GOD.

O fool, thou dost not absolutely die ; nor,
when dead, dost thou escape the lofty One.
Although thou shouldst arrange that when dead
thou perceivest nothing, thou shalt foolishly be
overcome. God the Creator of the world liveth,
whose laws cry out that the dead are in exist-
ence. But thou, whilst recklessly thou seekest
to live without God, judgest that in death is
extinction, and thinkest that it is absolute. God
has not ordered it as thou thinkest, that the dead
are forgetful of what they have previously done.
Now has the governor made for us receptacles
of death, and after our ashes we shall behold
them. Thoia art stripped, O foolish one, who
thinkest that by death thou art not, and hast
made thy Ruler and Lord to be able to do
nothing. But death is not a mere vacuity, if
thou reconsiderest in thine heart. Thou mayest
know that He is to be desired, for late thou
shalt perceive Him. Thou wast the ruler of
the flesh ; certainly flesh ruled not thee. Freed
from it, the former is buried ; thou art here.
Rightly is mortal man separated from the flesh.
Therefore mortal eyes will not be able to be
equalled (to divine things). Thus our depth
keeps us from the secret of God. Give thou
now, whilst in weakness thou art dying, the
honour to God, and beheve that Christ will
bring thee back living from the dead. Thou
oughtest to give praises in the church to the
omnipotent One.

XXVIII. THE RIGHTEOUS RISE AGAIN.

Righteousness and goodness, peace and true
patience, and care concerning one's deeds, make
to live after death. But a crafty mind, mis-
chievous, perfidious, evil, destroys itself by de-
grees, and delays in a cruel death. O wicked
man, hear now what thou gainest by thy evil


deeds. Look on the judges of earth, who now
in the body torture with terrible punishments ;
either chastisements are prepared for the de-
serving by the sword, or to weep in a long im-
prisonment. Dost thou, last of all, hope to laugh
at the God of heaven and the Ruler of the sky,
by whom all things were made ? Thou ragest,
thou art mad, and now thou takest away the
name of God, from whom, moreover, thou shalt
not escape ; and He will award punishments
according to your deeds. Now I would have
you be cautious that thou come not to the burn-
ing of fire. Give thyself up at once to Christ,
that goodness may attend thee.

XXIX. TO THE WICKED AND UNBELIEVING RICH
MAN.

Thou wflt, O rich man, by insatiably looking
too much to all thy wealth, squander those things
to which thou art still seeking to cling. Thou
sayest, I do not hope when dead to live after
such things as these. O ungrateful to the great
God, who thus judgest thyself to be a god ; to
Him who, when thou knewest nothing of it,
brought thee forth, and then nourished thee.
He governs thy meadows ; He, thy vineyards ;
He, thy herd of cattle ; and He, whatever thou
possessest. Nor dost thou give heed to these
things ; or thou, perchance, rulest all things.
He who made the sky, and the earth, and the
salt seas, decreed to give us back again ourselves
in a golden age. And only if thou believest,
thou livest in the secret of God. Learn God, O
foolish man, who wishes thee to be immortal,
that thou mayest give Him eternal thanks in thy
struggle. His own law teaches thee ; but since
thou seekest to wander, thou disbelievest all
things, and thence thou shalt go into hell. By
and by thou givest up thy life ; thou shalt be
taken where it grieveth thee to be : there the
spiritual punishment, which is eternal, is under-
gone ; there are always wailings : nor dost thou
absolutely die therein — there at length too late
proclaiming the omnipotent God.

XXX. RICH MEN, BE HUMBLE.

Learn, O thou who art about to die, to show
thyself good to all. Why, in the midst of the
people, makest thou thyself to be another than
thou art? Thou goest where tliou knowest not,
and ignorantly thence thou departest. Thou
managest wickedly with thy very body ; thou
thirstest always after riches. Thou exaltest thy-
self too much on high ; and thou bearest pride,
and dost not willingly look on the poor. Now
ye do not even feed your parents themselves
when placed under you. Ah, wretched men, let
ordinary men flee far from you. He lived, and
I have destroyed him ; the poor man cries out
ivprjKa. By and by thou shalt be driven with


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


209


the furies of Charybdis, when thou thyself dost
perish. Thus ye rich men are undiscipHned, ye
give a law to those, ye yourselves not being pre-
pared. Strip thyself, O rich man turned away
from God, of such evils, if assuredly, perchance,
what thou hast seen done may aid thee. Be ye
the attendant of God while ye have time. Even
as the elm loves the vine, so love ye people of
no account. Observe now, O barren one, the
law which is terrible to the evil, and equally
benignant to the good ; be humble in prosperity.
Take away, O rich men, hearts of fraud, and
take up hearts of peace. And look upon your
evil-doing. Do ye do good ? I am here.

XXXI. TO JUDGES.

Consider the sayings of Solomon, all ye
judges ; in what way, with one word of his, he
disparages you. How gifts and presents corrupt
the judges, thence, thence follows the law. Ye
always love givers ; and when there shall be a
cause, the unjust cause carries off the victory.
Thus I am innocent ; nor do I, a man of no
account, accuse you, because Solomon openly
raises the blasphemy. But your god is your
belly, and rewards are your laws. Paul the
apostle suggests this, I am not deceitful.

XXXII. TO SELF-PLEASERS.

If place or time is favourable, or the person
has advanced, let there be a new judge. Why
now art thou lifted up thence ? Untaught, thou
blasphemest Him of whose liberality thou livest.
In such weakness thou dost not ever regard
Him. Throughout advances and profits thou
greedily presumest on fortune. There is no law
to thee, nor dost thou discern thyself in pros-
perity. Although they may be counted of gold,
let the strains of the pipe always be raving. If
thou hast not adored the crucifixion of the Lord,
thou hast perished.' Both place and occasion
and person are now given to thee, if, however,
thou believest ; but if not, thou shalt fear before
Him. Bring thyself into obedience to Christ,
and place thy neck under Him. To Him re-
mains the honour and all the confidence of
things. When the time flatters thee, be more
cautious. Not foreseeing, as it behoves thee,
the final awards of fate, thou art not able ever to
live again without Christ.

XXXIII. TO THE GENTILES.

O people, ferocious, without a shepherd, now
at length wander not. For I also who admonish
you was the same, ignorant, wandering. Now,
therefore, take the likeness of your Lord. Raise
upward your wild and roughened hearts. Enter
stedfastly into the fold of your sylvan Shepherd,


' [This is not Patripassianism. Nor does the
the next chapter involve this heresy.]


remaining safe from robbers under the royal roof.
In the wood are wolves ; therefore take refuge
in the cave. Thou warrest, thou art mad ; nor
dost thou behold where thou abidest. Believe
in the one God, that when dead thou mayest
live, and mayest rise in His kingdom, when there
shall be the resurrection to the just.

XXXIV. MOREOVER, TO IGNOR.\NT GENTILES.

The unsubdued neck refuses to bear the yoke
of labour. "Then it delights to be satisfied with
herbs in the rich plains. And still unwiUingly is
subdued the useful mare, and it is made to be
less fierce when it is first brought into subjection.
O people, O man, thou brother, do not be a
brutal flock. Pluck thyself forth at length, and
thyself withdraw thyself. Assuredly thou art not
cattle, thou art not a beast, but thou art born a
man. Do thou thyself wisely subdue thyself,
and enter under arms. Thou who followest
idols art nothing but the vanity of the age. Your
trifling hearts destroy you when almost set free.
There gold, garments, silver is brought to the
elbows ; there war is made ; there love is sung
of instead of psalms. Dost thou think it to be
life, when thou playest or lookest forward to
such things as these ? Thou choosest, O ignorant
one, things that are extinct ; thou seekest golden
things. Thence thou shalt not escape the plague,
although thyself art divine. Thou seekest not
that grace which God sent to be read of in the
earth, but thus as a beast thou wanderest. The
golden age before spoken of shall come to
thee if thou believest, and again thou shalt begin
to live always an immortal life. That also is
permitted to know what thou wast before. Give
thyself as a subject to God, who governs all
things.^

XXXV. OF THE TREE OF LIFE AND DEATH.

Adam was the first who fell, and that he might
shun the precepts of God, Belial was his tempter
by the lust of the palm tree. And he conferred
on us also what he did, whether of good or of
evil, as being the chief of all that was born from
him ; and thence we die l)y his means, as he
himself, receding from the divine, became an
outcast from the Word. We shall be immortal
when six thousand years are accomplished. The
tree of the apple being tasted, death has entered
into the world. By this tree of death we are
born to the life to come. On the tree depends
the life that bears fruits — precepts. Now, there-
fore, pluck 3 believingly the fruits of life. A law
was given from the tree to be feared by the
primitive man, whence comes death by the neg-
lect of the law of the beginning. Now stretch
forth your hand, and take of the tree of life.


[Here ends the apologetic portion]
Set/. " capite," conjectural for " cavete."


2IO


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


The excellent law of the Lord which follows has
issued from the tree. The first law is lost ; man
eats whence he can, who adores the forbidden
gods, the evil joys of life. Reject this partak-
ing ; it will suffice you to know what it should
be. If you wish to live, surrender yourselves to
the second law. Avoid the worship of temples,
the oracles of demons ; turn yourselves to Christ,
and ye shall be associates with God. Holy is
God's law, which teaches the dead to^ live. God
alone has commanded us to offer to Him the
hymn of praise. All of you shun absolutely the
law of the devil.

XXXVI. OF THE FOOLISHNESS OF THE CROSS.

I have spoken of the twofold sign whence
death proceeded, and again I have said that
thence life frequently proceeds ; but the cross
has become foolishness to an adulterous people.
The awful King of eternity shadows forth these
things by the cross, that they may now believe
on Him.' O fools, that live in death ! Cain
slew his younger brother by the invention of
wickedness. Thence the sons of Enoch ^ are
said to be the race of Cain. Then the evil peo-
ple increased in the world, which never transfers
souls to God. To believe the cross came to be
a dread, and they say that they live righteously.
The first law was in the tree ; and thence, too,
the second. And thence the second law first of
all overcame the terrible law with peace. ^ Lifted
up, they have rushed into vain prevarications.
They are unwilling to acknowledge the Lord
pierced with nails ; but when His judgment shall
come, they will then discern Him. But the
race of Abel already believes on a merciful
Christ.

XXXVII. THE FANATICS WHO JUDAIZE.

What ! art thou half a Jew ? wilt thou be half
profane? Whence thou shalt not when dead
escape the judgment of Christ. Thou thyself
blindly wanderest, and foolishly goest in among
the blind. And thus the blind leadeth the blind
into the ditch. Thou goest whither thou knovv-
est not, and thence ignorantly withdrawest. Let
them who are learning go to the learned, and let
the learned depart. But thou goest to those
from whom thou canst learn nothing. Thou
goest forth before the doors, and thence also
thou goest to the idols. Ask first of all what is
commanded in the law. Let them tell thee if it
be commanded to adore the gods ; for they are
ignored in respect of that which they are espe-
cially able to do. But because they are guilty
of that very crime, they relate nothing concern-
ing the commandments of God save what is


■ I [Or, " shadows forth Himself. "\

2 " Eusebius tells of another Enoch, who was not translated with- i
out seeing death."— Rig. [See Gen. iv. 17, i8. S.] I

3 Et inde secunda terribilem legem primo cum pace revincit. —
Davis, conjecturally. I


marvellous. Then, however, they blindly lead
you with them into the ditch. There are deaths
too well known by them to relate, or because the
heaping up of the plough closes up the field.
The Almighty would not have them understand
their King. Why such a wickedness ? He Him-
self took refuge from those bloody men. He
gave Himself to us by a superadded law.
Thence now they lie concealed with us, de-
serted by their King. But if you think that in
them there is hope, you are altogether in error
if you worship God and heathen temples.

XXXVIII. TO THE JEWS.

Evil always, and recalcitrant, with a stiff neck
ye wish not that ye should be overcome; thus
ye will be heirs. Isaiah said that ye were of
hardened heart. Ye look upon the law which
Moses in wrath dashed to pieces ; and the same
Lord gave to him a second law. In that he
placed his hope ; but ye, half healed, reject it,
and therefore ye shall not be worthy of the king-
dom of heaven.

XXXIX. ALSO TO THE JEWS.

Look upon Leah, that was a type of the syna-
gogue, which Jacob received as a sign, with eyes
so weak \ and yet he served again for the younger
one beloved : a true mystery, and a type of our
Church. Consider what was abundantly said of
Rebecca from heaven ; whence, imitating the
alien, ye may beUeve in Christ. Thence come
to Tamar and the offspring of twins. Look to
Cain, the first tiller of the earth, and Abel the
shepherd, who was an unspotted offerer in the
ruin of his brother, and was slain by his brother.
Thus therefore perceive, that the younger are
approved by Christ.

XL. AGAIN TO THE SAME.

There is not an unbelieving people such as
yours. O evil men ! in so many places, and so
often rebuked by the law of those who cry aloud.
And the lofty One despises your Sabbaths, and
altogether rejects your universal monthly feasts
according to law, that ye should not make to
Him the commanded sacrifices ; who told you
to throw a stone for your offence. If any should
not believe that He had perished by an unjust ,
death, and that those who were beloved were
saved by other laws, thence that life was sus-
pended on the tree, and believe not on Him.
God Himself is the- life ; He Himself was sus-
pended for us. But ye with indurated heart
insult Him.

XLI. OF THE TIME OF ANTICHRIST.*

Isaiah said : This is the man who moveth the
world and so many kings, and under whom

< [See Elucidation at end.]


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


the land shall become desert. Hear ye how
the prophet foretold concerning him. I have
said nothing elaborately, but negligently. Then,
doubtless, the world shall be finished when he
shall appear. He himself shall divide the globe
into three ruling powers, when, moreover, Nero
shall be raised up from hell, Elias shall first
come to seal the beloved ones ; at which things
the region of Africa and the northern nation, the
whole earth on all sides, for seven years shall
tremble. But Elias shall occupy the half of the
time, Nero shall occupy half. Then the whore
Babylon, being reduced to ashes, its embers shall
thence advance to Jerusalem ; and the Latin
conqueror shall then say, I am Christ, whom ye
always pray to ; and, indeed, the original ones who
were deceived combine to praise him. He does
many wonders, since his is the false prophet.
Especially that they may believe him, his image
shall speak. The Almighty has given it power
to apjjear such. The Jews, recapitulating Scrip-
tures from him, exclaim at the same time to the
Highest that they have been deceived.


XLII. OF THE HIDDEN AND HOLY PEOPLE OF THE
ALMIGHTY CHRIST, THE LIVING GOD.

Let the hidden, the final, the holy people be
longed for ; and, indeed, let it be unknown by
us where it abides, acting by nine of the tribes
and a half . . . ; and he has bidden to live by
the former law. Now let us all live : the tradi-
tion of the law is new, as the law itself teaches,
I point out to you more plainly. Two of the
tribes and a half are left : wherefore is the half
of the tribes separated from them ? That they
might be martyrs, when He should bring war on
His elected ones into the world ; or certainly the
choir of the holy prophets would rise together
upon the people who should impose a check
upon them whom the obscene horses have slaugh-
tered with kicking heel ; nor would the band
hurry rashly at any time to tlie gift of peace.
Those of the tribes are withdrawn, and all the
mysteries of Christ are fulfilled by them through-
out the whole age. Moreover, they have arisen
from the crime of two brothers, by whose au-
spices they have followed crime. Not undeserv-
edly are these bloody ones thus scattered : they
shall again assemble on behalf of the mysteries
of Christ. But then the things told of in the
law are hastening to their completion. The Al-
mighty Christ descends to His elect, who have
been darkened from our view for so long a time
— they have become so many thousands — that
is the true heavenly people. The son does not
die before his father, then ; nor do they feel
pains in their bodies, nor polypus in their nos-
trils. They who cease depart in ripe years in
their bed, fulfilling all the things of the law, and


therefore they are protected. They are bidden
to pass on the right side of their Lord ; and
when they have passed over as before, He dries
up the river. Nor less does the Lord Himself
also proceed with them. He has passed over to
our side, they come with the King of heaven ;
and in their journey, what shall I speak of which
God will bring to pass? Mountains subside be-
fore them, and fountains break forth. The crea-
tion rejoices to see the heavenly people. Here,
however, they hasten to defend the captive ma-
tron. But the wicked king who possesses her,
when he hears, flies into the parts of the north,
and collects all his foUowers. Moreover, when
the tyrant shall dash himself against the army of
God, his soldiery are overthrown by the celestial
terror ; the false prophet himself is seized with
the wicked one, by the decree of the Lord ;
they are handed over alive to Gehenna. From
him chiefs and leaders are bidden to obey ; then
will the holy ones enter into the breasts of their
ancient mother, that, moreover, they also may
be refreshed whom he has evil persuaded. With
various punishments he will torment those who
trust in him ; they come to the end, whereby
offences are taken away from the world. The
Lord will begin to give judgment by fire.

XLIII. OF THE END OF THIS AGE.

The trumpet gives the sign in heaven, the lion
being taken away, and suddenly there is dark-
ness with the din of heaven. The Lord casts
down His eyes, so that the earth trembles. He
cries out, so that all may hear throughout the
world : Behold, long have I been silent while I
bore your doings in such a time. They cry
out together, complaining and groaning too late.
They howl, they bewail ; nor is there room found
for the wicked. What shall the mother do for
the sucking child, when she herself is burnt u]) ?
In the flame of fire the Lord will judge the
wicked. But the fire shall not touch the just,
but shall by all means lick them up.' In one
place they delay, but a part has wept at the
judgment. Such will be the heat, that the stones
themselves shall melt. The winds assemble into
lightnings, the heavenly wrath rages ; and wher-
ever the wicked man fleeth, he is seized upon by
this fire. There will be no succour nor ship of
the sea. Amen ^ flames on the nations, and the
Medes and Parthians burn for a thousand years,
as the hidden words of John declare. For then
after a thousand years they are delivered over to
Gehenna ; and he whose work they were, with
them are burnt up.


1 [The translator here inserts a mark of interrogation. The
meaning is: lick up them (the wicked) who have persecuted them.
Dan. iii 22.]

2 [Rev. lii. 14.]


212


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


XLIV, OF THE FIRST RESURRECTION.

From heaven will descend the city in the first
resurrection ; this is what we may tell of such a
celestial fabric. We shall arise again to Him,
who have been devoted to Him. And they shall
be incorruptible, even already living without
death. And neither will there be any grief nor
any groaning in that city. They shall come also
who overcame cruel martydom under Antichrist,
and they themselves live for the whole time, and
receive blessings because they have suffered evil
things ; and they themselves marrying, beget for
a thousand years. There are prepared all the
revenues of the earth, because the earth renewed
without end pours forth abundantly. Therein
are no rains ; no cold comes into the golden
camp. No sieges as now, nor rapines, nor does
that city crave the light of a lamp. It shines
from its Founder. Moreover, Him it obeys ; in
breadth 12,000 furlongs, and length and depth.
It levels its foundation in the earth, but it raises
its head to heaven. In the city before the doors,
moreover, sun and moon shall shine ; he who is
evil is hedged up in torment, for the sake of the
nourishment of the righteous. But from the
thousand years God will destroy all those evils.

XLV, OF THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.

I add something, on account of unbelievers,
of the day of judgment. Again, the fire of the
Lord sent forth shall be appointed. The earth
gives a true groan ; then those who are making
their journey in the last end, and then all unbe-
lievers, groan. The whole of nature is con-
verted in flame, which yet avoids the camp of
His saints. The earth is burned up from its
foundations, and the mountains melt. Of the sea
nothing remains : it is overcome by the power-
ful fire. This sky perishes, and the stars and
these things are changed. Another newness
of sky and of everlasting earth is arranged.
Thence they who deserve it are sent away in a
second death, but the righteous are placed in
inner dweUing-places.

XLVI. TO CATECHUMENS,

In few words, I admonish all believers in
Christ, who have forsaken idols, for your salva-
tion. In the first times, if in any way thou fall-
est into error, still, when entreated, do thou
leave all things for Christ ; and since thou hast
known God, be a recruit good and approved,
and let virgin modesty dwell with thee in purity.
Let the mind be watchful for good things. Be-
ware that thou fall not into former sins. In
baptism the coarse dress of thy birth is washed.
For if any sinful catechumen is marked with pun-
ishment, let him live in the signs of Christian-


ity, although not without loss.' The whole of
the matter for thee is this. Do thou ever shun
great sins.

XLVII. TO THE FAITHFUL.

I admonish the faithful not to hold their
brethren in hatred. Hatreds are accounted
impious by martyrs for the flame. The mart)^:
is destroyed whose confession is of such kind ;
nor is it taught that the evil is expiated by the*
shedding of blood. A law is given to the unjust
man that he may restrain himself Thence he
ought to be free from craft ; so also oughtest
thou. Twice dost thou sin against God, if thou
extendest strifes to thy brother ; whence thou
shalt not avoid sin following thy former courses.
Thou hast once been washed : shalt thou be able
to be immersed again ?

XLVIII. O FAITHFUL, BEWARE OF EVIL.

The birds are deceived, and the beasts of the
woods in the woods, by those very charms by
which their ruin is ever accomplished, and caves
as well as food deceive thein as they follow ; and
they know not how to shun evil, nor are they
restrained by law. Law is given to man, and a
doctrine of life to be chosen, from which he
remembers that he may be able to live carefully,
and recalls his o\vn place, and takes away those
things which belong to death. He severely con-
demns himself who forsakes rule ; either bound
with iron, or cast down from his degree ; or
deprived of life, he loses what he ought to enjoy.
Warned by example, do not sin gravely ; trans-
lated by the laver, rather have charity ; flee far
from the bait of the mouse-trap, where there is
death. Many are the martyrdoms which are
made without shedding of blood. Not to desire
other men's goods ; to wish to have the benefit
of martyrdom ; to bridle the tongue, thou ought-
est to make thyself humble ; not willingly to use
force, nor to return force used against thee, thou
wilt be a patient mind, understand that thou art
a martyr.

XLIX. TO PENITENTS.

Thou art become a penitent ; pray night and
day ; yet from thy Mother the Church do not
far depart, and the Highest will be able to be
merciful to thee. The confession of thy fault
shall not be in vain. Equally in thy state of
accusation learn to weep manifestly. Then,
if thou hast a wound, seek herbs and a physi-
cian ; and yet in thy punishments thou shalt be
able to mitigate thy sufferings. For I will even
confess that I alone of you am here, and that
terror must be foregone. I have myself felt the
destruction ; and therefore I warn those who are


but


■ [Catechumens falling away before baptism mu3t not despair,
persevere and remain under discipline.]


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


213


wounded to walk more cautiously, to put thy
hair and thy beard in the dust of the earth, and
to be clothed in sackcloth, and to entreat from
the highest King will aid thee, that thou perish
not perchance from among the people.

L. WHO HAVE APOSTATIZED FROM GOD.

Moreover, when war is waged, or an enemy
attacks, if one be able either to conquer or to
be hidden, they are great trophies ; but unhappy
will he be who shall be taken by them. He
loses country and king who has been unwilling
to fight worthily for the truth, for his country, or
for Ufe. He ought to die rather than go under
a barbarian king ; and let him seek slavery who
is willing to transfer himself to enemies without
law. Then, if in warring thou shouldst die for thy
king, thou hast conquered, or if thou hast given
thy hands, thou hast perished uninjured by law.
The enemy crosses the river ; do thou hide under
thy lurking-place ; or, if he can enter or not, do
not linger. Everywhere make thyself safe, and
thy friends also ; thou hast conquered. And
take watchful care lest any one enter in that
lurking-place. It will be an infamous thing if
any one declares himself to the enemy. He
who knows not how to conquer, and runs to
deliver himself up, has weakly foregone praise
for neither his own nor his country's good.
Then he was unwilling to live, since life itself
will perish. If any one is without God, or pro-
fane from the enemy, they are become as sound-
ing brass, or deaf as adders : such men ought
abundantly to pray or to hide themselves.

LI. OF INFANTS.

The enemy has suddenly come flooding us
over with war ; and before they could flee, he
has seized upon the helpless children. They
cannot be reproached, although they are seen
to be taken captive ; nor, indeed, do I excuse
them. Perhaps they have deserved it on account
of the faults of their parents ; therefore God
has given them up. However, I exhort the
adults that they run to arms, and that they
should be born again, as it were, to their Mother
from the womb. Let them avoid a law that is
terrible, and always bloody, impious, intractable,
living with the life of the beasts ; for when
another war by chance should be to be waged,
he who should be able to conquer or even rightly
to know how to beware . . .

LII. DESERTERS.

For deserters are not called so as all of one
kind. One is wicked, another partially with-
draws ; but yet true judgments are decreed for
both. So Christ is fought against, even as Csesar
is obeyed. Seek the refuge of the king, if thou


hast been a delinquent. Do thou implore of
Him ; do thou prostrate confess to Him : He
will grant all things whose also are all our things.
The camp being replaced, beware of sinning
further ; do not wander long as a soldier through
caves of the wild beasts. Let it be sin to thee
to cease from unmeasured doing.

LIII. TO THE SOLDIERS OF CHRIST.

When thou hast given thy name to the war-
fare, thou art held by a bridle. Therefore begin
thou to put away thy former doings. Shun lux-
uries, since labour is threatening arms. With all
thy virtue thou must obey the king's command,
if thou wishest to attain the last times in glad-
ness. He is a good soldier, always wait for
things to be enjoyed. Be unwilling to flatter
thyself; absolutely put away sloth, that thoa
mayest daily be ready for what is set before thee..
Be careful beforehand ; in the morning revisit
the standards. When thou seest the war, takC'
the nearest contest. This is the king's glory, to
see the soldiery prepared. The king is present ;
desire that ye may fight beyond his hope. He
makes ready gifts. He gladly looks for the
victory, and assigns you to be a fit follower. Do
thou be unwilling to spare thyself besides for
Belial ; be thou rather diligent, that he may
give fame for your death,

LIV. OF FUGITIVES.

The souls of those that are lost deservedly
of themselves separate themselves. Begotten of
him, they again recur to those things which are
his. The root of Cain, the accursed seed, breaks
forth and takes refuge in the servile nation under
a barbarian king ; and there the eternal flame
will torment on the day decreed. The fugitive
will wander vaguely without discipline, loosed
from law to go about through the defiles of
the ways. These, therefore, are such whom no
penalty has restrained. If they will not live,
they ought to be seen by the idols.

LV. OF THE SEED OF THE TARES.

Of the seed of the tares, who stand mingled
in the Church. When the times of the harvest
are filled up, the tares that have sprung up are
separated from the fruit, because God had not
sent them. The husbandman separates all those
collected tares. The law is our field ; whoever
does good in it, assuredly the Ruler Himself
will afford a true repose, for the tares are burned
with fire. If, therefore, you think that under
one they are delaying, you are wrong. I desig-
nate you as barren Christians ; cursed was the
fig-tree without fruit in the word of the Lord,
and immediately it withered away. Ye do not
works ; ye prepare no gift for the treasury, and yet
ye thus vainly think to deserve well of the Lord.


214


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


LVI. TO THE DISSEMBLER.

Dost thou dissemble with the law that was
given with such public announcement, crying
out in the heavenly word of so many prophets ?
If a prophet had only cried out to the clouds,'
the word of the Lord uttered by him would
surely suffice. The law of the Lord proclaims
itself into so many volumes of prophets ; none of
them excuses wickedness ; thus even thou wish-
est from the heart to see good things ; thou art
also seeking to live by deceits. Why, then, has
the law itself gone forth with so much pains?
Thou abusest the commands of the Lord, and
yet thou callest thyself His son. Thou art seen,
if thou wilt be such without reason. I say, the
Almighty seeks the meek to be His sons, those
who are upright with a good heart, those who
are devoted to the divine law ; but ye know
already where He has plunged the wicked.

LVII. THAT WORLDLY THINGS ARE ABSOLUTELY TO
BE AVOIDED.

If certain teachers, while looking for your
gifts or fearing your persons, relax individual
things to you, not only do I not grieve, but I am
compelled to speak the truth. Thou art going
to vain shows with the crowd of the evil one,
where Satan is at work in the circus with din.
Thou persuadest thyself that everything that
shall please thee is lawful. Thou art the off-
spring of the Highest, mingled with the sons of
the devil. Dost thou wish to see the former
things which thou hast renounced? Art thou
again conversant with them? What shall the
Anointed One profit thee ? Or if it is permitted,
■on account of weakness, that thou foolishly pro-
fane . . , Love not the world, nor its contents.
:Such is God's word, and it seems good to thee.
'Thou observest man's command, and shunnest
God's. Thou trustedst to the gift whereby the
teachers shut up their mouths, that they may be
:silent, and not tell thee the divine commands ;
while I speak the truth, as thou art bound look
to the Highest. Assign thyself as a follower
to Him whose son thou wast. If thou seekest to
live, being a believing man, as do the Gentiles,
the joys of the world remove thee from the
grace of Christ. With an undisciplined mind
thou seekest what thou presumest to be easily
lawful, both thy dear actors and their musical
strains ; nor carest thou that the offspring of
such an one should babble follies. While thou
thinkest that thou art enjoying life, thou art
improvidently erring. The Highest commands,
and thou shunnest His righteous precepts.

LVIII. THAT THE CHRISTIAN SHOULD BE SUCH.

When the Lord says that man should eat bread
with groaning, here what art thou now doing, who


' Or, " If one prophet only had cried out to the world.'


desirest to live with joy ? Thou seekest to rescind
the judgment uttered by the highest God when
He first formed man ; thou wishest to abandon
the curb of the law. If the Almighty God have
bidden thee live with sweat, thou who art living
in pleasure wilt already be a stranger to Him.
The Scripture saith that the Lord was angry with
the Jews. Their sons, refreshed with food, rose
up to play. Now, therefore, why do we follow
these circumcised men ? ^ In what respect they
perished, we ought to beware ; the greatest part
of you, surrendered to luxuries, obey them. Thou
transgressest the law in staining thyself with dyes :
against thee the apostle cries out ; yea, God cries
out by him. Your dissoluteness, says he, in itself
ruins ^ you. Be, then, such as Christ wishes you
to be, gentle, and in Him joyful, for in the world
you are sad. Run, labour, sweat, fight with sad-
ness. Hope comes with labour, and the palm is
given to victory. If thou wishest to be refreshed,
give help and encouragement to the martyr. Wait
for the repose to come in the passage of death.

LIX. TO THE MATRONS OF THE CHURCH OF THE
LIVING GOD.

Thou wishest, O Christian woman, that the
matrons should be as the ladies of the world.
Thou surroundest thyself with gold, or with the
modest silken garment. Thou givest the terror
of the law from thy ears to the wind. Thou
affectest vanity with all the pomp of the devil.
Thou art adorned at the looking-glass with thy
curled hair turned back from thy brow. And
moreover, with evil purposes, thou puttest on
false medicaments, on thy pure eyes the stibium,
with painted beauty, or thou dyest thy hair that
it may be always black. God is the overlooker,
who dives into each heart. But these things are
not necessary for modest women. Pierce thy
breast with chaste and modest feeling. The law
of God bears witness that such laws fail from
the heart which believes ; to a wife approved
of her husband, let it suffice that she is so, not by
her dress, but by her good disposition. To put
on clothes which the cold and the heat or too
much sun demands, only that thou mayest be
approved modest, and show forth the gifts of thy
capacity among the people of God. Thou who
wast formerly most illustrious, givest to thyself
the guise of one who is contemptible. She who
lay without life, was raised by the prayers of the
widows. She deserved this, that she should be
raised from death, not by her costly dress, but by
her gifts. Do ye, O good matrons, flee from
the adornment of vanity ; such attire is fitting for
women who haunt the brothels. Overcome the
evil one, O modest women of Christ. Show
forth all your wealth in giving.


2 Sponte profectos.

3 Deperdunt.


i


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COAIMODIANUS.


215


LX. TO THE SAME AGAIN.

Hear my voice, thou who vvishest to remain a
Christian woman, in what way the blessed Paul
commands you to be adorned. Isaiah, more-
over, the teacher and author that spoke from
heaven, for he detests those who follow the wick-
edness of the world, says : The daughters of
Zion that are lifted up shall be brought low. It
is not right in God that a faithful Christian
woman should be adorned. Dost thou seek to
go forth after the fashion of the Gentiles, O thou
who art consecrated to God? God's heralds,
crying aloud in the law, condemn such to be
unrighteous women, who in such wise adorn
themselves. Ye stain your hair ; ye paint the
opening of your eyes with black ; ye Hft up your
pretty hair one by one on your painted brow ;
ye anoint your cheeks with some sort of ruddy
colour laid on ; and, moreover, ear-rings hang
down with very heavy weight. Ye bury your
neck with necklaces ; with gems and gold ye
bind hands worthy of God with an evil presage.
Why should I tell of your dresses, or of the whole
pomp of the devil? Ye are rejecting the law
when ye wish to please the world. Ye dance
in your houses ; instead of psalms, ye sing love
songs. Thou, although thou mayest be chaste,
dost not prove thyself so by following evil things.
Christ therefore makes you, such as you are,
equal with the Gentiles. Be pleasing to the
hymned chorus, and to an appeased Christ with
ardent love fervently offer your savour to Christ.

LXI. IN THE CHURCH TO ALL THE PEOPLE OF
GOD.

I, brethren, am not righteous who am lifted
up out of the filth, nor do I exalt myself; but I
grieve for you, as seeing that out of so great a
people, none is crowned in the contest ; certain-
ly, even if he does not himself fight, yet let him
suggest encouragement to others. Ye rebuke
calamity ; O belly, stuff yourself out with luxury.
The brother labours in arms with a world op-
posed to him ; and dost thou, stuffed with wealth,
neither fight, nor place thyself by his side when
he is fighting? O fool, dost not thou perceive
that one is warring on behalf of many? The
whole Church is suspended on such a one if he
conquers. Thou seest that thy brother is with-
held, and that he fights with the enemy. Thou
desirest peace in the camp, he outside rejects it.
Be pitiful, that thou mayest be before all things
saved. Neither dost thou fear the Lord, who
cries aloud with such an utterance ; even He
who commands us to give food even to our ene-
mies. Look forward to thy meals from that
Tobias who always on every day shared them
entirely with the poor man. Thou seekest to
feed him, O fool, who feedeth thee again. Dost
thou wish that he should prepare for me, who is


setting before him his burial? The brother op-
pressed with want, nearly languishing away, cries
out at the splendidly fed, and with distended
belly. What sayest thou of the Lord's day?
If he have not placed himself before, call forth
a poor man from the crowd whom thou mayest
take to thy dinner. In the tablets is your hope
from a Christ refreshed.

LXII. TO HIM WHO WISHES FOR MARTYRDOM.

Since, O son, thou desirest martyrdom, hear.
Be thou such as Abel was, or such as Isaac him-
self, or Stephen, who chose for himself on the
way the righteous life. Thou indeed desirest
that which is a matter suited for the blessed.
First of all, overcome the evil one with thy good
acts by living well ; and when He thy King shall
see thee, be thou secure. It is His own time,
and we are living for both ; so that if war fails,
the martyrs shall go in peace. Many indeed err
who say. With our blood we have overcome the
wicked one ; and if he remains, they are unwill-
ing to overcome. He perishes by lying in wait,
and the wicked tbus feels it ; but he that is law-
ful does not feel the punishments applied. With
exclamation and with eagerness beat thy breast
with thy fists. Even now, if thou hast conquered
by good deeds, thou art a martyr in Him. Thou,
therefore, who seekest to extol martyrdom with
thy word, in peace clothe thyself with good
deeds, and be secure.'

LXIII. THE DAILY WAR.

Thou seekest to wage war, O fool, as if wars
were at .peace. From the first formed day in
the end you fight. Lust precipitates you, there
is war ; fight with it. Luxury persuades, neglect
it ; thou hast overcome the war. Be sparing of
abundance of wine, lest by means of it thou
shouldest go wrong. Restrain thy tongue from
cursing, because with it thou adorest the Lord.
Repress rage. Make thyself peaceable to all.
Beware of trampling on thy inferiors when
weighed down with miseries. Lend thyself as a
protector only, and do no hurt. Lead your-
selves in a righteous path, unstained by jealousy.
In thy riches make th3'self gentle to those that
are of little account. Give of thy labour, clothe
the naked. Thus shalt thou conquer. Lay
snares for no man, since thou servest God. Look
to the beginning, whence the envious enemy has
perished. I am not a teacher, but the law itself
teaches by its proclamation. I'hou wearest such
great words vainly, who in one moment seekest
without labour to raise a martyrdom to Christ.

LXIV. OF THE ZEAL OF CONCUPISCENCE.

In desiring, thence thou perishest, whilst thou
art burning with envy of thy neighbour. Tliou


[Compare Clement's reproof, vol. ii. p. 423, this series.]


2l6


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


extinguishest thyself, when thou inflamest thy-
self within. Thau art jealous, O envious man,
of another who is struggling with evil, and de-
sirest that thou niayest become equally the pos-
sessor of so much wealth. The law does not
thus behold him when thou seekest to fall upon
him. Depending on all things, thou livest in
the lust of gain ; and although thou art guilty to
thyself, thou condemnest thyself b^ thy own
judgment. The greedy survey of the eyes is
never satisfied. Now, therefore, if thou mayest
return and consider, lust is vain . . . whence
God cries out. Thou fool, this night thou art
summoned. Death rushes after thee. Whose,
then, shall be those talents ? By hiding the un-
righteous gains in the concealed treasury, when
the Lord shall supply to every one his daily life.
Let another accumulate ; do thou seek to live
well. And when thy heart is conscious of God,
thou shalt be victor over all things ; yet I do not
say that thou shouldest boast thyself in public,
when thou art watching for thy day by living
without fraud. The bird perishes in the midst
of food, or carelessly sticks fast in the bird-lime.
Think that in thy simphcity thou hast much to
beware of. Let others trangress these bounds.
Do thou always look forward.

LXV, THEY WHO GIVE FROM EVIL.

Why dost thou senselessly feign thyself good
by the wound of another? Whence thou be-
stowest, another is daily weeping. Dost not thou
believe that the Lord sees those things from
heaven? The Highest says. He does not ap-
prove of the gifts of the wicked. Thou shalt
break forth upon the wretched when thou shalt
have gained a place. One gives gifts that he
may make another of no account ; or if thou
hast lent on usury, taking twenty-four per cent,
thou wishest to bestow charity that thou mayest
purge thyself, as being evil, with that which is
evil. The Almighty absolutely rejects such works
as these. Thou hast given that which has been
wrung from tears ; that candidate, oppressed
with ungrateful usuries, and become needy, de-
plores it. Besides having obtained an opportu-
nity for the exactors, thy enemy for the present
is the people ; thou consecrated, hast become
wicked for reward. Also thou wishest to atone
for thyself by the gain of wages. O wicked one,
thou deceivest thyself, but none else.

LXVI. OF A DECEITFUL PEACE.

The arranged time comes to our people ;
there is peace in the world ; and, at the same
time, ruin is weighing us down from the entice-
ment of the world, (the destruction) of the reck-
less people whom ye have rent into schism.
Either obey the law of the city, or depart from
it. Ye behold the mote sticking in our eyes,


and will not see the beam in your own. A
treacherous peace is coming to you ; persecution
is rife ; the wounds do not appear ; and thus,
without slaughter, ye are destroyed. War is
waged in secret, because, in the midst of peace
itself, scarcely one of you has behaved himself
with caution. O badly fortified, and foretold
for slaughter, ye praise a treacherous peace, —
a peace that is mischievous to you. Having
become the soldiers of another than Christ, ye
have perished.

LXVII. TO THE READERS.

I warn certain readers only to consider, and to
give material to others by an example of life,
to avoid strife, and to shun so many quarrels ; to
repress terror, and never to be proud ; more-
over, denounce the righteous obedience of wicked
men. Make yourselves like to Christ your Mas-
ter, O little ones. Be among the lilies of the
field by your benefits ; ye have become blessed
when ye bear the edicts ; ye are flowers in the
congregation ; ye are Christ's lanterns. Keep
what ye are, and ye shall be able to tell it.

LXVIII. TO MINISTERS.

Exercise the mystery of Christ, O deacons,
with purity ; therefore, O ministers, do the com-
mands of your Master ; do not play the person
of a righteous judge ; strengthen your office by
all things, as learned men, looking upwards,
always devoted to the Supreme God. Render
the faithful sacred ministries of the altar to God,
prepared in divine matters to set an example ;
yourselves incline your head to the pastors, so
shall it come to pass that ye may be approved
of Christ.

LXIX. TO god's shepherds.

A shepherd, if he shall have confessed, has
doubled his conflict. Moreover, the apostle bids
that such should be teachers. Let him be a
patient ruler ; let him know when he may relax
the reins ; let him terrify at first, and then anoint
with honey ; and let him first observe to do him-
self what he says. The shepherd who minds
worldly things is esteemed in fault, against whose
countenance thou mightest dare to say anything.
Gehenna itself bubbles up in hell with rumours.
Woe to the wretched people which wavers with
doubtful brow ! if such a shepherd shall be pres-
ent to it, it is almost ruined. But a devout man
restrains it, governing rightly. The swarms are
rejoiced under suitable kings ; in such there is
hope, and the entire Church lives.

Lxx. I speak to the elder-born.
The time demands that I alone should speak
to you truth.

He is often admonished by one word which


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


217


many refuse. I wish you to turn your hatred
against me alone, that the hearts of all may
tremble at the tempter. Look to the saying
that truly begets hatred, (and consider) hc^w
many tilings I have lately indeed foretold con-
cerning a delusive peace, while, alas, the enticing
seducer has come upon you unawares, and be-
cause ye have not known how that his wiles were
imminent, ye have perished ; ye work absolutely
bitter things, but that is itself the characteristic
of the world ; not any one for whom ye inter-
cede acts for nothing. He who takes refuge
from your fire, plunges in the whirlpool. Then
the wretch, stripped naked, seeks assistance from
you. The judges themselves shudder at your
frauds ... of a shorter title, I should not la-
bour at so many lines. Ye who teach, look upon
those to whom ye willingly tend, when for your-
selves 3"e both receive banquets and feed upon
them. For those things are ye already almost
entering the foundations of the earth.

LXXI. TO VISIT THE SICK.

If thy brother should be weak — I speak of
the poor man — do not empty-handed visit such
an one as he lies ill. Do good under God ; pay
your obedience by your money. Thence he
shall be restored ; or if he should perish, let a
poor man be refreshed, who has nothing where-
with to pay you, but the Founder and Author of
the world on his behalf. Or if it should displease
thee to go to the poor man, always hateful, send
money, and something whence he may recover
himself. And, similarly, if thy poor sister* lies
upon a sick-bed, let your matrons begin to bear
her victuals. God Himself cries out. Break thy
bread to the needy. There is no need to visit
with words, but with benefits. It is wicked that
thy brother should be sick through want of
food. Satisfy him not with words. He needs
meat and drink. Look upon such assuredly
weakened, who are not able to act for them-
selves. Give to them at once. I pledge my
word that fourfold shall be given you by God.

LXXII. TO THE POOR IN HEALTH.

What can healthful poverty do, unless wealth
be present ? Assuredly, if thou hast the means,
at once communicate also to thy brother. Be
responsible to thyself for one, lest thou shouldst
be said to be proud. I promise that thou shalt
live more secure than the rich man. Receive
into thy ears the teaching of the great Solomon :
God hates the poor man to be a pleader on
high.' Therefore submit thyself, and give hon-
our to Him that is powerful ; for the soft speech
— thou knowest the proverb — melts.^ One is


' [Prov. xxiii. i
2 [Prov. XV. I.]


conquered by service, even although there be an
ancient anger. If the tongue be silent, thou
hast found nothing better. If there should not
wholesomely be an art whereby life may be gov-
erned, either give aid or direction by the com-
mand of Him that is mighty. Let it not shame
or grieve you that a healthy man should have
faith. In the treasury, besides, thou oughtest to
give of thy labour, even as that widow whom the
Anointed One preferred.^

LXXIII. THAT SONS ARE NOT TO BE BEWAILED.

Although the death of sons leaves grief for
the heart, yet it is not right either to go forth in
black garments, or to bewail them. The Lord
prudently says that ye must grieve with the mind,
not with outward show, which is finished in the
week. In the book of Solomon the promises
of the Lord concerning the resurrection are for-
gotten if thou wouldest make thy sons martyrs,
and thus with thy voice will bewail them. Art
thou not ashamed without restraint to lament
thy sons, like the Gentiles? Thou tearest thy
face, thou beatest thy breast, thou takest off
thy garments ; and dost thou not fear the Lord,
whose kingdom thou desirest to behold ? Mourn
as it is right, but do not do wrong on their be-
half. Ye therefore are such. What less than
Gentiles are ye ? Ye do as the crowds that are
descended from the diabohcal stock. Ye cry
that they are extinct. With what advantage, O
false one, thou hast perished ! The father has
not led his son with grief to be slain at the altar,
nor has the prophet mourned over a deceased
son with grief, nor even has a weeping parent.
But one devoted to God was hastily dying.

LXXIV. OF FUNERAL POMP.

Thou who seekest to be careful of the pomp
of death art in error. As a servant of God, thou
oughtest even in death to please Him. Alas
that the lifeless body should be adorned in death !
O true vanity, to desire honour for the dead !
A mind enchained to the world ; not even in
death devoted to Christ. Thou knowest the
proverbs. He wished to be carried through
the forum. Thus ye, who are like to him, and
living with untrained mind, wish to have a happy
and blessed day at your death, that the people
may come together, and that you may see praise
with mourning. Thou dost not foresee whither
thou mayest deserve to go when dead. Lo, they
are following thee ; and thou, perchance, art
already burning, being driven to punishment.
What will the pomp benefit the dead man?
Thou shalt be accused, who seekest them on
account of those gatherings. Thou desirest to
live under idols. Thou deceivest thyself.

3 [Mark xii. 42; Luke xxi. 2.]


2l8


THE INSTRUCTIONS OF COMMODIANUS.


LXXV. TO THE CLERKS.

They will assemble together at Easter, that
day of ours most blessed ; and let them rejoice,
who ask for divine entertainments. Let what is
sufficient be expended upon them, wine and food.
Look back at the source whence these things
may be told on your behalf. Ye are wanting in
a gift to Christ, in moderate expenditure. Since
ye yourselves do it not, in what manner can ye
persuade the righteousness of the law to such
people, even once in the year? Thus often
blasphemy suggests to many concerning you.

LXXVr. OF THOSE WHO GOSSIP, AND OF SILENCE.

When a thing appears to anybody of no con-
sequence, and is not shunned, and it rushes
forth, as if easy, whilst thou abusest it. Fables
assist it when thou comest to pour out prayers,
or to beat thy breast for thy daily sin. The
trumpet of the heralds sounds forth, while the
reader is reading, that the ears may be open,
and thou rather impedest them. Thou art luxu-
rious with thy lips, with which thou oughtest to
groan. Shut up thy breast to evils, or loose
them in thy breast. But since the possession of
money gives barefacedness to the wealthy, thence
every one perishes when they are most trusting
to themselves. Thus, moreover, the women
assemble, as if they would enter the bath. They
press closely, and make of God's house as if it
were a fair. Certainly the Lord frightened the
house of prayer. The Lord's priest commanded
with "sursum corda," when prayer was to be
made, that your silence should be m^de. Thou
answerest fluently, and moreover abstainest not
from promises. He entreats the Highest on
behalf of a devoted people, lest any one should
perish, and thou turnest thyself to fables. Thou
mockest at him, or detractest from thy neigh-
bour's reputation. Thou speakest in an undisci-
plined manner, as if God were absent — as if
He who made all things neither hears nor sees.

LXXVII. TO THE DRUNKARDS.

I place no limit to a drunkard ; but I prefer
a beast. From those who are proud in drinking
thou withdrawest in thine inner mind, holding
the power of the ruler, O fool, among Cyclopes.
Thence in the histories thou criest, While I am
dead I drink not. Be it mine to drink the best
things, and to be wise in heart. Rather give
assistance (what more seekest thou to abuse?)
to the lowest pauper, and ye shall both be re-
freshed. If thou doest such things, thou extin-
guishest Gehenna for thyself,

LXXVIII. TO THE PASTORS.

Thou who seekest to feed others, and hast
prepared what thou couldest by assiduously


feeding, hast done rightly. But still look after
the poor man, who cannot feed thee again : then
will thy table be approved by the one God. The
Almighty has bidden such even especially to be
fed. Consider, when thou feedest the sick, thou
art also lending to the High One. In that thing
the Lord has wished that you should stand before
Him approved.

LXXIX. TO THE PETITIONERS.

If thou desirest, when praying, to be heard
from heaven, break the chains from the lurking-
places of wickedness ; or if, pitying the poor,
thou prayest by thy benefits, doubt not but what
thou shalt have asked may be given to the peti-
tioner. Then truly, if void of benefits, thou
adorest God, do not thus at all make thy prayers
vainly.

LXXX. THE NAME OF THE MAN OF GAZA.

Ye who are to be inhabitants of the heavens
with God-Christ, hold fast the beginning, look
at all things from heaven. Let simplicity, let
meekness dwell in your body. Be not angry
with thy devout brother without a cause, for ye
shall receive whatever ye may have done from
him. This has pleased Christ, that the dead
should rise again, yea, with their bodies ; and
those, too, whom in this world the fire has
burned, when six thousand years are completed,
and the world has come to an end. The heaven
in the meantime is changed with an altered
course, for then the wicked are burnt up with
divine fire. The creature with groaning burns
with the anger of the highest God. Those who
are more worthy, and who are begotten of an
illustrious stem, and the men of nobility under
the conquered Antichrist, according to God's
command living again in the world for a thou-
sand years, indeed, that they may serve the
saints, and the High One, under a servile yoke,
that they may bear victuals on their neck. More-
over, that they may be judged again when the
reign is finished. They who make God of no
account when the thousandth year is finished
shall perish by fire, when they themselves shall
speak to the mountains. All flesh in the monu-
ments and tombs is restored according to its
deed : they are plunged in hell ; they bear their
punishments in the world ; they are shown to
them, and they read the things transacted from
heaven ; the reward according to one's deeds in
a perpetual tyranny. I cannot comprehend all
things in a little treatise ; the curiosity of the
learned men shall find my name in this.'


' [Dr. Schaff says this A'l^wi?;! Gaztsi' may indicate his possession
of the weahh of truth, etc. But, if we read the acrostical initials o!
the verses iackmarcfs, we find the name Coinmodianus Meudicus
Chrtsti, which betokens his poverty also, in the spirit of St. Paul
(2 Cor. vi. 10; also. Rev. ii. 9), which our author would naturally
make emphatic here.]


ELUCIDATION. 219


ELUCIDATION.

I KNOW nothing of the second poem of our author, and am indebted for the following particulars
to Dr. Schaff.'

It is an apologetic poem against Jews and Gentiles, written in uncouth hexameters, and dis-
cusses in forty-seven sections the doctrine concerning God and the Redeemer and mankind. It
treats of the names of Son and Father ; and here, probably, he lays himself open to the charge
of Patripassian heresy. He passes to the obstacles encountered by the Gospel, warns the Jews
and the Gentiles to forsake their unprofitable devotions, and enlarges on the eschatology, as he con-
ceives of it. Let me now quote textually, as follows : —

"The most interesting part of the second poem is the conclusion. It contains a fuller
description of Antichrist than the first poem. The author expects that the end of the world will
come with the seventh persecution. The Goths will conquer Rome and redeem the Christians ;
but then Nero will appear as the heathen Antichrist, reconquer Rome, and rage against the Chris-
tians three years and a half He will be conquered in turn by the Jewish and real Antichrist from
the East, who, after the defeat of Nero and the burning of Rome, will return to Judea, perform
false miracles, and be worshipped by the Jews. At last Christ appears, that is, God himself (from
the Monarchian stand-point of the author) with the lost Twelve Tribes [?] as his army, which had
lived beyond Persia in happy simplicity and virtue. Under astounding phenomena of nature he
will conquer Antichrist and his host, convert all nations, and take possession of the holy city of
Jerusalem."

This idea of a double Antichrist re-appears in Lactantius, Inst. Div., vii. 16 seqq.

This second poem was discovered by Cardinal Pitra in 1852. The two poems were edited by
E. Ludwig, Leipzig, 1877 and 1878.

' Hht., vol. ii. 855.


ORIGEN.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. FREDERICK CROMBIE, D.D.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO THE

WORKS OF ORIGEN


[a.d. 185-230-254.] The reader will remember the rise and rapid development of the great
Alexandrian school, and the predominance which was imparted to it by the genius of the illustri-
ous Clement.' But in Origen, his pupil, who succeeded him at the surprising age of eighteen,
a new sun was to rise upon its noontide. Truly was Alexandria " the mother and mistress of
churches " in the benign sense of a nurse and instructress of Christendom, not its arrogant and
usurping imperatrix.

The full details of Origen's troubled but glorious career are given by Dr. Crombie, who in my
opinion deserves thanks for the kind and apologetic temper of his estimate of the man and the
sublime doctor, as well as of the period of his life. Upon the fervid spirit of a confessor in an
age of cruelty, lust, and heathenism, what right have we to sit in judgment? Of one whose very
errors were virtues at their source, how can a Christian of our self-indulgent times presume to
speak in censure ? Well might the Psalmist exclaim,^ " Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord ;
for His mercies are great : let me not fall into the hand of man."

Justly has it been urged that to those whose colossal labours during the ante-Nicene period
exposed them to hasty judgment, and led them into mistakes, much indulgence must be shown.
The language of theology was but assuming shape under their processes, and we owe them an
incalculable debt of gratitude : but it was not yet moulded into precision ; nor had great councils,
presided over by the Holy Ghost, as yet afforded those safeguards to freedom of thought which
gradually defined the limits of orthodoxy. To no single teacher did the Church defer. Holy
Scripture and the quod ab omnibus were the grand presci-iption, against which no individual
prelate or doctor could prevail, against which no see could uplift a voice, without chastisement
and subjection. Over and over again were the bishops of patriarchal and apostolic sees, includ-
ing Rome, adjudged heretics, and anathematized by the inexorable law of truth, and of " the
faith once delivered to the saints," which not even " an angel from heaven " might presume to
change or to enlarge. But before the great Synodical period (a.d. 325 to 451), while ortho-
doxy is marvellously maintained and witnessed to by Origen and Tertullian themselves, their
errors, however serious, have never separated them from the grateful and loving regard of those
upon whom their lives of heroic sorrow and suffering have conferred blessings unspeakable. The
Church cannot leave their errors uncorrected. Their persons she leaves to the Master's award :
their characters she cherishes, while their faults she deplores.

The great feature of the ante-Nicene theology, even in the mistakes of the writers, is its
reliance on the Holy Scripture, ^\'hat wealth of Scripture they lavish in their pages ! We identify
the Scriptures by their aid ; but, were they lost in other forms, we might almost restore them from

' Vol. ii p. 105, this series. ^ 2 Sam. xxiv. 14.


224 • INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


their pages. And forever is the Church indebted to Origen for -the patient and encyclopedic
labour and learning which he bestowed on the Scriptures in producing his Hexapla. Would that,
in his interpretations of the inspired text, he had more strictly adhered to the counsels of Leonides,
who was of Bacon's opinion, that the meanings which flow naturally from the holy text are
sweetest and best, even as that wine is best which is not crushed out and extorted from the
grape, but which trickles of itself from the ripe and luscious cluster in all its purity and natural
flavour. So Hooker remarks ; and his view is commonly accepted by critics, that the interpreta-
tion of a text which departeth most from its natural rendering is commonly the worst.

It is too striking an illustration of the childlike simplicity of the primitive faithful to be passed
by, in Origen's history, that anecdote of his father, Leonides, who was himself a confessor and
martyr : how he used to strip the bosom of his almost inspired boy as he lay asleep, and imprint
kisses on his naked breast, " the temple of the Holy Ghost." That blessed Spirit, he believed,
was near to his own lips when he thus saluted a Christian child, " for of such is the kingdom of
heaven." From a child, this other Timothy "knew the Scriptures" indeed. His own doting
father imbued him with the literature of the Greeks : but, far better, he taught him to love the
lively oracles of the Lord of glory; and in these he became so proficient, even from tender
years, that he puzzled his parent with his " understanding and answers," like the holy Child of
Nazareth when He heard the doctors in the Temple, and also " asked them questions." \\\ will
he was also a martyr from his youth, and to the genuine spirit of martyrdom we must attribute
that heroic fault of his youth which he lived to condemn in riper years, and which, evil and
rash as it was, enabled the Church, once and for all, to give an authoritative interpretation to the
language of the Saviour, and to guard her children thenceforth from similar exploits of pious
mistake. None can doubt the purity of the motive. Few draw the important inference of the
nature of the Church's conflict with that intolerable prevalence of sensuality and shameless vice
which so impressed her children with the import of Christ's words, " Blessed are the pure in heart :
for they shall see God."

Here follows the very full account of the life of Origen by Dr. Crombie, professor of biblical
criticism in St. Mary's College, St. Andrews : —

Origen, surnamed Adamantinus, was born in all probability at Alexandria, about the year
185 A.D.' Notwithstanding that his name is derived from that of an Egyptian deity,^ there seems
no reason to doubt that his parents were Christian at the time of his birth. His father Leonides
was probably, as has been conjectured,^ one of the many teachers of rhetoric or grammar who
abounded in that city of Grecian culture, and appears to have been a man of decided piety.
Under his superintendence, the youthful Origen was not only educated in the various branches
of Grecian learning, but was also required daily to commit to memory and to repeat portions of
Scripture prescribed him by his father ; and while under this training, the spirit of inquiry into
the meaning of Scripture, which afterwards formed so striking a feature in the literary character
of the great Alexandrine, began to display itself. Eusebius ^ relates that he was not satisfied with
the plain and obvious meaning of the text, but sought to penetrate into its deeper signification,
and caused his father trouble by the questions which he put to him regarding the sense of par-
ticular passages of Holy Writ. Leonides, like many parents, assumed the appearance of rebuking
the curiosity of the boy for inquiring into things which were beyond his youthful capacity, and
recommended him to be satisfied with the simple and apparent meaning of Scripture, while he is

1 Cf. Redepenning's Origenes, vol. i. pp. 417-420 (Erste Beilage: iiber Origenes Geburtsjahr und den Ort, wo er geboren wurde).
[His surname denotes the strength, clearness, and point of his mind and methods. It is generally given Adamantius.]

2 Horus vel Or. Cf. Ibid. (Zweite Beilage: iiber Namen und Beinamen der Origenes). [But compare Cave, vol. i. p. 322. Lives
0/ the Fathers, Oxford, 1840.]

3 Encyclopaedie der Katholischen Theologie, s.v. Origenes.
* Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. ii. § 9,


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


described as inwardly rejoicing at the signs of genius exhibited by his son, and as giving thanks
to God for having made him the parent of such a child.' But this state of things was not to last ;
for in the year 202, when Origen was about seventeen years of age, the great persecution of the
Christians under Septimius Severus broke out, and among the victims was his father Leonides,
who was apprehended and put in prison. Origen wished to share the fate of his father, but was
prevented from quitting his home by the artifice of his mother, who was obliged to conceal his
clothes to prevent him from carrying out his purpose. He wrote to his father, however, a
letter, exhorting him to constancy under his trials, and entreating him not to change his convic-
tions for the sake of his family .2 By the death of his father, whose property was confiscated to
the imperial treasury, Origen was left, with his mother and six younger brothers dependent upon
him for support. At this juncture, a wealthy and benevolent lady of Alexandria opened to him
her house, of which he became an inmate for a short time. The society, however, which he found
there was far from agreeable to the feelings of the youth. The lady had adopted as her son one
Paul of Antioch, whom Eusebius terms an " advocate of the heretics tRen existing at Alexandria."
The eloquence of the man drew crowds to hear him, although Origen could never be induced to
regard him with any favour, nor even to join with him in any act of worship, giving then, as Euse-
bius remarks, " unmistakeable specimens of the orthodoxy of his faith." ^

Finding his position in his household so uncomfortable, he resolved to enter upon the career of
a teacher of grammar, and to support himself by his own exertions. As he had been carefully in-
structed by his father in Grecian literature, and had devoted himself to study after his death, he was
enabled successfully to cany out his intention. And now begins the second stadium of his career.

The diligence and ability with which Origen prosecuted his profession speedily attracted
attention and brought him many pupils. Among others who sought to avail themselves of his
instructions in the principles of the Christian religion, were two young men, who afterwards
became distinguished in the history of the Church, — Plutarch, who died the death of martyrdom,
and Heraclas, who afterwards became bishop of Alexandria. It was not, however, merely by his
success as a teacher that Origen gained a reputation. The brotherly kindness and unwearied
affection which he displayed to all the victims of the persecution, which at that time was raging
with peculiar severity at Alexandria under the prefect Aquila, and in which many of his old pupils
and friends were martyred, are described as being so marked and conspicuous, as to draw down
upon him the fury of the mob, so that he was obliged on several occasions to flee from house to
house to escape instant death. It is easy to understand that services of this kind could not fail
to attract the attention of the heads of the Christian community at Alexandria ; and partly, no
doubt, because of these, but chiefly on account of his high literary reputation, Bishop Demetrius
appointed him to the office of master in the Catechetical School, which was at that time vacant
(by the departure of Clement, who had quitted the city on the outbreak of the persecution),
although he was still a layman, and had not passed his eighteenth year. The choice of Deme-
trius was amply justified by the result. Origen discontinued his instructions in literature, in order
to devote himself exclusively to the work of teaching in the Catechetical School. For his labours
he refused all remuneration. He sold the books which he possessed, — many of them manu-
scripts which he himself had copied, — on condition of receiving from the purchaser four obols ■*
a day ; and on this scanty pittance he subsisted, leading for many years a life of the greatest
asceticism and devotion to study. After a day of labour in the school, he used to devote the
greater part of the night to the investigation of Scripture, sleeping on the bare ground, and
keeping frequent fasts. He carried out literally the command of the Saviour, not to possess two
coats, nor wear shoes. He consummated his work of mortification of the flesh by an act of self-

' Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. ii. §§ lo, ii.

2 Eusebius, Hi'si. Eccles. ,h. vi. c. li.: 'Ejrejje, fiij 5i' iina<; aWo tX i|>povi}OT)?.

3 T^9 ff eVetVou TTfpi ttji' tticttii' bp8oSo^ia<; cvapyi) napei\eTO SeiyfiaTa.
* The obol was about three-halfpence of English money.


226 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

mutilation, springing from a perverted interpretation of our Lord's words in Matt. xix. 12, and the
desire to place himself beyond the reach of temptation in the intercourse which he necessarily
had to hold with youthful female catechumens.' This act was destined to exercise a baneful
influence upon his subsequent career in the Church.

During the episcopate of Zephyrinus (201-218) Origen visited Rome,^ and on his return
again resumed his duties in the Catechetical School, transferring the care of the younger catechu-
mens to his friend and former pupil Heraclas, that he might devote himself with less distraction
to the instruction of the more advanced, and to the more thorough investigation and exposition
of Scripture. With a view to accomplish this more successfully, it is probable that about this
time he set himself to acquire a knowledge of the Hebrew language, the fruit of which may be
seen in the fragments which remain to us of his 7nag7ium opus, the Hexapla; and as many among
the more cultured heathens, attracted by his reputation, seem to have attended his lectures, he
felt it necessary to make himself more extensively acquainted with the doctrines of the Grecian
schools, that he might meet kis opponents upon their own ground, and for this purpose he attended
the prelections of Ammonius Saccas, at that time in high repute at Alexandria as an expounder
of the Neo-Platonic philosophy, of which school he has generally been considered the founder.
The influence which the study of philosophical speculations exerted upon the mind of Origen
may be traced in the whole course of his after development, and proved the fruitful source of
many of those errors which were afterwards laid to his charge, and the controversies arising out
of which disturbed the peace of the Church during the two following centuries. As was to be
expected, the fame of the great Alexandrine teacher was not confined to his native city, but
spread far and wide ; and an evidence of this was the request made by the Roman governor of
the province of Arabia to Demetrius and to the prefect of Egypt, that they would send Origen to
him that he might hold an interview with one whose reputation was so great. We have no details
of this visit, for all that Eusebius relates is that, " having accomplished the objects of his journey,
he again returned to Alexandria." 3 It was in the year 216 that, the Emperor Caracalla visited
Alexandria, and directed a bloody persecution against its inhabitants, especially the literary mem-
bers of the community, in revenge for the sarcastic verses which had been composed against him
for the murder of his brother Geta, a crime which he had perpetrated under circumstances of the
basest treachery and cruelty.

Origen occupied too prominent a position in the literary society of the city to be able to
remain with safety, and therefore withdrew to Palestine to his friend Bishop Alexander of Jerusalem,
and afterwards to Caesarea, where he received an honourable welcome from Bishop Theoctistus.
This step proved the beginning of his after troubles. These two men, filled with becoming
admiration for the most learned teacher in the Church, requested him to expound the Scriptures
in their presence in a public assembly of the Christians. Origen, although still a layman, and
without any sacerdotal dignity in the Church, complied with the request. When this proceeding
reached the ears of Demetrius, he was filled with the utmost indignation. "Such an act was
never either heard or done before, that laymen should deliver discourses in the presence of the
bishops," 4 was his indignant remonstrance to the two offending bishops, and Origen received a
command to return immediately to Alexandria. He obeyed, and for some years appears to have
devoted himself solely to his studies in his usual spirit of self-abnegation.

It was probably during this period that the commencement of his friendship with Ambrosius
is to be dated. Little is known of this individual. Eusebius s states that he had formerly been

1 For a full discussion of the doubts which have been thrown upon the credibility of Eusebius in this matter by Schnitzer and Baur,
cf. Redepenning, Origcnes, vol. i. pp. 444-458, and Hefele, Encyclopaedie dcr Katholischen Theologie, s.v. Origenes.

2 [Where he met with Hippolytus, and heard him preach, according to St. Jerome.]

3 Euseb., Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 19, § 16.
■* Ibid., b. vi. c. 19.

S Ibid., b- vi. c. 18.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 227

an adherent of the Valentinian heresy, but had been converted by the arguments and eloquence
of Origen to the orthodox faith of the Church. They became intimate friends ; and as Ambrose
seems to have been possessed of large means, and entertained an unbounded admiration of the
learning and abilities of his friend, it was his delight to bear the expenses attending the transcrip-
tion and publication of the many works which he persuaded him to give to the world. He fur-
nished him " with more than seven amanuenses, who relieved each other at stated times, and with
an equal number of transcribers, along with young girls who had been practised in calligraphy," '
to make fair copies for publication of the works dictated by Origen. The literary activity of
these years must have been prodigious, and probably they were among the happiest which Origen
ever enjoyed. Engaged in his favourite studies, surrounded by many friends, adding yearly to his
own stores of learning, and enriching the literature of the Church with treatises of the highest
value in the department of sacred criticism and exegesis, it is difficult to conceive a condition of
things more congenial to the mind of a true scholar. Only one incident of any importance seems
to have taken place during these peaceful years, — his visit to Julia Mammsea, the pious mother
of Alexander Severus. This noble lady had heard of the fame of Origen, and invited him to visit
her at Antioch, sending a military escort to conduct him from Alexandria to the Syrian capital.
He remained with her some time, " exhibiting innumerable illustrations of the glory of the Lord,
and of the excellence of divine instruction, and then hastened back to his accustomed studies." ^
These happy years, however, were soon to end. Origen was called to Greece, probably about
the year 228,^ upon what Eusebius vaguely calls "the pressing need of ecclesiastical affairs." -^
But, this has generally been understood s to refer to the prevalence of heretical views in the Church
there, for the eradication of which the assistance of Origen was invoked. Before entering on this
journey, he obtained letters of recommendation from his bishop.^ He passed through Palestine
on his way to Greece, and at Csesarea received at the hands of his friends Alexander and Theoc-
tistus ordination to the ofhce of presbyter, — an honour which proved to him afterwards the
source of much persecution and annoyance. No doubt the motives of his friends were of the
highest kind, and among them may have been the desire to take away the ground of objection
formerly raised by Demetrius against the public preaching of a mere layman in the presence of a
bishop. But they little dreamed of the storm which this act of theirs was to raise, and of the
consequences which it was to bring upon the head of him whom they had sought to honour.
After completing his journey through Greece, Origen returned to Alexandria about the year 230.
He there found his bishop greatly incensed against him for what had taken place at Ccesarea.
Nor did his anger expend itself in mere objurgations and rebukes. In the year 231 a synod was
summoned by Demetrius, composed of Egyptian bishops and Alexandrian presbyters, who declared
Origen unworthy to hold the office of teacher, and excommunicated him from the fellowship of
the Church of Alexandria. Even this did not satisfy the vindictive feeling of Demetrius. He
summoned a second synod, in which the bishops alone were permitted to vote, and by their suf-
frages Origen was degraded from the office of presbyter, and intimation of this sentence was
ordered to be made by encyclical letter to the various Churches. The validity of the sentence
was recognised by all of them, with the exception of those in Palestine, Phoenicia, Arabia, and
Achaia; a remarkable proof of the position of influence which was at that time held by the
Church of Alexandria. Origen appears to have quitted the city before the bursting of the storm,
and betook himself to Csesarea, which henceforth became his home, and the seat of his labours
for a period of nearly a quarter of a century. The motives which impelled Demetrius to this

' Euseb., Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 23.

2 Euseb., Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 21: Trap' r\ \povov SiaTpi'i|/as, Tr^eio-Ta xe o<jo. el's rrjv ToO Kvpiov So^av koI t^s toO ddov &iSa<TKa-
\eCov dpcT^? eTTiSeifa/ievos, «7rl Tas CTuv^Sei? ecrnevSe 5iaTpi/3as.

3 Cf. Hefele, Encyclopaedic, ^K.q.., s.v. Origenes.

* 'ETreiyouo-rj? XPf'i! eKKArjcriaerTiKwi' kv^Ko. TtpaynaTuiv.

5 Cf. Redepenning, vol. i. p. 406, etc.

6 Cf. Hid.


228 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

treatment of Origen have been variously stated and variously criticised. Eusebius ' refers his
readers for a full account of all the matters involved to the treatise which he and Pamphilus com-
posed in his defence ; but this work has not come down to us,^ although we possess a brief notice
of it in the Bibliotheca of Photius,^ from which we derive our knowledge of the proceedings of
the two synods. There seems little reason to doubt that jealousy of interference on the part of the
bishops of another diocese was one main cause of the resentment displayed by Demetrius ; while
it is also possible that another alleged cause, the heterodox character of some of Origen's opinions,
as made known in his already published works, among which were his Stromata and De Priiicipiis,'^
may have produced some effect upon the minds of the hostile bishops. Hefele 5 asserts that the
act of the Palestinian bishops was contrary to the Church law of the time, and that Demetrius
was justified on that ground for his procedure against him. But it may well be doubted whether
there was any generally understood law or practice existing at so early a period of the Church's
history. If so, it is difficult to understand how it should have been unknown to the Palestinian
bishops ; or, on the supposition of any such existing law or usage, it is equally difficult to con-
ceive that either they themselves or Origen should have agreed to disregard it, knowing as they
did the jealous temper of Demetrius, displayed on the occasion of Origen's preaching at C^sarea
already referred to. This had drawn from the Alexandrine bishop an indignant remonstrance, in
which he had asserted that such an act was " quite unheard of before ; " ^ but, to this statement
the Csesarean bishops replied in a letter, in which they enumerated several instances of laymen
w^ho had addressed the congregation. 7 The probabilities, therefore, are in favour of there being
no generally understood law or practice on the subject, and that the procedure, therefore, was
dictated by hierarchical jealousy on the part of Demetrius. According to Eusebius,^ indeed, the
act of mutilation already referred to was made a ground of accusation against Origen ; and there
seems no doubt that there existed an old canon of the Church,^ based upon the words in Deut.
xxiii. I, which rendered one who had committed such an act ineligible for office in the Church.
But there is no trace of this act, as disqualifying Origen for the office of presbyter, having been
urged by Demetrius, so far as can be discovered from the notices of the two synods which have
been preserved by Rufinus and Photius. And it seems extremely probable, as- Redepenning
remarks, '° that if Demetrius were acquainted with this act of Origen, as Eusebius says he was,"
he made no public mention of it, far less that he made it a pretence for his deposition.

Demetrius did not long survive the execution of his vengeance against his unfortunate cate-
chist. He died about a year afterwards, and was succeeded by Heraclas, the friend and former
pupil of Origen. It does not, however, appear that Heraclas made any effort to have the sen-
tence against Origen recalled, so that he might return to the early seat of his labours. Origen
devoted himself at Csesarea chiefly to exegetical studies upon the books of Scripture, enjoying the
countenance and friendship of the two bishops Alexander and Theoctistus, who are said by Euse-
bius " to have attended him the whole time as pupils do their master." He speedily raised the
theological school of that city to a degree of reputation which attracted many pupils. Among
those who placed themselves under his instructions were two young Cappadocians, who had come
to Csesarea with other intentions, but who were so attracted by the whole character and person-
ality of Origen, that they immediately became his pupils. The former of these, afterwards Gregory

^ Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 22 and c. 33.

2 With the exception of the first book; cf. Migne, vol. ix. pp. 542-632.

3 Cf. Photii Bibliotheca, ed. Hoeschel, p. 298.

4 Eusebius expressly mentions that both these works, among others, were published before he left Alexandria. — Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 24.

5 s.v. Origenes.

6 Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 19.

7 Ibid.

8 Ibid., b. vi. c. 8.

9 6 aKpwTTjpiao-as ka.vTov firj yei-eVeio KAT)pi/cds. Cf. Redepennbg, vol. t. pp. 208, 216, 218.
*° Cf. Redepenning, vol. i. p. 409, note 2.

" Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 8.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 229

Thaumaturgus, Bishop of New Csesarea, has left us, in the panegyric which he wrote after a disci-
pleship of five years, a full and admiring account of the method of his great master.

The persecution under the Emperor Maximin obliged Origen to take refuge in Csesarea in
Cappadocia, where he remained in concealment about two years in the house of a Christian lady
named Juliana, who was the heiress of Symmachus, the Ebionite translator of the Septuagint, and
from whom he obtained several mss. which had belonged to Symmachus. Here, also, he com-
posed his Exhortation to Mai-tyrdojn, which was expressly written for the sake of his friends
Ambrosius and Protoctetus, who had been imprisoned on account of their Christian profession, but
who recovered their freedom after the death of Maximin, — an event which allowed Origen to
return to the Palestinian Csesarea and to the prosecution of his labours. A visit to Athens,
where he seems to have remained some time, and to Bostra in Arabia, in order to bring back to
the true faith Bishop Beryllus, who had expressed heterodox opinions upon the subject of the
divinity of Christ, (in which attempt he proved successful,) \vere the chief events of his life during
the next five years. On the outbreak of the Decian persecution, however, in 249, he was impris-
oned at Tyre, to which city he had gone from Csesarea for some unknown reason, and was made
to suffer great cruelties by his persecutors. The effect of these upon a frame worn out by ascetic
labours may be easily conceived. Although he survived his imprisonment, his body was so weak-
ened by his sufferings, that he died at Tyre in 254, in the seventieth year of his age.

The character of Origen is singularly pure and noble ; for his moral qualities are as remarkable
as his intellectual gifts. The history of the Church records the names of few whose patience and
meekness under unmerited suffering were more conspicuous than his. How very differently would
Jerome have acted under circumstances like those which led to Origen's banishment from Alexan-
dria ! And what a favourable contrast is presented by the self-denying asceticism of his whole
life, to the sins which stained the early years of Augustine, prior to his conversion ! The impres-
sion which his whole personality made upon those who came within the sphere of his influence is
evidenced in a remarkable degree by the admiring affection displayed towards him by his friend
Ambrose and his pupil Gregory. Nor was it friends alone that he so impressed. To him belongs
the rare honour of convincing heretics of their errors, and of leading them back to the Church ; a
result which must have been due as much to the gentleness and earnestness of his Christian char-
acter, as to the prodigious learning, marvellous acuteness, and logical power, which entitle him to
be regarded as the greatest of the Fathers. It is singular, indeed, that a charge of heresy should
have been brought, not only after his death, but even during his life, against one who rendered
such eminent services to the cause of orthodox Christianity. But this charge must be considered
in reference to the times when he lived and wrote. No General Council had yet been held to
settle authoritatively the doctrine of the Church upon any of those great questions, the discussion
of which convulsed the Christian world during the two following centuries ; and in these circum-
stances greater latitude was naturally permissible than would have been justifiable at a later period.
Moreover, a mind so speculative as that of Origen, and so engrossed with the deepest and most
difficult problei7<s of human thought, must sometimes have expressed itself in a way liable to be
misunderstood. But no doubt the chief cause of his being regarded as a heretic is to be found in
the haste with which he allowed iriany of his writings to be published. Had he considered more
carefully what he intended to bring before the public eye, less occasion would have been furnished
to objectors, and the memory of one of the greatest scholars and most devoted Christians that the
world has ever seen would have been freed, to a great extent at least, from the reproach of heresy.

Origen was a very voluminous author. Jero"ie says that he wrote more than any individual
could read; and Epiphanius • relates that his v.ritings amounted to 6,000 volumes, by which
statement we are probably to understand that ever/ individual treatise, large or small, including
each of the numerous homilies, was counted as a separate volume. The admiration entertained

• Hares , Ixiv. 63.


230 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

for him by his friend Ambrosius, and the readiness with which the latter bore all the expenses of
transcription and pubhcation, led Origen to give to the world much which otherwise would never
have seen the light.

The works of the great Adamantinus may be classed under the following divisions : —

(i) EXEGETICAL WORKS.

These comprise 2xoA.ta, brief notes on Scripture, of which only fragments remain : To/aoi,
Commentaries, lengthened expositions, of which we possess considerable portions, including those
on Matthew, John, and Epistle to the Romans ; and about 200 Homilies, upon the principal
books of the Old and New Testaments, a full list of which may be seen in Migne's edition. In
these works his peculiar system of interpretation found ample scope for exercise ; and although
he carried out' his principle of allegorizing many things, which in their historical and literal sig-
nification offended his exegetical sense, he nevertheless maintains that " the passages which hold
good in their historical acceptation are much more numerous than those which contain a purely
spiritual meaning." ' The student will find much that is striking and suggestive in his remarks
upon the various passages which he brings under review. For an account of his method of inter-
preting Scripture, and the grounds on which he based it, the reader may consult the fourth book
of the treatise On the Principles.

(2) CRITICAL WORKS.

The great critical work of Origen was the Hexapla or Six-columned Bible ; an attempt to
provide a revised text of the Septuagint translation of Old Testament Scripture. On this under-
taking he is said to have spent eight-and- twenty years of his life, and to have acquired a knowledge
of Hebrew in order to qualify himself for the task. Each page of this work consisted, with the
exception to be noticed immediately, of six columns. In the first was placed the current Hebrew
text ; in the second, Jhe same represented m Greek letters ; in the third, the version of Aquila ;
m the fourth, that of Symmachus ; in the fifth, the text of the LXX., as it existed at the time ;
and in the sixth, the version of Theodotion. Having come into possession also of certain other
Greek translations of some of the books of Scripture, he added these in their appropriate place,
so that the work presented in some parts the appearance of seven, eight, or nine columns, and
was termed Heptapla, Octopla, or Enneapla, in consequence. He inserted critical marks in the
text of the LXX., an asterisk to denote what ought to be added, and an obelus to denote what
ought to be omitted ; taking the additions chiefly from the version of Theodotion. The work,
with the omission of the Hebrew column, and that representing the Hebrew in Greek letters, was
termed Tetrapla ; and with regard to it, it is uncertain whether it is to be considered a preliminary
work on the part of Origen, undertaken by way of preparation for the larger, or merely as an
excerpt from the latter. The whole extended, it is said, to nearly fifty volumes, and was, of
course, far too bulky for common use, and too costly for transcription. It was placed in some
repository in the city of Tyre, from which it was removed after Origen's death to the library at
Caesarea, founded by Pamphilus, the friend of Eusebius. It is supposed to ha,e been burnt at
the capture of Csesarea by the Arabs in 653 a.d. The column, hcvcver, containing the version
of the LXX. had been copied by Pamphilus and Eusebius, along with the critical marks of
Origen, although, owing to carelessness on the part o'l subsequent transcribers, the text was
soon again corrupted. The remains of this work ^vere published by Montfaucon at Paris, 1713,
2 vols, folio ; by Bahrdt at Leipsic in 1769 ; and is at present again in course of pubhcation from
the Clarendon press, Oxford, under the editors'iip of Mr. Field, who has made use of the Syriac-
Hexaplar version, and has added various fragments not contained in prior editions. (For a full
and critical account of this work, the English reader is referred to Dr. Sara. Davidson's Biblical
Criticism, vol. i. ch. xii., which has been made use of for the above notice.)

I \_De Frincip., B. IV. i. 19. S.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 231

(3) APOLOGETICAL WORKS.
His great apologetical work was the treatise undertaken at the special request of his friend
Ambrosius, in answer to the attack of the heathen philosopher Celsus on the Christian religion, in
a work which he entitled Aoyo? SX-qOrj^, or A True Discourse, Origen states that he had heard
that there were two individuals of this name, both of them Epicureans, the earlier of the two having
lived in the time of Nero, and the other in the time of Adrian, or later.' Redepenning is of
opinion that Celsus must have composed his work in the time of Marcus Aurelius (161-180 a.d.),
on account of his supposed mention of the Marcionites (whose leader did not make his appear-
ance at Rome before 142 a.d.), and of the Marcellians (followers of the Carpocratian Marcellina),
a sect which was founded after the year 155 a.d. under Bishop Anicetus.^ Origen believed his
opponent to be an Epicurean, but to have adopted other doctrines than those of Epicurus, because
he thought that by so doing he could assail Christianity to greater advantage.^ The work which
Origen composed in answer to the so-styled True Discourse consists of eight books, and belongs
to the latest years of his life. It has always been regarded as the great apologetic work of antiq-
uity ; and no one can peruse it without being struck by the multifarious reading, wonderful acute-
ness, and rare subtlety of mind which it displays. But the rule which Origen prescribed to him-
self, of not allowing a single objection of his opponent to remain unanswered, leads him into a
minuteness of detail, and into numerous repetitions, which fatigue the reader, and detract from
the interest and unity of the work. He himself confesses that he began it on one plan, and
carried it out on another.'* No doubt, had he lived to re-write and condense it, it would have
been more worthy of his reputation. But with all its defects, it is a great work, and well deserves
the notice of the students of Apologetics. The table of contents subjoined to the translation will
convey a better idea of its nature than any description which our limits would permit us to give.

(4) DOGMATIC WORKS.

These include the Srpaj/^aTet?, a work composed in imitation of the treatise of Clement of the
same name, and consisting originally of ten books, of which only three fragments exist in a Latin
version by Jerome ; 5 a treatise on the Resurrection, of which four fragments remain ; ^ and the
treatise llept 'Apx^i', De Friticipiis, which contains Origen's views on various questions of
systematic theology. The work has come down to us in the Latin translation of his admirer
Rufinus ; but, from a comparison of the few fragments of the original Greek which have been
preserved, we see that Rufinus was justly chargeable with altering many of Origen's expressions,
in order to bring his doctrine on certain points more into harmony with the orthodox views of the
time. The De Principiis consists of four books, and is the first of the works of Origen in this
series, to which we refer the reader.

(5) PRACTICAL WORKS.

Under this head we place the little treatise Tlept Eu^^?, On Prayer, written at the instance of
his friend Ambrose, and which contains an exposition of the Lord's Prayer ; the Adyos Tr/aorpeTrrtKos
CIS /xaprvpLov, Exhortation to Martyrdom, composed at the outbreak of the persecution by Max-
imian, when his friends Ambrose and Protoctetus were imprisoned. Of his numerous letters only
two have come down entire, viz., that which was addressed to Julius Africanus, who had ques-
tioned the genuineness of the history of Susanna in the apocryphal additions to the book of
Daniel, and that to Gregory Thaumaturgus on the use of Greek philosophy in the explanation
of Scripture, although, from the brevity of the latter, it is questionable whether it is more than a

' Cf. Contra Celsum, I. c. viii. ad fin. * Preface, b. i. § 6.

* Cf. Redepenning, vol. ii. p. 131, note 2. S Migne, vol. i pp. 102-107.

3 Contra Cclsuvi, I. ch. viii. ' Migne, vol. i. pp. 91-100.


232 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

fragment of the original." The ^lAo/coAta, Philocalia, was a compilation from the writings of
Origen, intended to explain the difficult passages of Scripture, and executed by Basil the Great
and Gregory of Nazianzum ; large extracts of which have been preserved, especially of that part
which was taken from the treatise against Celsus. The remains were first printed at Paris in
1618, and again at Cambridge in 1676, in the reprint of Spencer's edition of the Contra Celsum.
In the Benedictine edition, and in Migne's reprint, the various portions are quoted in foot-notes
under the respective passages of Origen's writings.

(6) EDITIONS OF ORIGEN.^

The first published works of Origen were his Homilies, which appeared in 1475, although
neither the name of the publisher nor the place of publication is given. These were followed by
the treatise against Celsus in the translation of Christopher Persana, which appeared at Rome in
1481 ; and this, again, by an edition of the Homilies at Venice in 1503, containing those on the
first four books of Moses, Joshua, and Judges. The first collective edition of the whole works
was given to the world in a Latin translation by James Merlin, and was published in two folio
volumes, first at Paris in 15 12 and 15 19, and afterwards at Paris in 1522 and 1530. A revision
of Merlin's edition was begun by Erasmus, and completed, after his death, by Beatus Rhenanus.
This appeared at Basle in 1536 in two folio volumes, and again in 1557 and 15 71. A much better
and more complete edition was undertaken by the Benedictine Gilbertus Genebrardus, which was
pubHshed also in two volumes foHo at Paris in 1574, and again in 1604 and 16 19. Hoeschel
published the treatise against Celsus at Augsburg in 1605 ; Spencer, at Cambridge in 1658 and
1677, to which was added the Philocalia, which had first appeared in a Latin translation by
Genebrardus, and afterwards in Greek by Tarinus at Paris in 16 18 and 1624, in quarto. Huet,
Bishop of Avranches, published the exegetical wTitings in Greek, including the Commentaries on
Matthew and John, in two volumes folio, of which the one appeared at Rouen in 1668, and the
other at Paris in 1679. The great edition by the two learned Benedictines of St. Maur — Charles
de la Rue, and his nephew Vincent de la Rue — was published at Paris between the years 1733
and 1759. This is a work of immense industry and labour, and remains the standard to the
present time. It has been reprinted by Migne in his series of the Greek Fathers, in nine volumes,
large 8vo. In Oberthiir's series of the Greek Fathers, seven volumes contain the chief portion of
Origen's writings ; while Lommatzsch has published the whole in twenty-five small volumes, Berlin,
1831-48, containing the Greek text alone.

For further information upon the life and opinions of Origen, the reader may consult Rede-
penning's Origenes, 2 vols., Bonn, 1841, 1846 ; the articles in Herzog's Encyclopadie and Wetzer's
and Wette's Kirche'n-Lexikon, by Kling and Hefele respectively ; the brilliant sketch by Pressens6
in his Martyrs and Apologists ; ^ and the learned compilation of Huet, entitled Origeniatia, to be
found in the ninth volume of Migne's edition.

[In the Edinburgh series the foregoing Life was delayed till the appearance of the second
volume. The earlier volume appeared with a preface, as follows :] —

The name of the illustrious Origen comes before us in this series in connection with his
works De Principiis, Epistola ad Africanutn, Epistola ad Gregorium,'^ and the treatise Cofitra
Celsiunfi

It is in his treatise Ilcpt 'Ap^^v, or, as it is commonly known under the Latin title, De Princi-

' Both of these are translated in the first volume of Origen's works in this series.

2 Abridged from Redepenning.

3 Harwood's translation.
* i.e., Thaumaturgus.

S [The Messrs. Clark announced, in their original plan, that, of the manifold works of this great Father, only these specimens could be
given.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 233

piis, that Origen most fully develops his system, and brings out his peculiar principles. None of
his works exposed him to so much animadversion in the ancient Church as this. On it chiefly
was based the charge of heresy which some vehemently pressed against him, — a charge from
which even his firmest friends felt it no easy matter absolutely to defend him. The points on
which it was held that he had plainly departed from the orthodox faith, were the four following :
Firsts That the souls of men had existed in a previous state, and that their imprisonment in
material bodies was a punishment for sins which they had then committed. Second, That the
human soul of Christ had also previously existed, and been united to the Divine nature before
that incarnation of the Son of God which is related in the Gospels. Third, That our material
bodies shall be transformed into absolutely ethereal ones at the resurrection ; and Fourth, That all
men, and even devils, shall be finally restored through the mediation of Christ. His principles
of interpreting Scripture are also brought out in this treatise ; and while not a little ingenuity is
displayed in illustrating and maintaining them, the serious errors into which they might too easily
lead will be at once perceived by the reader.

It is much to be regretted that the original Greek of the De Principiis has for the most part
perished. We possess it chiefly in a Latin translation by Rufinus. And there can be no doubt
that he often took great liberties with his author. So much was this felt to be the case, that
Jerome undertook a new translation of the work ; but only small portions of his version have
reached our day. He strongly accuses Rufinus of unfaithfulness as an interpreter, while he also
inveighs bitterly against Origen himself, as having departed from the Catholic Faith, specially in
regard to the doctrine of the Trinity. There seems, however, after all, no adequate reason to
doubt the substantial orthodoxy of our author, although the bent of hi^ mind and the nature of
his studies led him to indulge in many vain and unauthorized speculations.

The Episile to Africanus was drawn forth by a letter which that learned writer had addressed
to Origen respecting the story of Susanna appended to the book of Daniel. Africanus had grave
doubts as to the canonical authority of the account. Origen replies to his objections, and seeks
to uphold the story as both useful in itself, and a genuine portion of the ancient prophetical
writings.

The treatise of Origen Against Celsus is, of all his works, the most interesting to the modern
reader. It is a defence of Christianity in opposition to a Greek philosopher named Celsus, who
had attacked it in a work entitled 'AXr]Or]<; Aoyos, that is, T/ie True Word, or The True Discourse.
Of this work we know nothing, except from the quotations contained in the answer given to it
by Origen. Nor has anything very certain been ascertained respecting its author. According to
Origen, he was a follower of Epicurus, but others have regarded him as a Platonist. If we may
judge of the work by those specimens of it preserved in the reply of Origen, it was little better
than a compound of sophistry and slander. But there is reason to be grateful for it, as having
called forth the admirable answer of Origen. This work was written in the old age of our author,
and is composed with great care ; while it abounds with proofs of the widest erudition. It is also
perfectly orthodox ; and, as Bishop Bull has remarked, it is only fair that we should judge from
a work written with the view of being considered by the world at large, and with the most
elaborate care, as to the mature and finally accepted views of the author.

The best edition of Origen's works is that superintended by Charles and Charles Vincent de
la Rue, Paris, 1 783, 4 vols, fob, which is reprinted by Migne. There is also an edition in 25
volumes, based upon that of De la Rue, but without the Latin translation, by Lommatzsch, Berlin,
1 831-1848. The De Principiis has been separately edited by Redepenning, Leipzig, 1836.
Spencer edited the Contra Celsum, Cambridge, 1677.

[Professor Crombie was assisted in the Contra Celsum by the Rev. W. H. Cairns, M.A.,
Rector of the Dumfries Academy. Mr. Cairns (since deceased) was the translator of Books VII.
and VIII. of that work.]


234 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

[The Works of Origen included in this volume having been placed in my hands by the Right
Reverend Editor of the present series (who restricts himself to a limited task of supervision), I
have endeavoured to do for them that which seemed needful in the circumstances. The tempta-
tion was strong to enter upon annotations, for which no one of the authors among the Ante-Nicene
Fathers offers larger room, and to insert corrections of various sorts, based upon modern progress
and research. But, in accordance with the plan of this series, I have been forced to resist this
temptation, and have striven only to be useful in matters which, though of great moment, are toil-
some, and in no wise flattering to editorial vanity or conceit.

I have silendy corrected numerous typographical errors which exist in the Edinburgh edition,
and have sought to secure uniformity in the details of reproducing the work, and, above all,
accuracy in all its parts. Particularly, I may mention that the Scripture references needed cor-
rection to the extent of mbre than a hundred places, and that references to classical and other
writers were often quite astray. A very few notes, enclosed in brackets, are all that I have deemed
it expedient or proper, on my part, to add.

While no one who is aware of human infirmity will ever dare to claim perfection in the typog-
raphy of a book which has passed through the press under his hands, yet in the present case I
venture to assure the student and reader that no pains or effort have been spared in order to make
the volume as accurate as possible in this respect. Much experience and training incline me to
hope and beheve that success has attended my efforts. S.]


i


PREFATORY NOTICE TO ORIGEN'S WORKS.


[The great biblical scholar and critic of the first half of the third century deserves a more
cordial recognition and appreciation than have always been accorded to him. While it is true
that in various matters he has strange, even wild, fancies, and gives utterance to expressions
which can hardly, if at all, be justified ; while it is also true that he indulges beyond all reason
(as it appears to us of the present age) in utterly useless speculations, and carries to excess his
great love of allegorizing, — yet these are rather of the nature of possible guesses and surmises
on numerous topics, of more or less interest, than deliberate, systematic teaching as matters of
faith. He frequently speaks of them in this wise, and does not claim for these guesses and
speculations any more credit than they may appear to his readers to be worth. In the great
fundamentals of the Christian creed Origen is unquestionably sound and true. He does not
always express himself in accordance with the exact definitions which the Church Catholic secured
in the century after his decease, as a necessary result of the struggle with Arian and other deadly
heresies ; but surely, in fairness, he is not to be too severely judged for this. Some writers (e.g.,
J. M. Neale, in his History of the Patriajxhate of Alexandria) give an unfavorable and con-
demnatory view of Origen and his career, but I am of opinion that Neale and others push their
objections much too far. I hold that Bishop Bull, and men like him, are nearer to truth and
justice in defending Origen and his lifelong labors in the cause of the Master.

The Ilepi 'Apxwv, which has come to us through the professedly paraphrastic but really unsat-
isfactory version of Rufinus, is the work which has given chief offence, and brought much odium
upon Origen ; but as this was written in early life, and it is doubtful in how far Origen is responsi-
ble for many things that are in it, it is only fair and just to judge him by such works as the Kara
KeXo-oi/ and his valuable Homilies on various books of Holy Scripture.' These go far to prove
clearly that he, whom Dr. Barrow designates as " the father of interpreters," is worthy the high
estimate which ancient as well as modern defenders of his good name have fully set forth, and to
justify the conviction, that, if we possessed more out of the numerous works of his which have
entirely perished, we should rank him even more highly than is done by Bishop Bull in his
Dcfensio Fidei Nicena?

In conclusion, I give a paragraph from the very valuable Introduction to the Criticism of the
New Testament, by Dr. F. H. Scrivener,^ one of the ablest of living biblical scholars and critics : —

" Origen is the most celebrated biblical critic of antiquity. His is the highest name among
the critics and expositors of the early Church. He is perpetually engaged in the discussion of
various readings of the New Testament, and employs language, in describing the then existing
state of the text, which would be deemed strong if applied even to its present condition, after the
changes which sixteen more centuries must needs have produced. . . . Seldom have such warmth
of fancy and so bold a grasp of mind been united with the lifelong, patient industry which
procured for this famous man the honourable appellatioi? of Ada??iantius.'' S.]

' It is matter of deep regret that the proposal of the Edinburgh publishers, to ii ■:Iude in Origen's works a translation of his Homilies,
did not meet with sufficient encouragement to warrant them in adding these to the pres -nt series.

2 Book II. cap. ix.

3 Third editiofi, Cambridge, 1883, pp. 418, 509.

235


PROLOGUE OF RUFINUS.


I KNOW that very many of the brethren, in-
duced by their thirst for a knowledge of the
Scriptures, have requested some distinguished
men, well versed in Greek learning, to translate
Origen into Latin, and so make him accessible
to Roman readers. Among these, when our
brother and colleague ' had, at the earnest en-
treaty of Bishop Damasus, translated two of the
Homilies on the Song of Songs out of Greek into
Latin, he prefixed so elegant and noble a preface
to that work, as to inspire every one with a most
eager desire to read and study Origen, saying
that the expression, " The King hath brought me
into his chamber," ^ was appropriate to his feel-
ings, and declaring that while Origen in his
other works surpassed all writers, he in the Song
of Songs surpassed even himself. He promises,
indeed, in that very preface, that he will present
the books on the Song of Songs, and numerous
others of the works of Origen, in a Latin trans-
I lation, to Roman readers. But he, finding
greater pleasure in compositions of his own,
pursues an end that is attended with greater
fame, viz., in being the author rather than the
translator of works. Accordingly we enter upon
the undertaking, which was thus begun and ap-
proved of by him, although we cannot compose in
a style of elegance equal to that of a man of such
distinguished eloquence ; and therefore I am
afraid lest, through my fault, the result should fol-
low, that that man, whom he deservedly esteems
as the second teacher of knowledge and wisdom
I in the Church after the apostles, should, through
the poverty of my language, appear far inferior
to what he is. And this consideration, which
frequently recurred to my mind, kept me silent,
land prevented me from yielding to the numerous
[entreaties of my brethren, until your influence,
I my very faithful brother Macarius, which is so
j great, rendered it impossible for my unskilful-
jness any longer to offer resistance. And there-
jfore, that I might not find you too grievous an
I exactor, I gave way, even contrary to my resolu-
{ tion ; on the condition and arrangement, how-


' Jerome is the person alluded to.
' Cant. i. 4.


ever, that in my translation I should follow as
far as possible the rule observed by my prede-
cessors, and especially by that distinguished man
whom I have mentioned above, who, after trans-
lating into Latin more than seventy of those
treatises of Origen which are styled Homilies,
and a considerable number also of his writings
on the apostles, in which a good many " stum-
bling-blocks " are found in the original Greek,
so smoothed and corrected them in his transla-
tion, that a Latin reader would meet with noth-
ing which could appear discordant with our
beUef. His example, therefore, we follow, to
the best of our ability ; if not with equal power
of eloquence, yet at least with the same strict-
ness of rule, taking care not to reproduce those
expressions occurring in the works of Origen
which are inconsistent with and opposed to each
other. The cause of these variations we have
explained more freely in the Apologeticiis, which
Pamphilus wrote in defence of the works of
Origen, where we added a brief tract, in which
we showed, I think, by unmistakeable proofs,
that his books had been corrupted in numerous
places by heretics and malevolent persons, and
especially those books of which you now require
me to undertake the translation, i.e., the books
which may be entitled De Principiis or De Prin-
cipatibus, and which are indeed in other respects
full of obscurities and difficulties. For he there
discusses those subjects with respect to which
philosophers, after spending all their* lives upon
them, have been unable to discover anything.
But here our author stro\'e, as much as in him
lay, to turn to the service of religion the belief
in a Creator, and the rational nature of created
beings, which the latter had degraded to pur-
poses of wickedness. If, therefore, we have
found anywhere in his writings, any statement
opposed to that view, wliich elsewhere in his
works he had himself piousl}' laid down regard-
ing the Trinity, we have either omitted it, as
being corrupt, and not the composition of Origen,
or we have brought it forward, agreeably to the
rule which we frequently find affirmed by him-
self. If, indeed, in his desire to pass rapidly
237


I


238


PROLOGUE OF RUFINUS.


on, he has, as speaking to persons of skill and
knowledge, sometimes expressed himself ob-
scurely, we have, in order that the passage might
be clearer, added what we had read more fully
stated on the same subject in his other works,
keeping explanation in view, but adding nothing
of our own, but simply restoring to him what was
his, although occurring in other portions of his
writings.

These remarks, therefore, by way of admoni-
tion, I have made in the preface, lest slanderous
individuals perhaps should think that they had
a second time discovered matter of accusation.
But let perverse and disputatious men have a
care what they are about. For we have in the
meantime undertaken this heavy labour, if God
should aid your prayers, not to shut the mouths
of slanderers (which is impossible, although God
perhaps will do it), but to afford material to
those who desire to advance in the knowledge


of these things. And, verily, in the presence of
God the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, I adjure and beseech every one, who may
either transcribe or read these books, by his be-
lief in the kingdom to come, by the mystery of
the resurrection from the dead, and by that ever-
lasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels,
that, as he would not possess for an eternal in-
heritance that place where there is weeping and
gnashing of teeth, and where their fire is not
quenched and their worm dieth not, he add
nothing to Scripture, and take nothing away from
it, and make no insertion or alteration, but that
he compare his transcript with the copies from
which he made it, and make the emendations
and distinctions according to the letter, and not
have his manuscript incorrect or indistinct, lest
the diiificulty of ascertaining the sense, from the
indistinctness of the copy, should cause greater
difficulties to the readers.


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


PREFACE.

1. All who believe and are assured that grace
and truth were obtained through Jesus Christ,
and who know Christ to be the truth, agreeably
to His own declaration, " I am the truth," '
derive the knowledge which incites men to a good
and happy life from no other source than from
the very words and teaching of Christ. And by
the words of Christ we do not mean those only
which He spake when He became man and tab-
ernacled in the flesh ; for before that time, Christ,
the Word of God, was in Moses and the proph-
ets. For without the Word of God, how could
they have been able to prophesy of Christ ? And
were it not our purpose to confine the present
treatise within the limits of all attainable brevity,
it would not be difficult to show, in proof of this
statement, out of the Holy Scriptures, how Moses
or the prophets both spake and performed all
they did through being filled with the Spirit of
Christ. And therefore I think it sufficient to
quote this one testimony of Paul from the Epis-
tle to the Hebrews,^ in which he says : " By
faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused
to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter ;
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season ; esteeming the reproach of Christ great-
er riches than the treasures of the Egyptians." ^
Moreover, that after His ascension into heaven
He spake in His apostles, is shown by Paul in
these words : '' Or do you seek a proof of Christ,
who speaketh in me ? " •*

2. Since many, however, of those who profess
to believe in Christ differ from each other, not
only in small and trifling matters, but also on
subjects of the highest importance, as, e.g., re-


' John xiv. 6.

^ [Here, and frequently elsewhere (some two hundred times in all),
Origen, \n his extant works, ascribes the authorship of the Epistle
to the Hebrews to St. Paul. Eusebius {Ecclesiastical History,
VI. 25) quotes Origen as saying, " My opinion is this: the thoughts
are the apostle's; but the diction and phraseology belong to some
one who has recorded what the apostle said, and as one who noted
do\yn what his master dictated. If, then, any Church considers this
Epistle as coming from Paul, let it be commended for this ; for neither
did those ancient men deliver it as such without cause. But who it was
that committed the Epistle to writing, is known only to God." S.]

■5 Heb. xi. 24-26.

♦ 2 Cor. xiii. 3.


garding God, or the Lord Jesus Christ, or the
Holy Spirit ; and not only regarding these, but
also regarding others which are created exist-
ences, viz., the powers 5 and the holy virtues ; ^
it seems on that account necessary first of all to
fix a definite limit and to lay down an unmistake-
able rule regarding each one of these, and then
to pass to the investigation of other points. For
as we ceased to seek for truth (notwithstanding
the professions of many among Greeks and Bar-
barians to make it known) among all who claimed
it for erroneous opinions, after we had come to
believe that Christ was the Son of God, and were
persuaded that we must learn it from Himself;
so, seeing there are many who think they hold
the opinions of Christ, and yet some of these
think differently from their predecessors, yet as
the teaching of the Church, transmitted in or-
derly succession from the apostles, and remaining
in the Churches to the present day, is still pre-
served, that alone is to be accepted as truth
which differs in no respect from ecclesiastical
and apostolical tradition.

3. Now it ought to be known that the holy
apostles, in preaching the faith of Christ, deliv-
ered themselves with the utmost clearness on
certain points which they believed to be neces-
sary to every one, even to those who seemed
somewhat dull in the investigation of divine
knowledge ; leaving, however, the grounds of
their statements to be examined into by those
who should deserve the excellent gifts of the
Spirit, and who, especially by means of the Holy
Spirit Himself, should obtain the gift of language,
of wisdom, and of knowledge : while on other
subjects they merely stated the fact that things
were so, keeping silence as to the manner or
origin of their existence ; clearly in order that
the more zealous of their successors, who should
be lovers of wisdom, might have a subject of
exercise on which to display the fruit of their
talents, — those persons, I mean, who should
prepare themselves to be fit and worthy receivers
of wisdom.


s Dominationes.
6 Virtutes.


239


240


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


4. The particular points ' clearly delivered in
the teaching of the apostles are as follow : —

First, That there is one God, who created
and arranged all things, and who, when nothing
existed, called all things into being — God from
the first creation and foundation of the world —
the God of all just men, of Adam, Abel, Seth,
Enos, Enoch, Noe, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
the twelve patriarchs, Moses, and the prophets ;
and that this God in the last days, as He had
announced beforehand by His prophets, sent
our Lord Jesus Christ to call in the first place
Israel to Himself, and in the second place the
Gentiles, after the unfaithfulness of the people
of Israel. This just and good God, the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, Himself gave the law,
and the prophets, and the Gospels, being also
the God of the apostles and of the Old and New
Testaments.

Secondly, That Jesus Christ Himself, who came
(into the world), was born of the Father before
all creatures ; that, after He had been the ser-
vant of the Father in the creation of all things —
" For by Him were all things made " ^ — He in
the last times, divesting Himself (of His glory),
became a man, and was incarnate although God,
and while made a man remained the God which
He was ; that He assumed a body like to our
own, differing in this respect only, that it was
born of a virgin and of the Holy Spirit : that this
Jesus Christ was truly born, and did truly suffer,
and did not endure this death common (to man)
in appearance only, but did truly die ; that He
did truly rise from the dead ; and that after His
resurrection He conversed with His disciples,
and was taken up (into heaven) .

Then, Thirdly, the apostles related that the
Holy Spirit was associated in honour and dig-
nity with the Father and the Son. But in His
case it is not clearly distinguished whether He
is to be regarded as born or innate,^ or also as a
Son of God or not : for these are points which
have to be inquired into out of sacred Scripture
according to the best of our ability, and which
demand careful investigation. And that this
Spirit inspired each one of the saints, whether
prophets or apostles ; and that there was not one
Spirit in the men of the old dispensation, and
another in those who were inspirecl at the advent
of Christ, is most clearly taught throughout the
Churches.

5. After these points, also, the apostolic teach-


' Species.

2 John i. 3.

3 Innatus. The words which Rufinus has rendered " natus an
innalus" are rendered by Jerome in his Epistle to Ai'itns (94 alias
59), " factus an infectus." Criticising the errors in the first book of
the Principles, he says: " Origen declares the Holy Spirit to be
third ill dignity and honour after the Father and the Son ; and although
professing ignorance whether he were created or not (factus an infec-
tus), he indicated afterwards his opinion regarding him, maintaining
that nothing was uncreated except God the Father." Jerome, no doubt,
read yevjjros ij ayei'jjTost ^"d Rufinus yivvT\jo% i) aycvi-ijTos. — R.


ing is that the soul, having a substance ■* and life
of its own, shall, after its departure from the .
world, be rewarded according to its deserts, be-
ing destined to obtain either an inheritance of
eternal life and blessedness, if its actions shall
have procured this for it, or to be delivered up
to eternal fire and punishments, if the guilt of
its crimes shall have brought it down to this :
and also, that there is to be a time of resurrec-
tion from the dead, when this body, which now
" is sown in corruption, shall rise in incorrup-
tion," and that which "is sown in dishonour
will rise in glory." s This also is clearly defined
in the teaching of the Church, that every rational
soul is possessed of free-will and volition ; that
it has a struggle to maintain with the devil and
his angels, and opposing influences,^ because
they strive to burden it with sins ; but if we live
rightly and wisely, we should endeavour to shake
ourselves free of a burden of that kind. From
which it follows, also, that we understand our-
selves not to be subject to necessity, so as to be
compelled by all means, even against our will,
to do either good or evil. For if we are our
own masters, some influences perhaps may im-
pel us to sin, and others help us to salvation ;
we are not forced, however, by any necessity
either to act rightly or wrongly, which those
persons think is the case who say that the courses
and movements of the stars are the cause of
human actions, not only of those which take
place beyond the influence of the freedom of the
will, but also of those which are placed within
our own power. But with respect to the soul, >
whether it is derived from the seed by a process •
of traducianism, so that the reason or substance of
it may be considered as placed in the seminal
particles of the body themselves, or whether it
has any other beginning ; and this beginning it-
self, whether it be by birth or not, or whether
bestowed upon the body from without or no, is
not distinguished with sufficient clearness in the
teaching of the Chu'-ch.

6. Regarding the devil and his angels, and the
opposing influences, the teaching of the Church
has laid down that these beings exist indeed ;
but what they are, or how they exist, it has not
explained with sufficient clearness. This opinion,
however, is held by most, that the devil was an
angel, and that, having become an apostate, he
induced as many of the angels as possible to fall
away with himself, and these up to the present
time are called his angels.

7. This also is a part of the Church's teach-
ing, that the world was made and took its begin-
ning at a certain time, and is to be destroyed on
account of its wickedness. But what existed


I


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


241


before this world, or what will exist after it, has
not*become certainly known to the many, for
there is no clear statement regarding it in the
teaching of the Church.

8. Then, finally, that the Scriptures were writ-
ten by the Spirit of God, and have a meaning,
not such only as is apparent at first sight, but
also another, which escapes the notice of most.
For those (words) which are written are the
forms of certain mysteries,' and the images of
divine things. Respecting which there is one
opinion throughout the whole Church, that the
whole law is indeed spiritual ; but that the spirit-
ual meaning which the law conveys is not known
to all, but to those only on whom the grace of
the Holy Spirit is bestowed in the word of wis-
dom and knowledge.

The term uo-o)/x,aroi/, i.e., incorporeal, is disused
and unknown, not only in many other writings,
but also in our own Scriptures. And if any one
should quote it to us out of the little treatise
entitled The Doctrine of Peter,^ in which the
Saviour seems to say to His disciples, " I am not
an incorporeal demon," ^ I have to reply, in the
first place, that that work is not included among
ecclesiastical books ; for we can show that it was
not composed either by Peter or by any other
person inspired by the Spirit of God. But even
if the point were to be conceded, the word
drroj/xuToi' there does not convey the same mean-
ing as is intended by Greek and Gentile authors
when incorporeal nature is discussed by philoso-
phers. For in the little treatise referred to he
used the phrase " incorporeal demon" to denote
that that form or outline of demoniacal body,
whatever it is, does not resemble this gross and
visible body of ours ; but, agreeably to the in-
tention of the author of the treatise, it must be
understood to mean that He had not such a
body as demons have, which is naturally fine,'*


' Sacramentorum.

2 Eusebius [Eccles. Hist., iii. c. 36), treating of Ignatius, quotes
from his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna as follows: "Writing to
the Smyrnaeans, he (Ignatius) has also em|)Ioyed words respecting
Jesus, I know not whence they are taken, to the following effect:
' But I know and believe that He was seen after the resurrection;
and when He came to Peter and his companions, He said to them,
Take and handle Me, and see that I am not an incorporeal spirit.' "
Jerome, in his catalogue of ecclesiastical writers, says the words are a
quotation from the Gospel of the Nazarenes, a work which he had
recently translated. Origen here quotes them, however, from The
Doctrine p/ Peter-, on which Ruaeus remarks that the words might
be contained in both of these apocryphal works.

3 Daemonium.
* Subtile.


and thin as if formed of air (and for this reason
is either considered or called by many incor-
poreal), but that He had a solid and palpable
body. Now, according to human custom, every-
thing which is not of that nature is called by the
simple or ignorant incorporeal ; as if one were
to say that the air which we breathe was incor-
poreal, because it is not a body of such a nature
as can be grasped and held, or can offer resist-
ance to pressure.

9. We shall inquire, however, whether the thing
which Greek philosophers call do-oj/xuroi', or " in-
corporeal," is found in holy Scripture under
another name. For it is also to be a subject
of investigation how God himself is to be un-
derstood, — whether as corporeal, and formed
according to some shaj^e, or of a different nature
from bodies, — a point which is not clearly
indicated in our teaching. And the same in-
quiries have to be made regarding Christ and
the Holy Spirit, as well as respecting every
soul, and everything possessed of a rational
nature.

10. This also is a part of the teaching of the
Church, that there are certain angels of God,
and certain good influences, which are His ser-
vants in accomplishing the salvation of men.
When these, however, were created, or of what
nature they are, or how they exist, is not clearly
stated. Regarding the sun, moon, and stars,
whether they are living beings or without life,
there is no distinct deliverance.s

Every one, therefore, must make use of ele-
ments and foundations of this sort, according to
the precept, " Enlighten yourselves with the light
of knowledge,"^ if he would desire to form a
connected series and body of truths agreeably
to the reason of all these things, that by clear
and necessary statements he may ascertain the
truth regarding each individual topic, and form,
as we have said, one body of doctrine, by means
of illustrations and arguments, — either those
which he has discovered in holy Scripture, or
which he has deduced by closely tracing out the
consequences and following a correct method.


5 [See note, ?■;//>-<?, at end of cap. vi. S.]

* Hos. X. 12. The words in the text are not the rendering of the
Authorized Version, but that of the Septuagint, which has </)uiTicraTe
eauToi? <l)M<; yi-iocreu);. Where the Masoretic text has pj,') {et tent-
pus) Origen evidently read T\'^~\ {scieutia), the similarity oi Van
and Daleth accounting for the error of the transcriber.


242


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


BOOK I.


1. I KNOW that some will attempt to say that,
even according to the declarations of our own
Scriptures, God is a body, because in the writ-
ings of Moses they find it said, that " our God
is a consuming fire ; " ' and in the Gospel ac-
cording to John, that " God is a Spirit, and they
who worship Him must worship Him in spirit
and in truth." ^ Fire and spirit, according to
them, are to be regarded as nothing else than a
body. Now, I should like to ask these persons
what they have to say respecting that passage
where it is declared that God is light ; as John
writes in his Epistle, " God is light, and in Him
there is no darkness at all." ^ Truly He is that
light which illuminates the whole understanding
of those who are capable of receiving truth, as
is said in the thirty-sixth Psalm, " In Thy ligbt
we shall see light." ■* For what other light of
God can be named, " in which any one sees
light," save an influence of God, by which a
man, being enlightened, either thoroughly sees
the truth of all things, or comes to know God
Himself, who is called the truth? Such is the
meaning of the expression, " In Thy light we
shall see light ; " i.e., in Thy word and wisdom,
which is Thy Son, in Himself we shall see Thee
the Father. Because He is called light, shall
He be supposed to have any resemblance to the
light of the sun ? Or how should there be the
slightest ground for imagining, that from that
corporeal light any one could derive the cause
of knowledge, and come to the understanding of
the truth?

2. If, then, they acquiesce in our assertion,
which reason itself has demonstrated, regarding
the nature of light, and acknowledge that God
cannot be understood to be a body in the sense
that light is, similar reasoning will hold true of
the expression " a consuming fire." For what
will God consume in respect of His being fire ?
Shall He be thought to consume material sub-
stance, as wood, or hay, or stubble ? And what
in this view can be called worthy of the glory of
God, if He be a fire, consuming materials of that
kind? But let us reflect that God does indeed
consume and utterly destroy ; that He consumes
evil thoughts, wicked actions, and sinful desires,
when they find their way into the minds of
believers ; and that, inhabiting along with His
Son those souls which are rendered capable of


^ Deut. iv. 24.

2 John iv. 24.

3 I John i. s.

4 Ps. xxxvi, 9.


receiving His word and wisdom, according to
His own declaration, " I and the P'ather shall
come, and We shall make our abode with him,"5
He makes them, after all their vices and passions
have been consumed, a holy temple, worthy of
Himself. Those, moreover, who, on account
of the expression " God is a Spirit," think that
He is a body, are to be answered, I think, in the
following manner. It is the custom of sacred
Scripture, when it wishes to designate anything
opposed to this gross and solid body, to call it
spirit, as in the expression, " The letter killeth,
but the spirit giveth life," "^ where there can be
no doubt that by " letter " are meant bodily
things, and by "spirit" intellectual things, which
we also term " spiritual." The apostle, more-
over, says, " Even unto this day, when Moses is
read, the veil is upon their heart : nevertheless,
when it shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be
taken away : and where the Spirit of the Lord
is, there is liberty." ? For so long as any one
is not converfed to a spiritual understanding, a
veil is placed over his heart, with which veil, i.e.,
a gross understanding. Scripture itself is said or
thought to be covered : and this is the meaning
of the statement that a veil was placed over the
countenance of Moses when he spoke to the
people, i.e., when the law was publicly read
aloud. But if we turn to the Lord, where also
is the word of God, and where the Holy Spirit
reveals spiritual knowledge, then the veil is taken
away, and with unveiled face we shall behold thel
glory of the Lord in the holy Scriptures.

3. And since many saints participate in the
Holy Spirit, He cannot therefore be understood
to be a body, which being divided into corporeal
parts, is partaken of by each one of the saints ;
but He is manifestly a sanctifying power, in
which all are said to have a share who have
deserved to be sanctified by His grace. And in
order that what we say may be more easily un-
derstood, let us take an illustration from things
very dissimilar. There are many persons who
take a part in the science ^ or art of medicine :
are we therefore to suppose that those who do
so take to themselves the particles of some body
called medicine, which is placed before them,
and in this way participate in the same? Or
must we not rather understand that all who with
quick and trained minds come to understand the
art and discipline itself, may be said to be par-


S John xiv. 23.
^ 2 Cor. iii. 6.
7 2 Cor. iii. 15-17.
^ Discipliua.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


243


takers of the art of healing? But these are not
to be deemed altogether parallel instances in a
comparison of medicine to the Holy Spirit, as
they have been adduced only to establish that
that is not necessarily to be considered a body,
a share in which is possessed by many individ-
uals. For the Holy Spirit differs widely from
the method or science of medicine, in respect
that the Holy Spirit is an intellectual existence,'
and subsists and exists in a peculiar manner,
whereas medicine is not at all of that nature.

4. But we must pass on to the language of the
Gospel itself, in which it is declared that " God
is a Spirit," and where we have to show how
that is to be understood agreeably to what we
have stated. For let us inquire on what occasion
these words were spoken by the Saviour, before
whom He uttered them, and what was the sub-
ject of investigation. We find, without any
doubt, that He spoke these words to the Samari-
tan woman, saying to her, who thought, agree-
ably to the Samaritan view, that God ought to
be worshipped on Mount Gerizim, that " God is
a Spirit." For the Samaritan woman, believing
Him to be a Jew, was inquiring of Him whether
God ought to be worshipped in Jerusalem or on
this mountain ; and her words were, " All our
fathers worshipped on this mountain, and ye
say that in Jerusalem is the place where we
ought to worship." ^ To this opinion of the
Samaritan woman, therefore, who imagined that
God was less rightly or duly worshipped, accord-
ing to the privileges of the different localities,
either by the Jews in Jerusalem or by the Sa-
maritans on Mount Gerizim, the Saviour answered
that he who would follow the Lord must lay
aside all preference for particular places, and
thus expressed Himself: "The hour is coming
when neither in Jerusalem nor on this mountain
shall the true worshippers worship the Father.
God is a Spirit, and they who worship Him must
worship Him in spirit and in truth." ^ And ob-
serve how logically He has joined together the
spirit and the truth : He called God a Spirit,
that He might distinguish Him from bodies ;
and He named Him the truth, to distinguish
Him from a shadow or an image. For they who
worshipped in Jerusalem worshipped God neither
in truth nor in spirit, being in subjection to the
shadow or image of heavenly things ; and such
also was the case with those who worshipped on
Mount Gerizim.

5. Having refuted, then, as well as we could,
every notion which might suggest that we were
to think of God as in any degree corporeal,
we go on to say that, according to strict truth,
God is incomprehensible, and incapable of being


' Subsistentia.
- John iv. 20.
^ John. iv. 23, 24.


measured.'* For whatever be the knowledge
which we are able to obtain of God, either by
perception or reflection, we must of necessity
believe that He is by many degrees far better
than what we perceive Him to be. For, as if
we were to see any one unable to bear a spark
of light, or the flame of a very small lamp, and
were desirous to acquaint such a one, whose
vision could not admit a greater degree of light
than what we have stated, with the brightness
and splendour of the sun, would it not be neces-
sary to tell him that the splendour of the sun was
unspeakably and incalculably better and more
glorious than all this light which he saw? So
our understanding, when shut in by the fetters
of flesh and blood, and rendered, on account
of its participation in such material substances,
duller and more obtuse, although, in comparison
with our bodily nature, it is esteemed to be far
superior, yet, in its efforts to examine and be-
hold incorporeal things, scarcely holds the place
of a spark or lamp. But among all intelligent,
that is, incorporeal beings, what is so superior to
all others — so unspeakably and incalculably su-
perior — as God, whose nature cannot be grasped
or seen by the power of any human understand-
ing, even the purest and brightest?

6. But it will not appear absurd if we employ
another similitude to make the matter clearer.
Our eyes frequently cannot look upon the nature
of the light itself — that is, upon the substance of
the sun ; but when we behold his splendour or
his rays pouring in, perhaps, through windows
or some small openings to admit the light, we
can reflect how great is the supply and source
of the light of the body. So, in like manner,
the works of Divine Providence and the plan of
this whole world are a sort of rays, as it were,
of the nature of God, in comparison with His
real substance and being. As, therefore, our
understanding is unable of itself to behold God
Himself as He is, it knows the Father of the
world from the beauty of His works and the
comeliness of His creatures. God, therefore, is
not to be thought of as being either a body or
as existing in a body, but as an uncompounded
intellectual nature,5 admitting within Himself no
addition of any kind ; so that He cannot be
believed to have within him a greater and a less,
but is such that He is in all parts Moras, and,
so to speak, 'Evd<;, and is the mind and source
from which all intellectual nature or mind takes
its beginning. But mind, for its movements or
operations, needs no physical space, nor sensible
magnitude, nor bodily shape, nor colour, nor any
other of those adjuncts which are the i)roperties
of body or matter. Wherefore that simple and


* " Insestimabilem."

i " Simplex intcllectualis natura."


244


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


wholly intellectual nature ' can admit of no delay
or hesitation in its movements or operations, lest
the simplicity of the divine nature should appear
to be circumscribed or in some degree ham-
pered by such adjuncts, and lest that which is
the beginning of all things should be found com-
posite and differing, and that which ought to be
free from all bodily intermixture, in virtue of
being the one sole species of Deity, so to speak,
should prove, instead of being one, to consist of
many things. That mind, moreover, does not
require space in order to carry on its movements
agreeably to its nature, is certain from observa-
tion of our own mind. For if the mind abide
within its own limits, and sustain no injury from
any cause, it will never, from diversity of situ-
ation, be retarded in the discharge of its func-
tions ; nor, on the other hand, does it gain any
addition or increase of mobility from the nature
of particular places. And here, if any one were
to object, for example, that among those who
are at sea, and tossed by its waves, the mind is
considerably less vigorous than it is wont to be
on land, we are to believe that it is in this state,
not from diversity of situation, but from the
commotion or disturbance of the body to which
the mind is joined or attached. For it seems to
be contrary to nature, as it were, for a human
body to live at sea ; and for that reason it ap-
pears, by a sort of inequality of its own, to enter
upon its mental operations in a slovenly and ir-
regular manner, and to perform the acts of the
intellect with a duller sense, in as great degree
as those who on land are prostrated with fever ;
With respect to whom it is certain, that if the
mind do not discharge its functions as well as
before, in consequence of the attack of disease,
the blame is to be laid not upon the place, but
upon the bodily malady, by which the body,
being disturbed and disordered, renders to the
mind its customary services under by no means
the well-known and natural conditions : for we
human beings are animals composed of a union
of body and soul, and in this way (only) was it
possible for us to live upon the earth. But God,
who is the beginning of all things, is not to be
regarded as a composite being, lest perchance
there should be found to exist elements prior to
the beginning itself, out of which everything is
composed, whatever that be which is called com-
posite. Neither does the mind require bodily
magnitude in order to perform any act or move-
ment ; as when the eye by gazing upon bodies
of larger size is dilated, but is compressed and
contracted in order to see smaller objects. The
mind, indeed, requires magnitude of an intel-
lectual kind, because it grows, not after the fash-
ion of a body, but after that of intelligence.


Natura ilia simplex et tota i


For the mind is not enlarged, together with the
body, by means of corporal additions, up to the
twentieth or thirtieth year of life ; but the intel-
lect is sharpened by exercises of learning, and
the powers implanted within it for intelligent v
purposes are called forth ; and it is rendered
capable of greater intellectual efforts, not being
increased by bodily additions, but carefully pol-
ished by learned exercises. But these it can-
not receive immediately from boyhood, or from
birth, because the framework of limbs which the
mind employs as organs for exercising itself is
weak and feeble ; and it is unable to bear the
weight of its own operations, or to exhibit a
capacity for receiving training.

7. If there are any now who think that the
mind itself and the soul is a body, I wish they
w^ould tell me by way of answer how it receives
reasons and assertions on subjects of such im-
portance — of such difficulty and such subtlety ?
Whence does it derive the power of memory?
and whence comes the contemplation of invis-
ible^ things? How does the body possess the
faculty of understanding incorporeal existences ?
How does a bodily nature investigate the pro-
cesses of the various arts, and contemplate the
reasons of things ? How, also, is it able to per-
ceive and understand divine truths, which are
manifestly incorporeal? Unless, indeed, some
should happen to be of opinion, that as the very
bodily shape and form of the ears or eyes con-
tributes something to hearing and to sight, and
as the individual members, formed by God, have
some adaptation, even from the very quality of
their form, to the end for which they were nat-
urally appointed ; so also he may think that the
shape of the soul or mind is to be understood
as if created purposely and designedly for per-
ceiving and understanding individual things, and
for being set in motion by vital movements. I
do not perceive, however, who shall be able to
describe or state what is the colour of the mind, in
respect of its being mind, and acting as an intelli-
gent existence. Moreover, in confirmation and
explanation of what we have already advanced
regarding the mind or soul — to the effect that
it is better than the whole bodily nature — the
following remarks may be added. There under-
lies every bodily sense a certain peculiar sensible
substance,^ on which the bodily sense exerts itself.
For example, colours, form, size, underlie vision ;
voices and sound, the sense of hearing ; odours,
good or bad, that of smell ; savours, that of
taste ; heat or cold, hardness or softness, rough-
ness or smoothness, that of touch. Now, of those
senses enumerated above, it is manifest to all that
the sense of mind is much the best. How,
then, should it not appear absurd, that under

2 Some read " visible."

3 " Substantia quadam sensibilis propria."


Chap. II.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


245


those senses which are inferior, substances should
have been placed on which to exert their powers,
but that under this power, which is far better
than any other, i.e., the sense of mind, nothing
at all of the nature of a substance should be
placed, but that a power of an intellectual na-
ture should be an accident, or consequent upon
bodies ? Those who assert this, doubtless do so
to the disparagement of that better substance
which is within them ; nay, by so doing, they
even do wrong to God Himself, when they im-
agine He may be understood by means of a
bodily nature, so that according to their view
He is a body, and that which may be under-
stood or perceived by means of a body ; and
they are unwilling to have it understood that
the mind bears a certain relationship to God,
of whom the mind itself is an intellectual image,
and that by means of this it may come to some
knowledge of the nature of divinity, especially
if it be purified and separated from bodily mat-
ter.

8. But perhaps these declarations may seem
to have less weight with those who wish to be
instructed in divine things out of the holy Scrip-
tures, and who seek to have it proved to them
from that source how the nature of God sur-
passes the nature of bodies. See, therefore, if
the apostle does not say the same thing, when,
speaking of Christ, he declares, that " He is the
image of the invisible God, the first-born of every
creature." ' Not, as some suppose, that the
nature of God is visible to some and invisible to
others : for the apostle does not say " the image
of God invisible " to men or " invisible " to sin-
ners, but with unvarying constancy pronounces
on the nature of God in these words : " the im-
age of the invisible God." Moreover, John, in
his Gospel, when asserting that " no one hath
seen God at any time," ^ manifestly declares to
all who are capable of understanding, that there
is no nature to which God is visible : not as if
He were a being who was visible by nature, and
merely escaped or baffled the view of a frailer
creature, but because by the nature of His being
it is impossible for Him to be seen. And if you
should ask of me what is my opinion regarding
the Only-begotten Himself, whether the nature
of God, which is naturally invisible, be not visible
even to Him, let not such a question appear to
you at once to be either absurd or impious, be-
cause we shall give you a logical reason. It is
one thing to see, and another to know : to see
and to be seen is a property of bodies ; to know
and to be known, an attribute of intellectual
being. Whatever, therefore, is a property of
bodies, cannot be predicated either of the Father
or of the Son ; but what belongs to the nature


Col. i. 15.
John i. 18.


of deity is common to the Father and the Son.3
Finally, even He Himself, in the Gospel, did not
say that no one has seen the Father, save the
Son, nor any one the Son, save the Father ; but
His words are : " No one knoweth the Son, save
the Father; nor any one the Father, save the
Son." •♦ By which it is clearly shown, that what-
ever among bodily natures is called seeing and
being seen, is termed, between the Father and
the Son, a knowing and being known, by means
of the power of knowledge, not by the frailness of
the sense of sight. Because, then, neither see-
ing nor being seen can be properly applied to an
incorporeal and invisible nature, neither is the
Father, in the Gospel, said to be seen by the Son,
nor the Son by the Father, but the one is said to
be known by the other.

9. Here, if any one lay before us the passage
where it is said, " Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God," 5 from that \ery passage,
in my opinion, will our position derive additional
strength ; for what else is seeing God in heart,
but, according to our exposition as above, under-
standing and knowing Him with the mind ? For
the names of the organs of sense are frequently
applied to the soul, so that it may be said to see
with the eyes of the heart, i.e., to perform an
intellectual act by means of the power of intel-
ligence. So also it is said to hear with the ears
when it perceives the deeper meaning of a state-
ment. So also we say that it makes use of teeth,
when it chews and eats the bread of life which
Cometh down from heaven. In like manner,
also, it is said to employ the services of other
members, which are transferred from their bodily
appellations, and applied to the powers of the
soul, according to the words of Solomon, " You
will find a divine sense." ^ For he knew that
there were within us two kinds of senses : the
one mortal, corruptible, human ; the other im-
mortal and intellectual, which he now termed
divine. By this divine sense, therefore, not of
the eyes, but of a pure heart, which is the mind,
God may be seen by those who are worthy.
For you will certainly find in all the Scriptures,
both old and new, the term " heart " repeatedly
used instead of " mind," i.e., intellectual power.
In this manner, therefore, although far below
the dignity of the subject, have we spoken of the
nature of God, as those who understand it under
the limitation of the human understanding. In
the next j^lace, let us see what is meant by the
name of Christ.

CHAP. II. — ON CHRIST.

I. In the first place, we must note that the
nature of that deity which is in Christ in respect


3 " Constat inter Patrem et Filiuni:'

4 Matt. xi. 27.

5 Matt. V. 8.

6 Cf. Prov. ii. 5.


246


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


of His being the only-begotten Son of God is
one thing, and that human nature which He
assumed in these last times for the purposes of
the dispensation (of grace) is another. And
therefore we have first to ascertain what the only-
begotten Son of God is, seeing He is called by
many different names, according to the circum-
stances and views of individuals. • For He is
termed Wisdom, according to the expression of
Solomon : " The Lord created me — the begin-
ning of His ways, and among His works, before
He made any other thing; He founded me
before the ages. In the beginning, before He
formed the earth, before He brought forth the
fountains of waters, before the mountains were
made strong, before all the hills. He brought me
forth." ■ He is also styled First-born, as the
apostle has declared : " who is the first-born of
every creature." ^ The first-born, however, is
not by nature a different person from the Wis-
dom, but one and the same. Finally, the Apos-
tle Paul says that " Christ (is) the power of God
and the wisdom of God." ^

2. Let no one, however, imagine that we mean
anything impersonal ^ when we call Him the wis-
dom of God ; or suppose, for example, that we
understand Him to be, not a living being en-
dowed with wisdom, but something which makes
men wise, giving itself to, and implanting itself
in, the minds of those who are made capable of
receivmg His virtues and intelligence. If, then,
it is once rightly understood that the only-begot-
ten Son of God is His wisdom hypostatically 5
existing, I know not whether our curiosity ought
to advance beyond this, or entertain any suspi-
cion that that {iTroo-rao-i? or substantia contains
anything of a bodily nature, since everything
that is corporeal is distinguished either by form,
or colour, or magnitude. And who in his sound
senses ever sought for form, or colour, or size, in
wisdom, in respect of its being wisdom ? And
who that is capable of entertaining reverential
thouglits or feelings regarding God, can suppose
or believe that God the Father ever existed, even
for a moment of time,^ without having generated
this Wisdom? For in that case he must say
either that God was unable to generate Wisdom
before He produced her, so that He afterwards
called into being her who formerly did not exist,
or that He possessed the power indeed, but —
what cannot be said of God without impiety —
was unwilling to use it ; both of which supposi-
tions, it is patent to all, are alike absurd and
impious : for they amount to this, either that


1 Prov. viii. 22-25. The reading in the text differs considerably
from that of the Vulgate.

2 Col. i. IS.

3 I Cor. i. 24.

4 Aliquid insubstantivum.

5 Substantialiter.

^ Ad punctum alicujus momenti.


God advanced from a condition of inability to
one of ability, or that, although possessed of the
power, He concealed it, and delayed the genera-
tion of Wisdom. Wherefore we have always
held that God is the Father of His only-begotten
Son, who was born indeed of Him, and derives
from Him what He is, but without any begin-
ning, not only such as may be measured by any
divisions of time, but even that which the mind
alone can contemplate within itself, or behold,
so to speak, with the naked powers of the under-
standing. And therefore we must believe that
Wisdom was generated before any beginning
that can be either comprehended or expressed.
And since all the creative power of the coming
creation 7 was included in this very existence of
Wisdom (whether of those things which have an
original or of those which have a derived exist-
ence), having been formed beforehand and
arranged by the power of foreknowledge ; on
account of these very creatures which had been
described, as it were, and prefigured in Wisdom
herself, does Wisdom say, in the words of Solo-
mon, that she was created the beginning of the
ways of God, inasmuch as she contained within
herself either the beginnings, or forms, or species
of all creation.

3. Now, in the same way in which we have
understood that Wisdom was the beginning of
the ways of God, and is said to be created, form-
ing beforehand and containing within herself the
species and beginnings of all creatures, must we
understand her to be the Word of God, because
of her disclosing to all other beings, i.e., to uni-
versal creation, the nature of the mysteries and
secrets which are contained within the divine
wisdom ; and on this account she is called the
Word, because she is, as it were, the interpreter
of the secrets of the mind. And therefore that
language which is found in the Acts of Paul^
where it is said that " here is the Word a living
being," appears to me to be rightly used. John,
however, with more sublimity and propriety, says
in the beginning of his Gospel, when defining
God by a special definition to be the Word,
" And God was the Word,9 and this was in the
beginning with God." Let him, then, who as-
signs a beginning to the Word or Wisdom of
God, take care that he be not guilty of impiety
against the unbegotten Father Himself, seeing
he denies that He had always been a Father,
and had generated the Word, and had possessed
wisdom in all preceding periods, whether they


7 Omnis virtus ac deformatio futurse creaturae.

8 This work is mentioned by Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., iii. c. 3 and
25, as among the spurious writings current in the Church. The Acts
0/ Paul atid Thccla was a different work from the Acts of Paul. The
words quoted, " Hie est verbum animal vivens," seem to be a corrup-
tion from Heb. iv. 12, C,iav yap 6 A0709 tou ©eoO. [Jones on the
Canoti, vol. ii. pp. 353-411, as to Paul and Thecla. As to this
quotation of our author, see Lardner, Credib., ii. p. 539.]

9 Or, " and the Word was God."


■i


Chap. TI.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


247


be called times or ages, or anything else that
can be so entitled.

4. This Son, accordingly, is also the truth and
life of all things which exist. And with reason.
For how could those things which were created
live, unless they derived their being from life?
or how could those things which are, truly exist,
unless they came down from the truth ? or how
could rational beings exist, unless the Word or
reason had previously existed? or how could
they be wise, unless there were wisdom? But
since it was to come to pass that some also should
fall away from life, and bring death upon them-
selves by their declension — for death is nothing
else than a departure from life — and as it was
not to follow that those beings which had once
been created by God for the enjoyment of life
should utterly perish, it was necessary that, before
death, there should be in existence such a power
as would destroy the coming death, and that
there should be a resurrection, the type of which
was in our Lord and Saviour, and that this resur-
rection should have its ground in the wisdom and
word and life of God. And then, in the next
place, since some of those who were created
were not to be always willing to remain unchange-
able and unalterable in the calm and moderate
enjoyment of the blessings which they possessed,
but, in consequence of the good which was in
them being theirs not by nature or essence, but
by accident, were to be perverted and changed,
and to fall away from their position, therefore
was the Word and Wisdom of God made the
Way. And it was so termed because it leads to
the Father those who walk along it.

Whatever, therefore, we have predicated of
the wisdom of God, will be appropriately applied
and understood of the Son of God, in virtue of
His being the Life, and the Word, and the Truth,
and the Resurrection : for all these titles are de-
rived from His power and operations, and in
none of them is there the slightest ground for
understanding anything of a corporeal nature
which might seem to denote either size, or form,
or colour ; for those children of men which ap-
pear among us, or those descendants of other
living beings, correspond to the seed of those by
whom they were begotten, or derive from those
mothers, in whose wombs they are formed and
nourished, whatever that is, which they bring into
this life, and carry with them when they are born.'
But it is monstrous and unlawful to compare God
the Father, in the generation of His only-begot-
ten Son, and in the substance ^ of the same, to


' " Quoniam hi qui videntur apud nos hominum filii, vel ceterorum
animalium, semini eorum a quibus seminati sunt respondent, vel
earum quanim in utero formantur ac nutriuntur, habent ex his quid-
quid iUud est quod in lucem banc assumunt, ac deferunt processuri."
Probably the last two words should be " deferunt processuris " —
" and hand it over to those who are destined to come forth from
them," i.e., to their descendants.

^ Subsistentia. Some would read here, " substantia."


any man or other living thing engaged in such an
act ; for we must of necessity hold that there is
something exceptional and worthy of God which
does not admit of any comparison at all, not
merely in things, but which cannot even be con-
ceived by thought or discovered by perception,
so that a human mind should be able to appre-
hend how the unbegotten God is made the Father
of the only-begotten Son. Because His genera-
tion is as eternal and everlasting as the brilliancy
which is produced from the sun. For it is not
by receiving the ^ breath of Hfe that He is made
a Son, by any outward act, but by His own
nature.

5. Let us now ascertain how those statements
which we have advanced are supported by the
authority of holy Scripture. The Apostle PauL
says, that the only-begotten Son is the " image
of the invisible God," and "the first-bom of
every creature." ^ And when writing to the He-
brews, he says of Him that He is " the bright-
ness of His glory, and the express image of His
person." s Now, we find in the treatise called
the Wisdom of Solomon the following descrip-
tion of the wisdom of God : " For she is the
breath of the power of God, and the purest efflux^
of the glory of the Almighty." ^ Nothing that is
polluted can therefore come upon her. For she
is the splendour of the eternal light, and the
stainless mirror of God's working, and the image
of His goodness. Now we say, as before, that
Wisdom has her existence nowhere else save in
Him who is the beginning of all things : from
whom also is derived everything that is wise,
because He Himself is the only one who is by
nature a Son, and is therefore termed the Only-
begotten.

6. Let us now see how we are to understand
the expression " invisible image," that we may
in this way perceive how God is rightly called
the Father of His Son ; and let us, in the first
place, draw our conclusions from what are cus-
tomarily called images among men. That is
sometimes called an image which is painted or
sculptured on some material substance, such as
wood or stone ; and sometimes a child is called
the image of his parent, when the features of the .
child in no respect belie their resemblance to
the father. I think, therefore, that that man
who was formed after the image and likeness of
God may be fittingly compared to the first illus-
tration. Respecting him, however, we shall see
more precisely, God willing, when we come to
expound the passage in Genesis. But the image


3 Per adoptionem Spiritus. The original words here were prob-
ably eiuTroiijcri'; ToO irrei/fiaroT, and Rufinus seems to have mistaken
the allusion to Gen. ii. 7. To " adoption," in the technical theological
sense, the words in the text cannot have any reference. — Schmtzer.

" Col. i. 15.

5 Heb. i. 3.

6 OTToppoia.

^ Wisd. vii. 25.


248


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


IBOOK I.


of the Son of God, of whom we are now speak-
ing, may be compared to the second of the above
examples, even in respect of this, that He is the
invisible image of the invisible God, in the same
manner as we say, according to the sacred his-
tory, that the image of Adam is his son Seth.
The words are, " And Adam begat Seth in his
own likeness, and after his own image." ' Now
this image contains the unity of nature and sub-
stance belonging to Father and Son. For if the
Son do, in like manner, all those things which
the Father doth, then, in virtue of the Son doing
all things like the Father, is the image of the
Father formed in the Son, who is born of Him,
like an act of His will proceeding from the mind.
And I am therefore of opinion that the will of
the Father ought alone to be sufficient for the
existence of that which He wishes to exist. For
in the exercise of His will He employs no other
way than that which is made known by the coun-
sel of His will. And thus also the existence ^ of
the Son is generated by Him. For this point
must above all others be maintained by those
who allow nothing to be unbegotten, i.e., unborn,
save God the Father only. And we must be
careful not to fall into the absurdities of those
who picture to themselves certain emanations, so
as to divide the divine nature into parts, and who
divide God the Father as far as they can, since
even to entertain the remotest suspicion of such
a thing regarding an incorporeal being is not
only the height of impiety, but a mark of the
greatest folly, it being most remote from any in-
telligent conception that there should be any
physical division of any incorporeal nature.
Rather, therefore, as an act of the will proceeds
from the understanding, and neither cuts off any
part nor is separated or divided from it, so after
some such fashion is the Father to be supposed
as having begotten the Son, His own image ;
namely, so that, as He is Himself invisible by
nature. He also begat an image that was invisible.
For the Son is the Word, and therefore we are
not to understand that anything in Him is cog-
nisable by the senses. He is wisdom, and in
wisdom there can be no suspicion of anything
corporeal. He is the true light, which enlightens
! every man that cometh into this world ; but He
has nothing in common with the light of this
sun. Our Saviour, therefore, is the image of
the invisible God, inasmuch as compared with the
Father Himself He is the truth : and as com-
pared with us, to whom He reveals the Father,
He is the image by which we come to the knowl-
edge of the Father, whom no one knows save
the Son, and he to whom the Son is pleased to
reveal Him. And the method of revealing Him
is through the understanding. For He by whom


Gen. V. 3.
Subsistentia.


the Son Himself is understood, understands, as a
consequence, the Father also, according to His
own words : " He that hath seen Me, hath seen
the Father also." ^

7. But since we quoted the language of Paul
regarding Christ, where He says of Him that He
is " the brightness of the glory of God, and the
express figure of His person," ■• let us see what
idea we are to form of this. According to John,
" God is hght." The only-begotten Son, there-
fore, is the glory of this light, proceeding insep-
arably from (God) Himself, as brightness does
from light, and illuminating the whole of crea-
tion. For, agreeably to what we have already
explained as to the manner in which He is the
Way, and conducts to the Father ; and in which
He is the Word, interpreting the secrets of wis-
dom, and the mysteries of knowledge, making
them known to the rational creation ; and is also
the Truth, and the Life, and the Resurrection, —
in the same way ought we to understand also the
meaning of His being the brightness : for it is
by its splendour that we understand and feel
what light itself is. And this splendour, present-
ing itself gently and softly to the frail and weak
eyes of mortals, and gradually training, as it were,
and accustoming them to bear the brightness of
the light, when it has put away from them every
hindrance and obstruction to vision, according
to the Lord's own precept, " Cast forth the beam
out of thine eye," 5 renders them capable of en-
during the splendour of the light, being made in
this respect also a sort of mediator between men
and the light.

8. But since He is called by the apostle not
only the brightness of His glory, but also the
express figure of His person or subsistence^ it
does not seem idle to inquire hoAv there can be
said to be another figure of that person besides
the person of God Himself, whatever be the
meaning of person and subsistence. Consider,
then, whether the Son of God, seeing He is His
Word and ^Visdom, and alone knows the Father,
and reveals Him to whom He will (i.e., to those
who are capable of receiving His word and wis-
dom), may not, in regard of this very point of
making God to be understood and acknowl-
edged, be called the figure of His person and
subsistence ; that is, when that Wisdom, which
desires to make known to others the means by
which God is acknowledged and understood
by them, describes Himself first of all, it may by
so doing be called the express figure of the per-
son of God. In order, however, to arrive at a
fuller understanding of the manner in which the
Saviour is the figure of the person or subsistence


3 John xiv. 9.

4 Heb. i.3.

5 Luke vi. 42.

<> Heb. i. 3. Substantiae vel subsistentiae.


Chap. II.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


249


of God, let us take an instance, which, although
it does not describe the subject of which we are
treating either fully or appropriately, may never-
theless be seen to be employed for this purpose
only, to show that the Son of God, who was in
the form of God, divesting Himself (of His
glory), makes it His object, by this very divest-
ing of Himself, to demonstrate to us the fulness
of His deity. For instance, suppose that there
were a statue of so enormous a size as to fill the
whole world, and which on that account could
be seen by no one ; and that another statue were
formed altogether resembling it in the shape of
the limbs, and in the features of the counte-
nance, and in form and material, but without the
same immensity of size, so that those who were
unable to behold the one of enormous propor-
tions, should, on seeing the latter, acknowledge
that they had seen the former, because it pre-
served all the features of its limbs and counte-
nance, and even the very form and material, so
closely, as to be altogether undistinguishable
from it ; by some such similitude, the Son of
God, divesting Himself of His equality with the
Father, and showing to us the way to the knowl-
edge of Him, is made the express image of His
person : so that we, who were unable to look
upon the glory of that marvellous light when
placed in the greatness of His Godhead, may,
by His being made to us brightness, obtain the
means of beholding the divine light by looking
upon the brightness. This comparison, of course,
of statues, as belonging to material things, is
employed for no other purpose than to show
that the Son of God, though placed in the very
insignificant form of a human body, in conse-
quence of the resemblance of His works and
power to the Father, showed that there was in
Him an immense and invisible greatness, inas-
much as He said to His disciples, " He who
sees Me, sees the Father also ; " and, " I and
the Father are one." And to these belong also
the similar expression, " The Father is in Me,
and I in the Father."

9. Let us see now what is the meaning of the
expression which is found in the Wisdom of
Solomon, where it is said of Wisdom that " it is
a kind of breath of the power of God, and the
purest efflux of the glory of the Omnipotent, and
the splendour of eternal light, and the spotless
mirror of the working or power of God, ajid the
image of His goodness." ' These, then, are
the definitions which he gives of God, pointing
out by each one of them certain attributes which
belong to the \\'isdom of God, calling wisdom
the power, and the glory, and the everlasting
light, and the working, and the goodness of God.
He does not say, however, that wisdom is the


Wisd. vii. 25, 26.


breath of the glory of the Almighty, nor of the
everlasting light, nor of the working of the Father,
nor of His goodness, for it was not appropriate
that breath should be ascribed to any one of
these ; but, with all propriety, he says that wis-
dom is the breath of the power of God. Now,
by the power of God is to be understood that by
which He is strong ; by which He appoints,
restrains, and governs all things visible and in-
visible ; which is sufficient for all those things
which He rules over in His providence ; among
all which He is present, as if one individual.
And although the breath of all this mighty and
immeasurable power, and the vigour itself pro-
duced, so to speak, by its own existence, proceed
from the power itself, as the will does from the
mind, yet even this will of God is nevertheless
made to become the power of God.^

Another power accordingly is produced, which
exists with properties of its own, — a kind of
breath, as Scripture says, of the primal and un-
begotten power of God, deriving from Him its
being, and never at any time non-existent. For
if any one were to assert that it did not formerly
exist, but came afterwards into existence, let him
explain the reason why the Father, who gave it
being, did not do so before. And if he shall
grant that there was once a beginning, when that
breath proceeded from the power of God, we
shall ask him again, why not even before the
beginning, which he has allowed ; and in this
way, ever demanding an earlier date, and going
upwards with our interrogations, we shall arrive
at this conclusion, that as God was always pos-
sessed of power and will, there never was any
reason of propriety or otherwise, why He may
not have always possessed that blessing which
He desired. By which it is shown that that
breath of God's power always existed, ha\ing no
beginning save God Himself. Nor was it fitting
that there should be any other beginning save
God Himself, from whom it derives its birth.
And according to the expression of the apostle,
that Christ " is the power of God," ^ it ought to
be termed not only the breath of the power of
God, but power out of power,

10. Let us now examine the expression, "Wis-
dom is the purest efflux of the glory of the Al-
mighty ; " and let us first consider what the glory
of the omnipotent God is, and then we shall also
understand what is its efflux. As no one can be
a father without having a son, nor a master with-
out possessing a servant, so even God cannot be
called omnipotent unless there exist those over
whom He may exercise His power ; and there-
fore, that God may be shown to be almighty, it


2 " Hujiis ergo totius virtutis tantx et tarn immensa: vapor, et, ut
ita dicam, vigor ipse in propria subsistentia effectus, quamvis ex ipsa
virtiite veUit voluntas ex mente procedat, tamen et ipsa voluntas Dei
nihilominus Dei virtus efficitur.'

•5 I Cor. i. 24.


250


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


is necessary that all things should exist. For if
any one would have some ages or portions of
time, or whatever else he likes to call them, to
have passed away, while those things which were
afterwards made did not yet exist, he would un-
doubtedly show that during those ages or periods
God was not omnipotent, but became so after-
wards, viz., from the time that He began to have
persons over whom to exercise power ; and in
this way He will appear to have received a cer-
tain increase, and to have risen from a lower to
a higher condition ; since there can be no doubt
that it is better for Him to be omnipotent than
not to be so. And now how can it appear other-
wise than absurd, that when God possessed none
of those things which it was befitting for Him to
possess. He should afterwards, by a kind of
progress, come into the possession of them ? But
if there never was a time when He was not om-
nipotent, of necessity those things by which He
receives that title must also exist ; and He must
always have had those over whom He exercised |
power, and which were governed by Him either ;
as king or prince, of which we shall speak more '
fully in the proper place, when we come to dis- !
cuss the subject of the creatures. But even now |
I think it necessary to drop a word, although ,
cursorily, of warning, since the question before
us is, how wisdom is the purest efflux of the '
glory of the Almighty, lest any one should think !
that the tide of Omnipotent was anterior in God
to the birth of Wisdom, through whom He is
called Father, seeing that Wisdom, which is the
Son of God, is the purest efflux of the glory of [
the Almighty. Let him who is inclined to enter-
tain this suspicion hear the undoubted declara-
tion of Scripture pronouncing, " In wisdom hast
Thou made them all," ' and the teaching of the
Gospel, that "by Him were all things made, and i
without Him nothing was made ; " ^ and let him
understand from this that the title of Omnipotent
in God cannot be older than that of Father ; for
it is through the Son that the Father is almighty, j
But from the expression " glory of the Almighty,"
of which glory Wisdom is the efflux, this is to I
be understood, that Wisdom, through which God '
is called omnipotent, has a share in the glory of
the Almighty, For through Wisdom, which is
Christ, God has power over all things, not only
by the authority of a ruler, but also by the vol-
untary obedience of subjects. And that you
may understand that the omnipotence of Father
and Son is one and the same, as God and the
Lord are one and the same with the Father,
listen to the manner in which John speaks in the
Apocalypse : " Thus saith the Lord God, which
is, and which was, and which is to come, the


• Ps. civ. 24.
Mohni.3.


Almighty." ^ For who else was " He which is
to come " than Christ? And as no one ought to
be offended, seeing God is the Father, that the
Saviour is also God ; so also, since the Father is
called omnipotent, no one ought to be offended
that the Son of God is also called omnipotent.
For in this way will that saying be true which
He utters to the Father, " All Mine are Thine,
and Thine are Mine, and I am glorified in
them." ■♦ Now, if all things which are the
Father's are also Christ's, certainly among those
things which exist is the omnipotence of the
Father ; and doubtless the only-begotten Son
ought to be omnipotent, that the Son also may
have all things which the Father possesses.
" And I am glorified in them," He declares.
For " at the name of Jesus every knee shall
bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth,
and things under the earth ; and every tongue
shall confess that the Lord Jesus is in the glory
of God the Father." s Therefore He is the
efflux of the glory of God in this respect, that
He is omnipotent — the pure and limpid Wis-
dom herself — glorified as the efflux of omnipo-
tence or of glory. And that it may be more
clearly understood what the glory of omnipotence
is, we shall add the following. God the Father
is omnipotent, because He has power over all
things, i.e., over heaven and earth, sun, moon,
and stars, and all things in them. And He ex-
ercises His power over them by means of His
Word, because at the name of Jesus every knee
shall bow, both of things in heaven, and things
on earth, and things under the earth. And if
every knee is bent to Jesus, then, without doubt,
it is Jesus to whom all things are subject, and
He it is who exercises power over all things,
and through whom all things are subject to the
Father ; for through wisdom, i.e., by word and
reason, not by force and necessity, are all things
subject. And therefore His glory consists in this
very thing, that He possesses all things, and
this is the purest and most limpid glory of om-
nipotence, that by reason and wisdom, not by
force and necessity, all things are subject. Now
the purest and most limpid glory of wisdom is a
convenient expression to distinguish it from that
glory which cannot be called pure and sincere.
But every nature which is convertible and change-
able, although glorified in the works of righteous-
ness or wisdom, yet by the fact that righteousness
or wisdom are accidental qualities, and because
that which is accidental may also fall away, its
glory cannot be called sincere and pure. But
the W^isdom of God, which is His only-begotten
Son, being in all respects incapable of change j
or alteration, and every good quality in Him


3 Rev. i. 8.

* John xvii. 10.

S Phil. ii. 10. II.


Chap. III.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


251


being essential, and such as cannot be changed
and converted, His glory is therefore declared
to be pure and sincere.

II. In the third place, wisdom is called the
splendour of eternal light. The force of this
expression we have explained in the preceding
pages, when we introduced the similitude of the
sun and the splendour of its rays, and showed
to the best of our power how this should be
understood. To what we then said we shall add
only the following remark. That is properly
termed everlasting or eternal which neither had
a beginning of existence, nor can ever cease to
be what it is. And this is the idea conveyed by
John when he says that " God is light." Now
His wisdom is the splendour of that light, not
only in respect of its being light, but also of
being everlasting light, so that His wisdom is
eternal and everlasting splendour. If this be
fully understood, it clearly shows that the exist-
ence of the Son is derived from the Father,
but not in time, nor from any other begin-
ning, except, as we have said, from God Him-
self.
'12. But wisdom is also called the stainless
i mirror of the ivepycia or working of God. We
must first understand, then, what the working of
the power of God is. It is a sort of vigour, so
to speak, by which God operates either in crea-
tion, or in providence, or in judgment, or in the
disposal and arrangement of individual things,
each in its season. For as the image formed in
a mirror unerringly reflects all the acts and
movements of him who gazes on it, so would
Wisdom have herself to be understood when she
is called the stainless mirror of the power and
working of the Father : as the Lord Jesus Christ
also, who is the Wisdom of God, declares of
Himself when He says, " The works which the
Father doeth, these also doeth the Son like-
wise." ' And again He says, that the Son can-
not do anything of Himself, save what He sees
the Father do. As therefore the Son in no
j respect differs from the Father in the power of
His works, and the work of the Son is not a
different thing from that of the Father, but one
and the same movement, so to speak, is in all
i things, He therefore named Him a stainless
I mirror, that by such an expression it might be
understood that there is no dissimilarity what-
ever between the Son and the Father. How,
indeed, can those things which are said by some
to be done after the manner in which a disciple
resembles or imitates his master, or according
to the view that those things are made by the
Son in bodily material which were first formed
by the Father in their spiritual essence, agree
with the declarations of Scripture, seeing in the


Gospel the Son is said to do not similar things,
but the same things in a similar manner?

13. It remains that we inquire what is the
" image of His goodness ; " and here, I think,
we must understand the same thing which we
expressed a little ago, in speaking of the image
formed by the mirror. For He is the primal
goodness, doubtless, out of which the Son is
born, who, being in all respects the image of the
Father, may certainly also be called with pro-
priety the image of His goodness. For there is
no other second goodness existing in the Son,
save that which is in the Father. And there-
fore also the Saviour Himself rightly says in the
Gospel, " There is none good save one only,
God the Father," ^ that by such an expression it
may be understood that the Son is not of a dif-
ferent goodness, but of that only which exists in
the Father, of whom He is rightly termed the
image, because He proceeds from no other
source but from that primal goodness, lest there
might appear to be in the Son a different good-
ness from that which is in the Father. Nor is
there any dissimilarity or difference of goodness
in the Son. And therefore it is not to be im-
agined that there is a kind of blasphemy, as it
were, in the words, "There is none good save
one only, God the Father," as if thereby it may
be supposed to be denied that either Christ or
the Holy Spirit was good. But, as we have
already said, the primal goodness is to be under-
stood as residing in God the Father, from whom
both the Son is born and the Holy Spirit pro-
ceeds, retaining within them, without any doubt,
the iiature of that goodness which is in the
source whence they are derived. And if there
be any other things which in Scripture are
called good, whether angel, or man, or servant,
or treasure, or a good heart, or a good tree, all
these are so termed catachrestically,^ having in
them an accidental, not an essential goodness.
But it would require both much time and labour
to collect together all the titles of the Son of
God, such, e.g., as the true light, or the door, or
the righteousness, or the sanctification, or the
redemption, and countless others ; and to show
for what reasons each one of them is so given.
Satisfied, therefore, with what we have already
advanced, we go on with our inquiries into those
other matters which follow.

CHAP. III. ON THE HOLY SPIRIT.

I, The next point is to investigate as briefly
as possible the subject of the Holy Spirit. All
who perceive, in whatever manner, the existence
of Providence, confess that God, who created
and disposed all things, is unbegotten, and rcc-


John V. 19.


2 [Luke xviii. 19.]

3 Abusive [= improperly used. S.


252


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


ognise Him as the parent of the universe. Now,
that to Him belongs a Son, is a statement not
made by us only ; although it may seem a suffi-
ciently marvellous and incredible assertion to
those who have a reputation as philosophers
among Greeks and Barbarians, by some of whom,
however, an idea of His existence seems to have
been entertained, in their acknowledging that
all things were created by the word or reason of
God. We, however, in conformity with our be-
lief in that doctrine, which we assuredly hold to
be divinely inspired, believe that it is possible in
no other way to explain and bring within the
reach of human knowledge this higher and
diviner reason as the Son of God, than by means
of those Scriptures alone which were inspired
by the Holy Spirit, i.e., the Gospels and Episdes,
and the law and the prophets, according to the
declaration of Christ Himself. Of the existence
of the Holy Spirit no one indeed could enter-
tain any suspicion, save those who were familiar
with the law and the prophets, or those who pro-
fess a beUef in Christ. For although no one is
able to speak with certainty of God the Father,
it is nevertheless possible for some knowledge
of Him to be gained by means of the visible
creation and the natural feelings of the human
mind ; and it is possible, moreover, for such
knowledge to be confirmed from the sacred
Scriptures. But with respect to the Son of God,
although no one knoweth the Son save the
Father, yet it is from sacred Scripture also that
the human mind is taught how to think of the
Son ; and that not only from the New, but,, also
from the Old Testament, by means of "'those
things which, although done by the saints, are
figuratively referred to Christ, and from which
both His divine nature, and that human nature
which was assumed by Him, may be discovered.
2. Now, what the Holy Spirit is, we are taught
in many passages of Scripture, as by David in
the fifty-first Psalm, when he says, "And take
not Thy Holy Spirit from me ; " ' and by Daniel,
where it is said, " The Holy Spirit which is in
thee."^ And in the New Testament we have
abundant testimonies, as when the Holy Spirit is
described as having descended upon Christ, and
when the Lord breathed upon His apostles after
His resurrection, saying, " Receive the Holy
Spirit ; " 3 and the saying of the angel to Mary,
"The Holy Spirit will come upon thee ; " "* the
declaration by Paul, that no one can call Jesus
Lord, save by the Holy Spirit.s In the Acts of
the Aposdes, the Holy Spirit was given by the
imposition of the apostles' hands in baptism.^


» Ps. li. II.

2 Dan. iv. 8.

3 John XX. 22.
* Luke i. 35.

5 iCor.xu. 3.

6 Acts viii. i8.


From all which we learn that the person of the
Holy Spirit was of such authority and dignity,
that saving baptism was not complete except by
the authority of the most excellent Trinity of
them all, i.e., by the naming of Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, and by joining to the unbegottcn
God the Father, and to His only-begotten Son,
the name also of the Holy Spirit. \\'ho, then,
is not amazed at the exceeding majesty of the
Holy Spirit, when he hears that he who speaks
a word against the Son of man may hope for
forgiveness ; but that he who is guilty of blas-
phemy against the Holy Spirit has not forgive-
ness, either in the present world or in that which
is to come ! 7

3. That all things were created by God, and
that there is no creature which exists but has
derived from Him its being, is established from
many declarations of Scripture ; those asserdons
being refuted and rejected which are falsely al-
leged by some respecting the existence either of
a matter co-eternal with God, or of unbegotten
souls, in which they would have it that God
implanted not so much the power of existence,
as equality and order. For even in that little
treatise called T/ie Pastor or Angel of Repent-
ance, composed by Hermas, we have the follow-
ing : " First of all, believe that there is one God
who created and arranged all things ; who, when
nothing formerly existed, caused all things to be ;
who Himself contains all things, but Himself is
contained by none."^ And in the book of
Enoch also we have similar descriptions. But
up to the present time we have been able to find
no statement in holy Scripture in which the Holy
Spirit could be said to be made or created,9 not
even in the way in which we have shown above
that the divine wisdom is spoken of by Solomon,
or in which those expressions which we have dis-
cussed are to be understood of the life, or the
word, or the other appellations of the Son of
God. The Spirit of God, therefore, which was
borne upon the waters, as is written in the be-
ginning of the creation of the world, is, I am of
opinion, no other than the Holy Spirit, so far as
I can understand ; as indeed we have shown in
our exposition of the passages themselves, not
according to the historical, but according to the
spiritual method of interpretation.

4. Some indeed of our predecessors have
observed, that in the New Testament, whenever
the Spirit is named without that adjunct which
denotes quality, the Holy Spirit is to be under-
stood ; as e.g., in the expression, " Now the fruit
of the Spirit is love, joy, and peace ; " '° and,
" Seeing ye began in the Spirit, are ye now made


' Cf. Matt. xii. 32 and Luke xii. lo.

8 Cf, HertniE Past., Vision v. Mandat. i. [See vol. ii. p. 20.J

9 Per quern Spiritus Sanctus factura esse vel creatura diceretut.
1° Gal. V. 22.


I


I Chap. III.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


253


I perfect in the flesh?" ' We are of opinion that
j this distinction may be observed in the Old Tes-
I tament also, as when it is said, " He that giveth
I His Spirit to the people who are upon the earth,
and Spirit to them who walk thereon." ^ For,
without doubt, every one who walks upon the
earth (i.e., earthly and corporeal beings) is a
partaker also of the Holy Spirit, receiving it from
God. My Hebrew master also used to say that
those two seraphim in Isaiah, which are described
as having each six wings, and calling to one an-
other, and saying, " Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord
God of hosts," 3 were to be understood of the
only- begotten Son of God and of the Holy Spirit.
And we think that that expression also which
occurs in the hymn of Habakkuk, " In the midst
either of the two living things, or of the two
lives. Thou wilt be known," ■♦ ought to be under-
stood of Christ and of the Holy Spirit. For all
; knowledge of the Father is obtained by revela-
'\J tion of the Son through the Holy Spirit, so that
7 both of these beings which, according to the
(prophet, are called either "living things" or
V " lives," exist as the ground of the knowledge of
' God the Father. For as it is said of the Son,
that " no one knoweth the Father but the Son,
and he to whom the Son will reveal Him," 5 the
same also is said by the apostle of the Holy
Spirit, when He declares, " God hath revealed
them to us by His Holy Spirit ; for the Spirit
searcheth all things, even the deep things of
God ; " ^ and again in the Gospel, when the
Saviour, speaking of the divine and profounder
parts of His teaching, which His disciples were
not yet able to receive, thus addresses them : " I
have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now ; but when the Holy
Spirit, the Comforter, is come, He will teach
you all things, and will bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." 7
We must understand, therefore, that as the Son,
who alone knows the Father, reveals Him to
j whom He will, so the Holy Spirit, who alone
Isearches the deep things of God, reveals God to
LAvhom He will : " For the Spirit bloweth where
'He listeth."^ We are not, however, to suppose
that the Spirit derives His knowledge through
revelation from the Son. For if the Holy Spirit
knows the Father through the Son's revelation.
He passes from a state of ignorance into one of
knowledge ; but it is alike impious and foolish
to confess the Holy Spirit, and yet to ascribe to
Him ignorance. For even although something
else existed before the Holy Spirit, it was not by


' Gal. iii. 3.

^ Isa. xlii. 5.

3 Isa. vi. 3.

* Hab. iii. 2.

5 Luke X. 22.

^ I Cor. ii. 10.

' Cf. John xvi. 12, 13, and xiv. 26.

8 John iii. S.


j progressive advancement that He came to be
the Holy Spirit ; as if any one should venture to
say, that at the time when He was not yet the
Holy Spirit He was ignorant of the Father, but
that after He had received knowledge He was
I made the Holy Spirit. For if this were the case,
I the Holy Spirit would never be reckoned in the
' Unity of the Trinity, i.e., along with the un-
[ changeable Father and His Son, unless He had
always been the Holy Spirit. When we use, in-
deed, such terms as " always " or " was," or any
■ other designation of time, they are not to be
; taken absolutely, but with due allowance ; for
i while the significations of these words relate to
time, and those subjects of which we speak are
spoken of by a stretch of language as existing in
time, they nevertheless surpass in their real na-
ture all conception of the finite understanding.

5. Nevertheless it seems proper to inquire
what is the reason why he who is regenerated
by God unto salvation has to do both with
Father and Son and Holy Spirit, and does not
obtain salvation unless with the co-operation of
, the entire Trinity ; and why it is impossible to
! become partaker of the Father or the Son with-
! out the Holy Spirit. And in discussing these
subjects, it will undoubtedly be necessary to de-
scribe the special working of the Holy Spirit, and
of the Father and the Son. I am of opinion,
then, that the working of the Father and of the
Son takes place as well in saints as in sinners, in
' rational beings and in dumb animals ; nay, even
I in those things which are without life, and in all
things universally which exist ; but that the oper-
ation of the Holy Spirit does not take place at
all in those things which are without life, or in
those which, although living, are yet dumb ; nay,
is not found even in those who are endued in-
deed with reason, but are engaged in evil courses,
and not at all converted to a better life. In
those persons alone do I think that the oper-
j ation of the Holy Spirit takes place, who are
already turning to a better life, and walking
along the way which leads to Jesus Christ, i.e.,
I who are engaged in the performance of good
actions, and who abide in God.
I 6. That the working of the Father and the
Son operates both in saints and in sinners, is
manifest from this, that all who are rational be-
ings are partakers of the word, i.e., of reason,
and by this means bear certain seeds, imi^lanted
within them, of wisdom ami justice, which is
Christ. Now, in Him who truly exists, and who
said by Moses, " I am who I am," '^ all things,
whatever they are, participate ; which participa-
tion in God the Father is shared both by just
men and sinners, by rational and irrational be-
ings, and by all things universally which exist.


254


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


The Apostle Paul also shows truly that all have
a share in Christ, when he says, " Say not in
thine heart. Who shall ascend into heaven? (i.e.,
to bring Christ down from above ;) or who shall
descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up
Christ again from the dead.) But what saith
the Scripture ? The word is nigh thee, even in
thy mouth, and in thy heart." ■ By which he
means that Christ is in the heart of all, in re-
spect of His being the word or reason, by par-
ticipating in which they are rational beings.
I That declaration also in the Gospel, " If I had
not come and spoken unto them, they had not
had sin ; but now they have no excuse for their
sin," ^ renders it manifest and patent to all who
have a rational knowledge of how long a time
man is without sin, and from what period he is
hable to it, how, by participating in the word or
reason, men are said to have sinned, viz., from
the time they are made capable of understanding
and knowledge, when the reason implanted with-
in has suggested to them the difference between
good and evil ; and after they have already be-
gun to know what evil is, they are made liable
to sin, if they commit it. And this is the mean-
ing of the expression, that " men have no excuse
for their sin," viz., that, from the time the divine
word or reason has begun to show them inter-
nally the difference between good and evil, they
ought to avoid and guard against that which is
wicked : " For to him who knoweth to do good,
and doeth it not, to him it is sin." ^ Moreover,
that all men are not without communion with
God, is taught in the Gospel thus, by the Sav-
iour's words : " The kingdom of God cometh
not with observation ; neither shall they say, Lo
here ! or, lo there ! but the kingdom of God is
within you." 4 But here we must see whether
this does not bear the same meaning with the
expression in Genesis : " And He breathed into
his face the breath of life, and man became a
living soul." 5 For if this be understood as ap-
plying generally to all men, then all men have a
share in God.

7. But if this is to be understood as spoken
of the Spirit of God, since Adam also is found
to have prophesied of some things, it may be
taken not as of general application, but as con-
fined to those who are saints. Finally, also, at
the time of the flood, when all flesh had cor-
rupted their way before God, it is recorded that
God spoke thus, as of undeserving men and
sinners : " My Spirit shall not abide with those
men for ever, because they are flesh." ^ By which
it is clearly shown that the Spirit of God is


1 Rom. X. 6-8.

2 John XV. 22.

* Luke xvu. 20, 21.
s Gen. ii. 7.
6 Gen. vi. 3.


taken away from all who are unworthy. In the
Psalms also it is written : " Thou wilt take away
their spirit, and they will die, and return to their
earth. Thou wilt send forth Thy Spirit, and
they shall be created, and Thou wilt renew the
face of the earth \" ^ which is manifestly intended
of the Holy Spirit, who, after sinners and un-
worthy persons have been taken away and de-
stroyed, creates for Himself a new people, and
renews the face of the earth, when, laying aside,
through the grace of the Spirit, the old man
with his deeds, they begin to walk in newness of
life. And therefore the expression is competently
applied to the Holy Spirit, because He will take
up His dwelling, not in all men, nor in those
who are flesh, but in those whose land ^ has been
renewed. Lastly, for this reason was the grace
and revelation of the Holy Spirit bestowed by
the imposition of the apostles' hands after bap-
tism. Our Saviour also, after the resurrection,
when old things had already passed away, and
all things had become new. Himself a new man,
and the first-born from the dead. His apostles
also being renewed by faith in His resurrection,
says, " Receive the Holy Spirit." ^ This is
doubtless what the Lord the Saviour meant to
convey in the Gospel, when He said that new
wine cannot be put into old bottles, but com-
manded that the bottles should be made new,
i.e., that men should walk in newness of life,
that they might receive the new wine, i.e., the
newness of grace of the Holy Spirit. In this
manner, then, is the working of the power of
God the Father and of the Son extended without
distinction to every creature ; but a share in the
Holy Spirit we find possessed only by the saints.
And therefore it is said, " No man can say that
Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." '° And
on one occasion, scarcely even the apostles
themselves are deemed worthy to hear the words,
" Ye shall receive the power of the Holy Ghost
coming upon you."" For this reason, also, I
think it follows that he who has committed a sin
against the Son of man is deserving of forgive-
ness ; because if he who is a participator of the
word or reason of God cease to live agreeably
to reason, he seems to have fallen into a state of
ignorance or folly, and therefore to deserve for-
giveness ; whereas he who has been deemed
worthy to have a portion of the Holy Spirit, and
who has relapsed, is, by this very act and work,
said to be guilty of blasphemy against the Holy
Spirit. Let no one indeed suppose that we,
from having said that the Holy Spirit is conferred
upon the saints alone, but that the benefits or
operations of the Father and of the Son extend^


7 Ps. civ. 29, 30.

8 Terra.

9 John XX. 22.
'° I Cor. xii. 3.
" Acts i. 8.


Chap. III.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


255


to good and bad, to just and unjust, by so doing
give a preference to the Holy Spirit over the
P'ather and the Son, or assert that His dignity is
greater, which certainly would be a very illogical
conclusion. For it is the peculiarity of His
grace and operations that we have been describ-
ing. Moreover, nothing in the Trinity can be
called greater or less, since the fountain of
divinity alone contains all things by His word
and reason, and by the Spirit of His mouth
sanctifies all things which are worthy of sanctifi-
cation, as it is written in the Psalm : " By the
word of the Lord were the heavens strengthened,
and all their power by the Spirit of His mouth." '
There is also a special working of God the Father,
besides that by which He bestowed upon all things
the gift of natural life. There is also a special
ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ to those upon
whom he confers by nature the gift of reason, by
means of which they are enabled to be rightly
what they are. There is also another grace of
the Holy Spirit, which is bestowed upon the
deserving, through the ministry of Christ and
the working of the Father, in proportion to the
merits of those who are rendered capable of
receiving it. This is most clearly pointed out
by the Apostle Paul, when demonstrating that
the power of the Trinity is one and the same,
in the words, " There are diversities of gifts, but
the same Spirit ; there are diversities of adminis-
trations, but the same Lord ; and there are di-
versities of operations, but it is the same God
who worketh all in all. But the manifestation
of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
Avithal." ^ From jvhich it most clearly follows
that there is no difference in the Trinity, but
that which is called the gift of the Spirit is made
known through the Son, and operated by God
the Father. " But all these worketh that one
and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every one
severally as He will." ^

8. Having made these declarations regarding
the Unity of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Spirit, let us return to the order in
which we began the discussion. God the Father
bestows upon all, existence ; and participation in
Christ, in respect of His being the word of reason,
renders them rational beings. From which it
follows that they are deserving either of praise
or blame, because capable of virtue and vice.
On this account, therefore, is the grace of the
Holy (ihost present, that those beings which are
not holy in their essence may be rendered holy
by participating in it. Seeing, then, that firstly,
they derive their existence from Crod the Father ;
""Asecondly, their rational nature from the Word ;
thirdly, their holiness from the Holy Spirit, —

' Ps. xxxiii. 6.
^ I Cor. xii. 4-7.
3 I Cor. xii. II.


those who have been previously sanctified by
the Holy Spirit are again made capable of re-
ceiving Christ, in respect that He is the right-
eousness of God ; and those who have earned
advancement to this grade by the sanctification
of the Holy Spirit, will nevertheless obtain the
gift of wisdom according to the power and work-
ing of the Spirit of God. And this I consider
is Paul's meaning, when he says that to " some is
given the word of wisdom, to others the word of
knowledge, according to the same Spirit." And
while pointing out the individual distinction of
gifts, he refers the whole of them to the source
of all things in the words, "There are diversities
of operations, but one God who worketh all in
all." ■* Whence also the working of the Father,
which confers existence upon all things, is found
to be more glorious and magnificent, while each
one, by participation in Christ, as being wisdom,
and knowledge, and sanctification, makes prog-
ress, and advances to higher degrees of perfec-
tion ; and seeing it is by partaking of the Holy
Spirit that any one is made purer and holier, he
obtai^, when he is made worthy, the grace of
wisdom and knowledge, in order that, after all
stains of pollution and ignorance are cleansed
and taken away, he may make so great an ad-
vance in holiness and purity, that the nature
which he received from God may become such
as is worthy of Him who gave it to be pure and
perfect, so that the being which exists may be as
worthy as He who called it into existence. For,
in this way, he who is such as his Creator v.ished
him to be, will receive from God power always
to exist, and to abide for ever. That this may
be the case, and that those whom He has created
may be unceasingly and inseparably present with
Him, who IS, it is the business of wisdom to in-
struct and train them, and to bring them to per-
fection by confirmation of His Holy Spirit and
unceasing sanctification, by which alone are they
capable of receiving God. In this way, then, by
the renewal of the ceaseless working of Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit in us, in its various stages
of progress, shall we be able at some future time
perhaps, although with difficulty, to behold the
holy and the blessed life, in which (as it is only
after many struggles that we are able to reach it)
we ought so to continue, that no satiety of that
blessedness should ever seize us ; but the more
we perceive its blessedness, the more should be
increased and intensified within us the longing
for the same, while we ever more eagerly and
freely receive and hold fast the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Spirit. But if satiety should
ever take hold of any one of those who stand on
the highest and perfect summit of attainment, I
do not think that such an one would suddenly


256


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


be deposed from his position and fall away, but
that he must decline gradually and little by little,
so that it may sometimes happen that if a brief
lapsus take place, and the individual quickly
repent and return to himself, he may not utterly
fall away, but may retrace his steps, and return
to his former place, and again make good that
which had been lost by his negligence.

CHAP. IV. ON DEFECTION, OR FALLING AWAY.

1 . To exhibit the nature of defection or falling
away, on the part of those who conduct them-
selves carelessly, it will not appear out of place
to employ a similitude by way of illustration.
Suppose, then, the case of one who had become
gradually acquainted with the art or science, say
of geometry or medicine, until he had reached
perfection, having trained himself for a length-
ened time in its principles and practice, so as to
attain a complete mastery over the art : to such
an one it could never happen, that, when he lay
down to sleep in the possession of his skill, he
should awake in a state of ignorance. It is not
our purpose to adduce or to notice here^those
accidents which are occasioned by any injury or
weakness, for they do not apply to our present
illustration. According to our point of view,
then, so long as that geometer or physician con-
tinues to exercise himself in the study of his art
and in the practice of its principles, the knowl-
edge of his profession abides with him ; but if
he withdraw from its practice, and lay aside his
habits of industry, then, by his neglect, at first a
few things will gradually escape him, then by and
by more and more, until in course of time every-
thing will be forgotten, and be completely ef-
faced from the memory. It is possible, indeed,
that when he has first begun to fall away, and to
yield to the corrupting influence of a negligence
which is small as yet, he may, if he be aroused
and return speedily to his senses, repair those
losses which up to that time are only recent, and
recover that knowledge which hitherto had been
only slighriy obliterated from his mind. Let us
apply this now to the case of those who have
devoted themselves to the knowledge and wis-
dom of God, whose learning and diligence in-
comparably surpass all other training ; and let
us contemplate, according to the form of the
similitude employed, what is the acquisition of
knowledge, or what is its disappearance, espe-
cially when we hear from the apostle what is said
of those who are perfect, that they shall behold
face to face the glory of the Lord in the revela-
tion of His mysteries.

2. But in our desire to show the divine bene-
fits bestowed upon us by Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, which Trinity is the fountain of all holi-
ness, we have fallen, in what we have said, into
a digression, having considered that the subject


of the soul, which accidentally came before us,
should be touched on, although cursorily, seeing
we were discussing a cognate topic relating to
our rational nature. We shall, however, with
the permission of God through Jesus Christ
and the Holy Spirit, more conveniently consider
in the proper place the subject of all rational
beings, which are distinguished into three genera
and species.

CHAP. V. ON RATIONAL NATURES.

1. After the dissertation, which we have
briefly conducted to the best of our ability, re-
garding the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, it fol-
lows that we offer a few remarks upon the subject
of rational natures, and on their species and
orders, or on the offices as well of holy as of
malignant powers, and also on those which oc-
cupy an intermediate position between these
good and evil powers, and as yet are placed in a
state of struggle and trial. For we find in holy
Scripture numerous names of certain orders and
offices, not only of holy beings, but also of those
of an opposite description, which we shall bring
before us, in the first place ; and the meaning
of which we shall endeavour, in the second place,
to the best of our ability, to ascertain. There
are certain holy angels of God whom Paul terms
" ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
them who shall be heirs of salvation." ' In the
writings also of St. Paul himself we find him
designating them, from some unknown source,
as thrones, and dominions, and principalities, and
powers ; and after this enumeration, as if know-
ing that there were still other rational offices ^
and orders besides those which he had named,
he says of the Saviour : " Who is above all prin-
cipality, and power, and might, and dominion,
and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come." ^
From which he shows that there were certain
beings besides those which he had mentioned,
which may be named indeed in this world, but
were not now enumerated by him, and perhaps
were not known by any other individual ; and
that there were others which may not be named
in this world, but will be named in the world to
come.

2. Then, in the next place, we must know that
every being which is endowed with reason, and
transgresses its statutes and limitations, is un-
doubtedly involved in sin by swerving from rec-
titude and justice. Every rational creature, ^
therefore, is capable of earning praise and cen-
sure : of praise, if, in conformity to that reason
which he possesses, he advance to better things ;
of censure, if he fall away from the plan and


» Heb. i. 14.

2 Officia.

3 Eph. i. 21.


Chap. V,


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


257


course of rectitude, for which reason he is justly
hable to pains and penalties. And this also is
to be held as applying to the devil himself, and
those who are with him, and are called his an-
gels. Now the titles of these beings have to
be explained, that we may know what they are
of whom we have to speak. The name, then, of
Devil, and Satan, and Wicked One, who is also
described as Enemy of God, is mentioned in
many passages of Scripture. Moreover, certain
angels of the devil are mentioned, and also a
prince of this world, who, whether the devil
himself or some one else, is not yet clearly man-
ifest. There are also certain princes of this
world spoken of as possessing a kind of wisdom
which will come to nought ; but whether these
are those princes who are also the principalities
wii;h whom we have to wresde, or other beings,
seems to me a point on which it is not easy for
any one to pronounce. After the principalities,
certain powers also are named with whom we
have to wrestle, and carry on a struggle even
against the princes of this world and the rulers
of this darkness. Certain spiritual powers of
wickedness also, in heavenly places, are spoken
of by Paul himself. What, moreover, are we to
say of those wicked and unclean spirits men-
tioned in the Gospel? Then we have certain
heavenly beings called by a similar name, but
which are said to bend the knee, or to be about
to bend the knee, at the name of Jesus ; nay,
even things on earth and things under the earth,
which Paul enumerates in order. And certainly,
in a place where we have been discussing the
subject of rational natures, it is not proper to be
silent regarding ourselves, who are human be-
ings, and are called rational animals ; nay, even
this point is not to be idly passed over, that even
of us human beings certain different orders are
mentioned in the words, "The portion of the
Lord is His people Jacob ; Israel is the cord of
His inheritance." ' Other nations, moreover,
are called a part of the angels ; since " when the
Most High divided the nations, and dispersed
the sons of Adam, He fixed the boundaries
of the nations according to the number of the
angels of God." ^ And therefore, with other
rational natures, we must also thoroughly examine
the reason of the human soul.

3. After the enumeration, then, of so many
and so important names of orders and offices,
underlying which it is certain that there are per-
sonal existences, let us inquire whether God, the
creator and founder of all things, created certain
of them holy and happy, so that they could
admit no element at all of an opposite kind, and
certain others so that they were made capable


' Deut. xxxii. 9.

* Deut. xxxii. 8. The Septuagint here differs from the Masoretic


both of virtue and vice ; or whether we are to
suppose that He created some so as to be alto-
gether incapable of virtue, and others again al-
together incapable of wickedness, but with the
power of abiding only in a state of happiness,
and others again such as to be capable of either
condition.3 In order, now, that our first inquiry
may begin with the names themselves, let us
consider whether the holy angels, from the period
of their first existence, have always been holy,
and are holy still, and will be holy, and have
never either admitted or had the power to admit
any occasion of sin. Then in the next place, let
us consider whether those who are called holy
principalities began from the moment of their
creation by God to exercise power over some
who were made subject to them, and whether
these latter were created of such a nature, and
formed for the very purpose of being subject
and subordinate. In like manner, also, whether
those which are called powers were created of
such a nature and for the express purpose of
exercising power, or whether their arriving at
that power and dignity is a reward and desert
of their virtue. Moreover, also, whether those
which are called thrones or seats gained that
stability of happiness at the same time with their
coming forth into being,* so as to have that pos-
session from the will of the Creator alone ; or
whether those which are called dominions had
their dominion conferred on them, not as a re-
ward for their proficiency, but as tjie peculiar
privilege of their creation, s so that it is some-
thing which is in a certain degree inseparable
from them, and natural. Now, if we adopt the
view that the holy angels, and the holy powers,
and the blessed seats, and the glorious virtues,
and the magnificent dominions, are to be re-
garded as possessing those powers and dignities
and glories in virtue of their nature,^ it will
doubtless appear to follow that those beings
which have been mentioned as holding offices
of an opposite kind must be regarded in the
same manner ; so that those principalities with
whom we have to struggle are to be viewed, not
as having rec«^-e|l tl^ spirit of opposition and
resistance to all g^xPat a later period, or as
falling away from good through the freedom
of the will, but as having had it in themselves
as the essence of their being from the beginning
of their existence. In like manner also will it
be the case with the powers and virtues, in none
of which was wickedness subsequent or posterior
to their first existence. Those also whom the
apostle termed rulers and princes of the dark-
ness of this world, are said, with respect to their


3 [See note at end of chap. vi. S.]

* Simul cum substantia; sua: prolalione — at the same lime with
the emanation of their substance.

5 Conditionis pra;rogaliva.

* Substantialitcr.


258


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Rook I.


rule and occupation of darkness, to fall not from
perversity of intention, but from the necessity of
their creation. Logical reasoning will compel
us to take the same view with regard to wicked
and malignant spirits and unclean demons. But
if to entertain this view regarding malignant and
opposing powers seem to be absurd, as it is cer-
tainly absurd that the cause of their wickedness
should be removed from the purpose of their
own will, and ascribed of necessity to their Crea-
tor, why should we not also be obliged to make
a similar confession regarding the good and holy
powers, that, viz., the good which is in them is
not theirs by essential being, which we have
manifestly shown to be the case with Christ and
the Holy Spirit alone, as undoubtedly with the
Father also ? For it was proved that there was
nothing compound in the nature of the Trinity,
so that these qualities might seem to belong to
it as accidental consequences. From which it
follows, that in the case of every creature it is
a result of his own works and movements, that
those powers which appear either to hold sway
over others or to exercise power or dominion,
have been preferred to and placed over those
whom they are said to govern or exercise power
over, and not in consequence of a peculiar
privilege inherent in their constitutions, but on
account of merit.

4. But that we may not appear to build our
assertions on subjects of such importance and
difficulty 011, the ground of inference alone, or to
require the assent of our hearers to what is only
conjectural, let us see whether we can obtain
any declarations from holy Scripture, by the
authority of which these positions may be more
credibly maintained. And, firstly, we shall ad-
duce what holy Scripture contains regarding
wicked powers ; we shall next continue our in-
vestigation with regard to the others, as the Lord
shall be pleased to enlighten us, that in matters
of such difficulty we may ascertain what is near-
est to the truth, or what ought to be our opinions
agreeably to the standard of religion. Now we
find in the prophet Ezekiel two prophecies writ-
ten to the prince of Tyre, the former of which
might appear to any one, before he heard the
second also, to be spoken of some man who was
prince of the Tyrians. In the meantime, there-
fore, we shall take nothing from that first proph-
ecy ; but as the second is manifestly of such a
kind as cannot be at all understood of a man,
but of some superior power which had fallen
away from a higher position, and had been re-
duced to a lower and worse condition, we shall
from it take an illustration, by which it may be
demonstrated with the utmost clearness, that
those opposing and malignant powers were not
formed or created so by nature, but fell from a
better to a worse position, and were converted


into wicked beings ; that those blessed powers
also were not of such a nature as to be unable to
admit what was opposed to them if they were
so inclined and became negligent, and did not

j guard most carefully the blessedness of their con-
dition. For if it is related that he who is called
the prince of Tyre was amongst the saints, and
was without stain, and was placed in the paradise

! of God, and adorned also with a crown of come-

I liness and beauty, is it to be supposed that such
an one could be in any degree inferior to any of
the saints? For he is described as having been
adorned with a crown of comeliness and beauty,

j and as having walked stainless in the paradise of
God : and how can any one suppose that such a

j being was not one of those holy and blessed

' powers which, as being placed in a state of hap-
piness, we must believe to be endowed with no
other honour than this? But let us see what we
are taught by the words of the prophecy them-
selves. "The word of the Lord," says the
prophet, " came to me, saying. Son of man, take
up a lamentation over the prince of Tyre, and
say to him. Thus saith the Lord God, Thou hast
been the seal of a similitude, and a crown of
comeliness among the delights of paradise ; thou
wert adorned with every good stone or gem,
and wert clothed with sardonyx, and topaz, and
emerald, and carbuncle, and sapphire, and jas-
per, set in gold and silver, and with agate, ame-
thyst, and chrysolite, and beryl, and onyx : with
gold also didst thou fill thy treasures, and thy
storehouses within thee. From the day when
thou wert created along with the cherubim, I
placed thee in the holy mount of God. Thou
wert in the midst of the fiery stones : thou wert
stainless in thy days, from the day when thou
wert created, until iniquities were found in thee :
from the greatness of thy trade, thou didst fill
thy storehouses with iniquity, and didst sin, and
wert wounded from the mount of God. And a
cherub drove thee forth from the midst of the
burning stones ; and thy heart was elated be-
cause of thy comeliness, thy discipline was cor-
rupted along with thy beauty : on account of
the multitude of thy sins, I cast thee forth to the
earth before kings ; I gave thee for a show and
a mockery on account of the multitude of thy
sins, and of thine iniquities : because of thy trade
thou hast polluted thy holy places. And I shall

j bring forth fire from the midst of thee, and it
shall devour thee, and I shall give thee for ashes
and cinders on the earth in the sight of all who
see thee : and all who know thee among the
nations shall mourn over thee. Thou hast been
made destruction, and thou shalt exist no longer
for ever." ' Seeing, then, that such are the
words of the prophet, who is there that on hear-


• Ezek. xxviii. 11-19.


Chap. V.]


ORIGEN DE PRIXCIPIIS.


259


ing, " Thou wert a seal of a similitude, and a
crown of comeliness among the delights of para-
dise," or that " From the day when thou wert
created with the cherubim, I placed thee in the
holy mount of God," can so enfeeble the mean-
ing as to suppose that this language is used
of some man or saint, not to say the prince of
Tyre ? Or what fiery stones can he imagine in
the midst of which any man could live? Or who
could be supposed to be stainless from the very
day of his creation, and wickedness being after-
wards discovered in him, it be said of him then
that he was cast forth upon the earth ? For the j
meaning of this is, that He who was not yet on
the earth is said to be cast forth upon it : whose j
holy places also are said to be polluted. We
have shown, then, that what we have quoted re-
garding the prince of Tyre from the prophet
Ezekiel refers to an adverse power, and by it it
is most clearly proved that that power was for-
merly holy and happy ; from which state of
happiness it fell from the time that iniquity was '
found in it, and was hurled to the earth, and
was not such by nature and creation. We are of
opinion, therefore, that these words are spoken !
of a certain angel who had received the office
of governing the nation of the Tyrians, and to
whom also their souls had been entrusted to be
taken care of. But what Tyre, or what souls of
Tyrians, we ought to understand, whether that
Tyre which is situated within the boundaries of
the province of Phoenicia, or some other of which
this one which we know on earth is the model ;
and the souls of the Tyrians, whether they are '
those of the former or those which belong to ;
that Tyre which is spiritually understood, does
not seem to be a matter requiring examination
in this place ; lest perhaps we should appear to
investigate subjects of so much mystery and
importance in a cursory manner, whereas they
demand a labour and work of their own.

5. Again, we are taught as follows by the
prophet Isaiah regarding another opposing pow-
er. The prophet says, " How is Lucifer, who
used to arise in the morning, fallen from heaven !
He who assailed all nations is broken and beaten
to the ground. Thou indeed saidst in thy heart,
I shall ascend into heaven ; above the stars of
heaven shall I place my throne ; I shall sit upon
a lofty mountain, above the lofty mountains
which are towards the north ; I shall ascend
above the clouds ; I shall be like the Most High.
Now shalt thou be brought down to the lower
world, and to the foundations of the earth. They
who see thee shall be amazed at thee, and shall
say, This is the man who harassed the whole
earth, who moved kings, who made the whole
world a desert, who destroyed cities, and did
not unloose those who were in chains. All the
kings of the nations have slept in honour, every


one in his own house ; but thou shalt be cast
forth on the mountains, accursed with the many
dead who have been pierced through with swords,
and have descended to the lovver world. As a
garment clotted with blood, and stained, will not
be clean ; neither shalt thou be clean, because
thou hast destroyed my land and slain my peo-
ple : thou shalt not remain for ever, most wicked
seed. Prepare thy sons for death on account of
the sins of thy father, lest they rise again and
inherit the earth, and fill the earth with wars.
And I shall rise against them, saith the Lord of
hosts, and I shall cause their name to perish,
and their remains, and their seed." ' Most evi-
dently by these words is he shown to have fallen
from heaven, who formerly was Lucifer, and who
used to arise in the morning. For if, as some
think, he was a nature of darkness, how is Luci-
fer said to have existed before ? Or how could
he arise in the morning, who had in himself
nothing of the light? Nay, even the Saviour
Himself teaches us, saying of the devil, " Behold,
I see Satan fallen from heaven like lightning." ^
For at one time he was light. Moreover our
Lord, who is the truth, compared the power of
His own glorious advent to lightning, in the
words, " For as the lightning shineth from the
height of heaven even to its height again, so will
the coming of the Son of man be."^ And not-
withstanding He compares him to lightning, and
says that he fell from heaven, that He might
show by this that he had been at one time in
heaven, and had had a place among the saints,
and had enjoyed a share in that light in which
all the saints participate, by which they are made
angels of light, and by which the apostles are
termed by the Lord the light of the world. In
this manner, then, did that being once exist as
light before he went astray, and fell to this place,
and had his glory turned into dust, which is
peculiarly the mark of the wicked, as the proph-
et also says ; whence, too, he was called the
prince of this world, i.e., of an earthly habita-
tion : for he exercised power over those who
were obedient to his wickedness, since "the
whole of this world " — for I term this place of
earth, world — " lieth in the wicked one," ■♦ and
in this apostate. That he is an apostate, i.e., a
fugitive, even the Lord in the book of Job says,
" Thou wilt take with a hook the apostate drag-
on," i.e., a fugitives Now it is certain that by
the dragon is understood the devil himself. If
then they are called opposing powers, and are
said to have been once without stain, while spot-
less purity exists in the essential being of none
save the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, but is an


' Isa. xiv. 12-22.

2 Luke X. 18.

3 Matt. xxiv. 27.
* I John V. 19.

5 Jubxl. 20 [LXX.]


26o


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


accidental quality in every created thing ; and
since that which is accidental may also fall away,
and since those opposite powers once were spot-
less, and were once among those which still re-
main unstained^ it is evident from all this that no
one is pure either by essence or nature, and that
no one was by nature polluted. And the conse-
quence of this is, that it lies within ourselves and
in our own actions to possess either happiness or
holiness ; or by sloth and negligence to fall from
happiness into wickedness and ruin, to such a
degree that, through too great proficiency, so to
speak, in wickedness (if a man be guilty of so
great neglect), he may descend even to that
state in which he will be changed into what is
called an " opposing power."

CHAP. VI. — ON THE END OR CONSUMMATION.

I. An end or consummation would seem to
be an indication of the perfection and comple-
tion of things. And this reminds us here, that
if there be any one imbued with a desire of
reading and understanding subjects of such diffi-
culty and importance, he ought to bring to the
effort a perfect and instructed understanding,
lest perhaps, if he has had no experience in
questions of this kind, they may appear to him
as vain and superfluous ; or if his mind be full of
preconceptions and prejudices on other points,
he may judge these to be heretical and opposed
to the faith of the Church, yielding in so doing
not so much to the convictions of reason as to
the dogmatism of prejudice. These subjects,
indeed, are treated by us with great solicitude
and caution, in the manner rather of an investi-
gation and discussion, than in that of fixed and
certain decision. For we have pointed out in
the preceding pages those questions which must
be set forth in clear dogmatic propositions, as I
think has been done to the best of my ability
when speaking of the Trinity. But on the pres-
ent occasion our exercise is to be conducted, as
we best may, in the style of a disputation rather
than of strict definition.

The end of the world, then, and the final con-
summation, will take place when every one shall
be subjected to punishment for his sins ; a time
which God alone knows, when He will bestow on
each one what he deserves. We think, indeed,
that the goodness of God, through His Christ,
may recall all His creatures to one end, even
His enemies being conquered and subdued. For
thus says holy Scripture, " The Lord said to My
Lord, Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make
Thine enemies Thy footstool." ' And if the
meaning of the prophet's language here be less
clear, we may ascertain it from the Apostle Paul,
who speaks more openly, thus : " For Christ


must reign until He has put all enemies under
His feet." ^ But if even that unreserved declara-
tion of the apostle do not sufficiently inform us
what is meant by " enemies being placed under
His feet," listen to what he says in the following
words, " For all things must be put under Him."
What, then, is this " putting under " by which
all things must be made subject to Christ? I
am of opinion that it is this very subjection
by which we also wish to be subject to Him, by
which the apostles also were subject, and all the
saints who have been followers of Christ. For
the name " subjection," by which we are subject
to Christ, indicates that the salvation which pro-
ceeds from Him belongs to His subjects, agree-
ably to the declaration of David, " Shall not my
soul be subject unto God? From Him cometh
my salvation." 3

2. Seeing, then, that such is the end, when all
enemies will be subdued to Christ, when death
— the last enemy — shall be destroyed, and
when the kingdom shall be delivered up by
Christ (to whom all things are subject) to God
the Father ; let us, I say, from such an end as
this, contemplate the beginnings of things. For
the end is always like the beginning : and, there-
fore, as there is one end to all things, so ought
we to understand that there was one beginning ;
and as there is one end to many things, so there
spring from one beginning many differences and
varieties, which again, through the goodness of
God, and by subjection to Christ, and through
the unity of the Holy Spirit, are recalled to one
end, which is like unto the beginning : all those,
viz., who, bending the knee at the name of Jesus,
make known by so doing their subjection to
Him : and these are they who are in heaven, on
earth, and under the earth : by which three
classes the whole universe of things is pointed
out, those, viz., who from that one beginning
were arranged, each according to the diversity
of his conduct, among the different orders, in
accordance with their desert ; for there was no
goodness in them by essential being, as in God
and His Christ, and in the Holy Spirit. For in
the Trinity alone, which is the author of all
things, does goodness exist in virtue of essential
being ; while others possess it as an accidental
and perishable quality, and only then enjoy bless-
edness, when they participate in holiness and
wisdom, and in divinity itself. But if \hey neg-
lect and despise such participation, then is each
one, by fault of his own slothfulness, made, one
more rapidly, another more slowly, one in a
greater, another in a less degree, the cause of
his own downfall. And since, as we have re-
marked, the lapse by which an individual falls
away from his position is characterized by great

2 I Cor. XV. 25.

3 Ps. Ixii. I.


Chap. VI.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


261


diversity, according to the movements of the
mind and will, one man falling with greater ease,
another with more difficulty, into a lower con-
dition ; in this is to be seen the just judgment
of the providence of God, that it should happen
to every one according to the diversity of his
conduct, in proportion to the desert of his de-
clension and defection. Certain of those, indeed,
who remained in that beginning which we have
described as resembling the end which is to
come, obtained, in the ordering and arrangement
of the world, the rank of angels ; others that of
influences, others of principalities, others of pow-
ers, that they may exercise power over those
who need to have power upon their head. Oth-
ers, again, received the rank of thrones, having
the office of judging or ruling those who require
this ; others dominion, doubtless, over slaves ;
all of which are conferred by Divine Providence
in just and impartial judgment according to
their merits, and to the progress which they had
made in the participation and imitation of God.
But those who have been removed from their
primal state of blessedness have not been re-
moved irrecoverably, but have been placed under
the rule of those holy and blessed orders which
we have described ; and by availing themselves
of the aid of these, and being remoulded by
salutary principles and discipline, they may re-
cover themselves, and be restored to their con-
dition of happiness. From all which I am of
opinion, so far as I can see, that this order of the
human race has been appointed in order that in
the future world, or in ages to come, when there
shall be the new heavens and new earth, spoken
of by Isaiah, it may be restored to that unity
promised by the Lord Jesus in His prayer to
God the Father on behalf of His disciples : " I
do not pray for these alone, but for all who shall
believe on Me through their word : that they all
may be one, as Thou, Father, art in Me, and I
in Thee, that they also may be one in Us ; " '
and again, when He says : " That they may be
one, even as We are one ; I in them, and Thou
in Me, that they may be made perfect in one." ^
And this is further confirmed by the language of
the Apostle Paul : " Until we all come in the
unity of the faith to a perfect man, to the meas-
ure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." ^
And in keeping with this is the declaration of
the same apostle, when he exhorts us, who even
in the present life are placed in the Church, in
which is the form of that kingdom which is to
come, to this same similitude of unity : " That
ye all speak the same thing, and that there be
no divisions among you ; but that ye be perfectly


' John

2 John :

3 tph. 1


XVII. 20, 21.


joined together in the same mind and in the
same judgment." ^

3. It is to be borne in mind, however, that
certain beings who fell away from that one be-
ginning of which we have spoken, have sunk to
such a depth of unworthiness and wickedness as
to be deemed altogether undeserving of that
training and instruction by which the human
race, while in the flesh, are trained and in-
structed with the assistance of the heavenly
powers ; and continue, on the contrary, in a
state of enmity and opposition to those who are
receiving this instruction and teaching. And
hence it is that the whole of this mortal life is
full of struggles and trials, caused by the oppo-
sition and enmity of those who fell from a better
condition without at all looking back, and who
are called the devil and his angels, and the other
orders of evil, which the apostle classed among
the opposing powers. But whether any of these
orders who act under the government of the
devil, and obey his wicked commands, will in a
future world be converted to righteousness be-
cause of their possessing the faculty of freedom
of will, or whether persistent and inveterate
wickedness may be changed by the power of
habit into nature, is a result which you yourself,
reader, may approve of, if neither in these pres-
ent worlds which are seen and temporal, nor in
those which are unseen and are eternal, that
portion is to differ wholly from the final unity
and fitness of things. But in the meantime,
both in those temporal worlds which are seen,
as well as in those eternal worlds which are in-
visible, all those beings are arranged, according
to a regular plan, in the order and degree of
their merits ; so that some of them in the first,
others in the second, some even in the last
times, after having undergone heavier and se-
verer punishments, endured for a lengthened
period, and for many ages, so to speak, im-
proved by this stern method of training, and
restored at first by the instruction of the angels,
and subsequently by the powers of a higher
grade, and thus advancing through each stage
to a better condition, reach even to that which
is invisible and eternal, having travelled through,
by a kind of training, every single office of the
heavenly powers. From which, I think, this will
appear to follow as an inference, that every ra-
tional nature may, in passing from one order to
another, go through each to all, and advance
from all to each, while made the subject of va-
rious degrees of proficiency and failure accord-
ing to its own actions and endeavours, put forth
in the enjoyment of its power of freedom of
will.


262


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


4. But since Paul says that certain things are
visible and temporal, and others besides these
invisible and eternal, we proceed to inquire how
those things which are seen are temporal —
whether because there will be nothing at all after
them in all those periods of the coming world,
in which that dispersion and separation from the
one beginning is undergoing a process of resto-
ration to one and the same end and likeness ;
or because, while the form of those things which
are seen passes away, their essential nature is
subject to no corruption. And Paul seems to
confirm the latter view, when he says, " For the
fashion of this world passeth away."' David
also appears to assert the same in the words,
" The heavens shall perish, but Thou shalt en-
dure ; and they all shall wax old as a garment,
and Thou shalt change them like a vesture, and
like a vestment they shall be changed." ^ For
if the heavens are to be changed, assuredly that
which is changed does not perish, and if the
fashion of the world passes away, it is by no
means an annihilation or destruction of their
material substance that is shown to take place,
but a kind of change of quality and transforma-
tion of appearance. Isaiah also, in declaring
prophetically that there will be a new heaven
and a new earth, undoubtedly suggests a similar
view. For this renewal of heaven and earth,
and this transmutation of the form of the pres-
ent world, and this changing of the heavens,
will undoubtedly be prepared for those who are
walking along that way which we have pointed
out above, and are tending to that goal of hap-
piness to which, it is said, even enemies them-
selves are to be subjected, and in which God is
said to be " all and in all." And if any one
imagine that at the end material, i.e., bodily,
nature will be entirely destroyed, he cannot in
any respect meet my view, how beings so nu-
merous and powerful are able to live and to
exist without bodies, since it is an attribute of
the divine nature alone — i.e., of the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit — to exist without any ma-
terial substance, and without partaking in any
degree of a bodily adjunct. Another, perhaps,
may say that in the end every bodily substance
will be so pure and refined as to be like the
aether, and of a celestial purity and clearness.
How things will be, however, is known with cer-
tainty to God alone, and to those who are His
friends through Christ and the Holy Spirit.^


CHAP. VII.


- ON INCORPOREAL AND CORPOREAL
BEINGS.


1 I Cor. vii. 31.

3 I The 'language used by Origen in this and the preceding chap-
ter affords a remarkable illustration of that occasional extravagance
in statements of facts and opinions, as well as of those strange im-
aginings and wild speculations as to the meanmg of Holy bcnpture
which brought upon him subsequently grave charges of error and
heretical pravity. See Neander's History of the Christian Re-
ligion and Church during the First Three Centuries (Roses

•* , • N 1 :: _ „, ,-„^^ onri MoCTpnbnrh s HtstorV ot


I. The subjects considered in the previous
chapter have been spoken of in general language,
the nature of rational beings being discussed
more by way of intelligent inference than strict
dogmatic definition, with the exception of the
place where we treated, to the best of our ability,
of the persons of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
We have now to ascertain what those matters are
which it is proper to treat in the following pages
according to our dogmatic belief, i.e., in agree-_
ment with the creed of the Church. All souls
and all rational natures, whether holy or wicked,
were formed or created, and all these, according
to their proper nature, are incorporeal ; but al-
though incorporeal, they were nevertheless cre-
ated, because all things were made by God
through Christ, as John teaches in a general way
in his Gospel, saying, " In the beginning waS^
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. The same was in the beginning
with God. All things were made by Him, and
Without Him was nothing made." •♦ The Apostle
Paul, moreover, describing created things by
species and numbers and orders, speaks as fol-
lows, when showing that all things were made
through Christ : " And in Him were all things
created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or
dominions, or principalities, or powers : all things
were created by Him, and in Him : and He is
before all, and He is the head." s He therefore
manifestly declares that in Christ and through
Christ were all things made and created, whether
things visible, which are corporeal, or things in-
visible, which I regard as none other than incor-
poreal and spiritual powers. But of those things
which he had termed generally corporeal or in-
corporeal, he seems to me, in the words that
follow, to enumerate the various kinds, viz.,
thrones, dominions, principalities, powers, influ-

These matters now have been previously men-
tioned by us, as we are desirous to come in an
orderly manner to the investigation of the sun,
and moon, and stars by way of logical inference,
and to ascertain whether they also ought prop-
erly to be reckoned among the principalities on
account of their being said to be created m
'Apva?, i.e., for the government of day and
night ; or whether they are to be regarded as
having only that government of day and night
which they discharge by performing the ofiice of
illuminating them, and are not in reality chief
of that order of principalities.

2. Now, when it is said that all things were


ligion and Church during tne rirsi •'«"<^ t il- i/ • ) — f
translation), vol. ii. p. 217 et seqq., and Hagenbach s //^.r/^rj/ ^/
Doctrines, vo\. i. p. 102 et seqq. See also Prefatory Note to Ori-
gen's Works, supra, p. 235. S.]


4 John i. 1-3.

5 Col. i. 16-18.


Chap. VII.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


263


made by Him, and that in Him were all things
created, both things in heaven and things on
earth, there can be no doubt that also those
things which are in the firmament, which is
called heaven, and in which those luminaries
are said to be placed, are included amongst the
number of heavenly things. And secondly, see-
ing that the course of the discussion has mani-
festly discovered that all things were made or
created, and that amongst created things there
is nothing which may not admit of good and
evil, and be capable of either, what are we to
think of the following opinion which certain of
our friends entertain regarding sun, moon, and
stars, viz., that they are unchangeable, and in-
capable of becoming the opposite of what they
are ? Not a few have held that view even regard-
ing the holy angels, and certain heretics also
regarding souls, which they call spiritual natures.
In the first place, then, let us see what reason
itself can discover respecting sun, moon, and
stars, — whether the opinion, entertained by
some, of their unchangeableness be correct, —
and let the declarations of holy Scripture, as far
as possible, be first adduced. For Job appears
to assert that not only may the stars be subject
to sin, but even that they are actually not clean
from the contagion of it. The following are his
words : " The stars also are not clean in Thy
sight." ■ Nor is this to be understood of the
splendour of their physical substance, as if one
were to say, for example, of a garment, that it
is not clean ; for if such were the meaning, then
the accusation of a want of cleanness in the
splendour of their bodily substance would imply
an injurious reflection upon their Creator. For
if they are unable, through their own diligent
efforts, either to acquire for themselves a body
of greater brightness, or through their sloth to
make the one they have less pure, how should
they incur censure for being stars that are not
clean, if they receive no praise because they are
so?^

3. But to arrive at a clearer understanding on
these matters, we ought first to inquire after this
point, whether it is allowable to suppose that
they are living and rational beings ; then, in the
next place, whether their souls came into exist-
ence at the same time with their bodies, or seem
, to be anterior to them ; and also whetlier, after
the end of the world, we are to understand that
they are to be released from their bodies ; and
whether, as we cease to live, so they also will
cease from illuminating the world. Although
this inquiry may seem to be somewhat bold,
yet, as we are incited by the desire of ascertain-
ing the truth as far as possible, there seems no


Tob XXV. 5.

[See note, supra, p. 262. S.]


absurdity in attempting an investigation of the
subject agreeably to the grace of the Holy Spirit.

We think, then, that they may be designated
as living beings, for this reason, that they are
said to receive commandments from God, which
is ordinarily the case only with rational beings.
" I have given a commandment to all the stars," ^
says the Lord. What, now, are these command-
ments? Those, namely, that each star, in its
order and course, should bestow upon the world
the amount of splendour which has been entrusted
to it. For those which are called " planets "
move in orbits of one kind, and those which are
termed fXTrAaFeis are different. Now it manifestly
follows from this, that neither can the movement
of that body take place without a soul, nor can
living things be at any time without motion. And
seeing that the stars move with such order and
regularity, that their movements never appear to
be at any time subject to derangement, would it
not be the height of folly to say that so orderly
an observance of method and plan could be
carried out or accomplished by irrational beings ?
In the writings of Jeremiah, indeed, the moon
is called the queen of heaven.^ Yet if the stars
are living and radonal beings, there will un-
doubtedly appear among them both an advance
and a falling back. For the language of Job,
" the stars are not clean in His sight," seems -4;o
me to convey some such idea.

4. And now we have to ascertain whether those
beings which in the course of the discussion we
have discovered to possess life and reason, were
endowed with a soul along with their bodies at
the time mentioned in Scripture, when " God
made two great lights, the greater light to rule
the day, and the lesser light to rule the night,
and the stars also," 5 or whether their spirit was
implanted in them, not at the creation of their
bodies, but from without, after they had been
already made. I, for my part, suspect that the
spirit was implanted in them from without ; but
it will be worth while to prove this from Scrip-
ture : for it will seem an easy matter to make
the assertion on conjectural grounds, while it is
more difficult to establish it by the testimony
of Scripture. Now it may be established con-
jecturally as follows. If the soul of a man,
which is certainly inferior while it remains the
soul of a man, was not formed along with his
body, but is proved to have been implanted
stricdy from without, much more must this be
the case with those living beings which are called
heavenly. For, as regarils man, how could the
soul of him, viz., Jacob, who supplanted his
brother in the womb, appear to be formed along
with his body? Or how could his soul, or its


3 Isa xlv. 12.

4 Jer. vii. iS.

5 Gen. i. i6.


264


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


images, be formed along with liis body, who,
while lying in his mother's womb, was filled with
tlie Holy Ghost ? I refer to John leaping in his
mother's womb, and exulting because the voice of
the salutation of Mary had come to the ears
of his mother Elisabeth. How could his soul
and its images be formed along with his body,
who, before he was created in the womb, is said
to be known to God, and was sanctified by Him
before his birth? Some, perhaps, may think
that God fills individuals with His Holy Spirit,
and bestows upon them sanctification, not on
grounds of justice and according to their deserts,
but undeservedly. And how shall we escape
that declaration : " Is there unrighteousness with
God? God forbid!"' or this: "Is there re-
spect of persons with God?"^ For such is the
defence of those who maintain that souls come
into existence with bodies. So far, then, as we
can form an opinion from a comparison with the
condition of man, I think it follows that we
must hold the same to hold good with heavenly
beings, which reason itself and scriptural authority
show us to be the case with men.

5. But let us see whether we can find in holy
Scripture any indications properly applicable to
these heavenly existences. The following is the
statement of the Apostle Paul : " The creature
w^s made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by
reason of Him who subjected the same in hope,
because the creature itself also shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption into the glorious
hberty of the children of God." 3 To what van-
ity, pray, was the creature made subject, or what
creature is referred to, or how is it said "not
willingly," or " in hope of what? " And in what
way is the creature itself to be delivered from
the bondage of corruption ? Elsewhere, also, the
same apostle says : " For the expectation of
the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the
sons of God." + And again in another passage,
"And not only we, but the creation itself groan-
eth together, and is in pain until now." 5 And
hence we have to inquire what are the groanings,
and what are the pains. Let us see then, in the
first place, what is the vanity to which the crea-
ture is subject. I apprehend that it is nothing
else than the body ; for although the body of
the stars is ethereal, it is nevertheless material.
Whence also Solomon appears to characterize
the whole of corporeal nature as a kind of bur-
den which enfeebles the vigour of the soul in
the following language : " Vanity of vanities,
saith the Preacher ; all is vanity. I have looked,
and seen all the works that are done under the


' Rom. ix.

2 Rom. ii. 1

3 Cf. Rom.
■* Rom. viii
5 Rom. viii.


, cf. 23.


sun ; and, behold, all is vanity.'"' To this van-
ity, then, is the creature subject, that creature
especially which, being assuredly the greatest in
this world, holds also a distinguished principaUty
of labour, i.e., the sun, and moon, and stars, are
said to be subject to vanity, because they are
clothed with bodies, and set apart to the office
of giving light to the human race. "And this
creature," he remarks, " was subjected to vanity
not willingly." For it did not undertake a vol-
untary service to vanity, but because it was the
will of Him who made it subject, and because
of the promise of the Subjector to those who
were reduced to this unwilling obedience, that
when the ministry of their great work was per-
formed, they were to be freed from this bondage
of corruption and vanity when the time of the
glorious redemption of God's children should
have arrived. And the whole of creation, re-
ceiving this hope, and looking for the fulfilment
of this promise now, in the meantime, as having
an affection for those whom it serves, groans
along with them, and patiently suffers with them,
hoping for the fulfilment of the promises. See
also whether the following words of Paul can
apply to those who, although not willingly, yet in
accordance with the will of Him who subjected
them, and in hope of the promises, were made
subject to vanity, when he says, " For I could
wish to be dissolved," or "to return and be with
Christ, which is far better." ^ For I think that
the sun might say in like manner, " I would de-
sire to be dissolved,'' or " to return and be with
Christ, which is far betten" Paul indeed adds,
" Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more
needful for you ; " while the sun may say, "To
abide in this bright and heavenly body is more
necessary, on account of the manifestation of
the sons of God." The same views are to be
believed and expressed regarding the moon and
stars.

Let us see now what is the freedom of the
creature, or the termination of its bondage.
When Christ shall have delivered up the king-
dom to God even the Father, then also those
living things, when they shall have first been
made the kingdom of Christ, shall be delivered,
along with the whole of that kingdom, to the
rule of the Father, that when God shall be all in
all, they also, since they are a part of all things,
may have God in themselves, as He is in all
things.

CHAP. VIII. ON THE ANGELS.

I. A similar method must be followed in
treating of the angels ; nor are we to suppose
that it is the result of accident that a particular
office is assigned to a particular angel : as to


6 Eccles. i. I

7 Phil. i. 23.


i


Chap. VIII.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


265


Raphael, e.g., the work of curing and healing ;
to Gabriel, the conduct of wars ; to Michael, the
duty of attending to the prayers and supplica-
tions of mortals. For we are not to imagine
that they obtained these offices otherwise than
by their own merits, and by the zeal and excel-
lent qualities which they severally displayed be-
fore this world was formed ; so that afterwards,
in the order of archangels, this or that office was
assigned to each one, while others deserved to
be enrolled in the order of angels, and to act
under this or that archangel, or that leader or
head of an order. All of which things were dis-
posed, as I have said, not indiscriminately and
fortuitously, but by a most appropriate and just
decision of God, who arranged them according
to deserts, in accordance with His own approval
and judgment : so that to one angel the Church
of the Ephesians was to be entrusted ; to an-
other, that of the Smyrnjeans ; one angel was to
be Peter's, another Paul's ; and so on through
every one of the little ones that are in the
Church, for such and such angels as even daily
behold the face of God must be assigned to
each one of them ; ' and there must also be
some angel that encampeth round about them
that fear God.- All of which things, assuredly,
it is to be believed, are not performed by acci-
dent or chance, or because they (the angels)
were so created, lest on that view the Creator
should be accused of partiality ; but it is to be
believed that they were conferred by God, the
just and impartial Ruler of all things, agreeably
to the merits and good qualities and mental
vigour of each individual spirit.

2. And now let us say something regarding
those who maintain the existence of a diversity
of spiritual natures, that we may avoid falling
into the silly and impious fables of such as pre-
tend that there is a diversity of spiritual natures
both among heavenly existences and human
souls, and for that reason allege that they were
called into being by different creators ; for while
it seems, and is really, absurd that to one and
the same Creator should be ascribed the crea-
tion of different natures of rational beings, they
are nevertheless ignorant of the cause of that
diversity. For they say that it seems inconsist-
ent for one and the same Creator, without any
existing ground of merit, to confer upon some
beings the power of dominion, and to subject
others again to authority ; to bestow a princi-
pality upon some, and to render others subordi-
nate to rulers. Which oi)inions indeed, in my
judgment, are completely rejected by following
out the reasoning explained above, and by which


' Matt, xviii. 10.

2 Ps. xxxiv. 7. Turn demun per singulos minimorum, qui sunt in
ecclesii, qui vel qui adscribi singulis debeant angeli, qui etiam quo-
tidie videant faciem Dei: sed et quis debeat esse angelus, qui cir-
cumdet in circuitu timentium Deum.


it was shown that the cause of the diversity and
variety among these beings is due to their con-
duct, which has been marked either with greater
earnestness or indifference, according to the
goodness or badness of their nature, and not to
any partiality on the part of the Disposer. But
that this may more easily be shown to be the
case with heavenly beings, let us borrow an illus-
tration from what either has been done or is
done among men, in order that from visible
things we may, by way of consequence, behold
also things invisible.

Paul and Peter are undoubtedly proved to
have been men of a spiritual nature. When,
therefore, Paul is found to have acted contrary
to religion, in having persecuted the Church of
God, and Peter to have committed so grave a
sin as, when questioned by the maid-servant, to
have asserted with an oath that he did not know
who Christ was, how is it possible that these —
who, according to those persons of whom we
speak, were spiritual beings — should fall into
sins of such a nature, especially as they are fre-
quently in the habit of saying that a good tree
cannot bring forth evil fruits? And if a good
tree cannot produce evil fruit, and as, according
to them, Peter and Paul were sprung from the
root of a good tree, how should they be deemed
to have brought forth fruits so wicked ? And if
they should return the answer which is generally
invented, that it was not Paul who persecuted,
but some other person, I know not whom, who
was in Paul ; and that it was not Peter who ut-
tered the denial, but some other individual in
him ; how should Paul say, if he had not sinned,
that " I am not worthy to be called an apostle,
because I persecuted the Church of God?"^
Or why did Peter weep most bitterly, if it were
another than he who sinned? From which all
their silly assertions will be proved to be baseless.

3. According to our view, there is no rational
creature which is not capable both of good and
evil. But it does not follow, that because we say
there is no nature which may not admit evil, we
therefore maintain that every nature has admitted
evil, i.e., has become wicked. As we may say
that the nature of every man admits of his being
a sailor, but it does not follow from that, that
every man will become so ; or, again, it is i)Ossi-
ble for every one to learn grammar or medicine,
but it is not therefore proved that every man is
either a physician or a grammarian ; so, if we
say that there is no nature which may not admit
evil, it is not necessarily indicated that it has
done so. For, in our view, not even the devil
himself was incapable of good ; but although
capable of admitting good, he did not therefore
also desire it, or make any effort after virtue.


3 I Cor. XV. 9.


266


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book I.


For, as we are taught by those quotations which
we adduced from the prophets, there was once
a time when he was good, when he walked in
the paradise of God between the cherubim. As
he, then, possessed the power either of receiv- !
ing good or evil, but fell away from a virtuous
course, and turned to evil with all the powers
of his mind, so also other creatures, as having a
capacity for either condition, in the exercise of
the freedom of their will, flee from evil, and
cleave to good. There is no nature, then, which
may not admit of good or evil, except the nature
of God — tlie fountain of all good things — and
of Christ ; for it is wisdom, and wisdom assured-
ly cannot admit folly ; and it is righteousness,
and righteousness will never certainly admit of
unrighteousness ; and it is the Word, or Reason,
which certainly cannot be made irrational ; nay,
it is also the light, and it is certain that the dark-
ness does not receive the light. In like manner,
also, the nature of the Holy Spirit, being holy,
does not admit of pollution ; for it is holy by
nature, or essential being. If there is any other
nature which is holy, it possesses this property
of being made holy by the reception or inspira-
tion of the Holy Spirit, not having it by nature,
but as an accidental quality, for which reason it
may be lost, in consequence of being accidental.
So also a man may possess an accidental right-
eousness, from which it is possible for him to fall
away. Even the wisdom which a man has is
still accidental, although it be within our own
power to become wise, if we devote ourselves to !
wisdom with the zeal and effort of our life ; and
if we always pursue the study of it, we may al-
ways be participators of wisdom : and that result
will follow either in a greater or less degree, ac-
cording to the desert of our life or the amount
of our zeal. For the goodness of God, as is
worthy of Him, incites and attracts all to that
blissful end, where all pain, and sadness, and
sorrow fall away and disappear.

4. I am of opinion, then, so far as appears to
me, that the preceding discussion has sufficiently
proved that it is neither from want of discrim-
ination, nor from any accidental cause, either
that the " principalities " hold their dominion,
or the other orders of spirits have obtained their
respective offices ; but that they have received
the steps of their rank on account of their merits,
although it is not our privilege to know or inquire
what those acts of theirs were, by which they
earned a place in any particular order. It is
sufficient only to know this much, in order to
demonstrate the impartiality and righteousness
of God, that, conformably with the declaration
of the Apostle Paul, " there is no acceptance of
persons with Him," ' who rather disposes every-


Cf. Rom. ii. 11


thing according to the deserts and moral prog-
ress of each individual. So, then, the angelic
office does not exist except as a consequence of
their desert ; nor do " powers " exercise power
except in virtue of their moral progress ; nor
do those which are called " seats," i.e., the pow-
ers of judging and ruling, administer their powers
unless by merit ; nor do " dominions " rule un-
deservedly, for that great and distinguished order
of rational creatures among celestial existences
is arranged in a glorious variety of offices. And
the same view is to be entertained of those
opposing influences which have given themselves
up to such places and offices, that they derive
the property by which they are made " princi-
palities," or " powers," or rulers of the darkness
of the world, or spirits of wickedness, or malig-
nant spirits, or unclean demons, not from their
essential nature, nor from their being so created,
but have obtained these degrees in evil in pro-
portion to their conduct, and the progress which
they made in wickedness. And that is a second
order of rational creatures, who have devoted
themselves to wickedness in so headlong a course,
that they are unwilling rather than unable to re-
call themselves ; the thirst for evil being already
a passion, and imparting to them pleasure. But
the third order of rational creatures is that of
those who are judged fit by God to replenish the
human race, i.e., the souls of men, assumed
in consequence of their moral progress into the
order of angels ; of whom we see some assumed
into the number : those, viz., who have been
made the sons of God, or the children of the
resurrection, or who have abandoned the dark-
ness, and have loved the light, and have been
made children of the light ; or those who, prov-
ing victorious in every struggle, and being made
men of peace, have been the sons of peace, and
the sons of God ; or those who, mortifying their
members on the earth, and, rising above not only
their corporeal nature, but even the uncertain
and fragile movements of the soul itself, have
united themselves to the Lord, being made alto-
gether spiritual, that they may be for ever one
spirit with Him, discerning along with Him each
individual thing, until they arrive at a condition
of perfect spirituality, and discern all things by
their perfect illumination in all holiness through
the word and wisdom of God, and are themselves
altogether undistinguishable by any one.

We think that those views are by no means to
be admitted, which some are wont unnecessarily
to advance and maintain, viz., that souls descend
to such a pitch of abasement that they forget
their rational nature and dignity, and sink into
the condition of irrational animals, either large
or small ; and in support of these assertions they
generally quote some pretended statements of
Scripture, such as, that a beast, to which a


^


Chap. VIII.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


267


woman has unnaturally prostituted herself, shall be
deemed ecjually guilty with the woman, and shall
be ordered to be stoned ; or that a bull which
strikes with its horn,' shall be put to death in
the same way ; or even the speaking of Balaam's
ass, when God opened its mouth, and the dumb
beast of burden, answering with human voice,
reproved the madness of the prophet. All of
which assertions we not only do not receive, but,
as being contrary to our belief, we refute and
reject. After the refutation and rejection of
such perverse opinions, we shall show, at the
proper time and place, how those passages which
they quote from the sacred Scriptures ought to
be understood.


FRAGMENT FROM THE FIRST BOOK OF
THE DE PRINCIPIIS.

Translated by Jerome in his Epistle to Avitus.

" It is an evidence of great negligence and
sloth, that each one should fall down to such (a


' [See Exod. xxi. 28, 29 S.]


pitch of degradation), and be so emptied, as
that, in coming to evil, he may be fastened to
the gross body of irrational beasts of burden."

ANOTHER FRAGMENT FROM THE SAME.

Translated in the same Epistle to Avitus.

" At the end and consummation of the world,
when souls and rational creatures shall have
been sent forth as from bolts and barriers,^ some
of them walk slowly on account of their slothful
habits, others fly with rapid flight on account of
their diligence. And since all are possessed
of free-will, and may of their own accord admit
either of good or evil, the former will be in a
worse condition than they are at present, while
the latter will advance to a better state of things ;
because different conduct and varying wills will
admit of a different condition in either direction,
i.e., angels may become men or demons, and
again from the latter they may rise to be men
or angels."


~ De quibusdam repagulis atque carceribus. There is an allusion
here to the race-course and the mode of starting the chariots.


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.

Book ii.


CHAP. I. ON THE WORLD.

I. Although all the discussions in the pre-
ceding book have had reference to the world
and its arrangements, it now seems to follow
that we should specially re-discuss a few points
respecting the world itself, i.e., its beginning and
end, or those dispensations of Divine Providence
which have taken place between the beginning
and the end, or those events which are supposed
to have occurred before the creation of the
world, or are to take place after the end.

In this investigation, the first point which
clearly appears is, that the world in all its diver-
sified and varying conditions is composed not
only of rational and diviner natures, and of a
diversity of bodies, but of dumb animals, wild
and tame beasts, of birds, and of all things which
live in the waters ; ' then, secondly, of places, i.e.,
of the heaven or heavens, and of the earth or
water, as well as of the air, which is intermediate,
and which they term aether, and of everything
which proceeds from the earth or is born in it.
Seeing, then,^ there is so great a variety in the
world, and so great a diversity among rational
beings themselves, on account of which every
other variety and diversity also is supposed to
have come into existence, what other cause than
this ought to be assigned for the existence of
the world, especially if we have regard to that
end by means of which it was shown in the pre-
ceding book that all things are to be restored
to their original condition ? And if this should
seem to be logically stated, what other cause, as
we have already said, are we to imagine for so
great a diversity in the world, save the diversity
and variety in the movements and declensions


1 The words " in aquis " are omitted in Redepenning's edition.

2 The original of this sentence is found at the close of the Em-
peror Justinian's Epistle to Menas, patriarch of Constantinople, and,
literally translated, is as follows: "The world being so very varied,
and containing so many different rational beings, what else ought we
to say was the cause of its existence than the diversity of the falling
away of those who decline from unity (t^s eniSo?) in different ways? "
— Ru.JEUs. Lommatzsch adds a clause not contained in the note of
the Benedictine editor: " And sometimes the soul selects the life that
is in water" {ivv&poi').

268


of those who fell from that primeval unity and
harmony in which they were at first created by
God, and who, being driven from that state of
goodness, and drawn in various directions by
the harassing influence of different motives and
desires, have changed, according to their differ-
ent tendencies, the single and undivided good-
ness of their nature into minds of various sorts ? ^
2. But God, by the ineffable skill of His wis-
dom, transforming and restoring all things, in
whatever manner they are made, to some useful
aim, and to the common advantage of all, recalls
those very creatures which differed so much from
each other in mental conformation to one agree-
ment of labour and purpose ; so that, although
they are under the influence of different motives,
they nevertheless complete the fulness and per-
fection of one world, and the very variety of
minds tends to one end of perfection. For it is
one power which grasps and holds together all
the diversity of the world, and leads the different
movements towards one work, lest so immense
an undertaking as that of the world should be
dissolved by the dissensions of souls. And for
this reason we think that God, the Father of all
things, in order to ensure the salvation of all His
creatures through the ineffable plan of His word
and wisdom, so arranged each of these, that
every spirit, whether soul or rational existence,
however called, should not be compelled by
force, against the liberty of his own will, to any
other course than that to which the motives of
his own mind led him (lest by so doing the
power of exercising free-will should seem to be
taken away, which certainly would produce a
change in the nature of the being itself) ; and
that the varying purposes of these would be suit-
ably and usefully adapted to the harmony of one
world, by some of them requiring help, and others
being able to give it, and others again being the
cause of struggle and contest to those who are
making progress, amongst whom their diligence


3 Lit. " into various qualil


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


269


would be deemed more worthy of approval, and
the place of rank obtained after victory be held
with greater certainty, which should be estab-
lished by the difficulties of the contest.'

3. Although the whole world is arranged into
offices of different kinds, its condition, neverthe-
less, is not to be supposed as one of internal
discrepancies and discordances ; but as our one
body is provided with many members, and is
held together by one soul, so I am of opinion
that the whole world also ought to be regarded
as some huge and immense animal, which is kept
together by the power and reason of God as
by one soul. This also, I think, is indicated
in sacred Scripture by the declaration of the
prophet, " Do not I fill heaven and earth ? saith
the Lord ; " ^ and again, "The heaven is My
throne, and the earth is My footstool ; " 3 and
by the Saviour's words, when He says that we
are to swear " neither by heaven, for it is God's
throne ; nor by the earth, for it is His foot-
stool." •♦ To the same effect also are the words
of Paul, in his address to the Athenians, when
he says, " In Him we live, and move, and have
our being." s For how do we live, and move,
and have our being in God, except by His com-
prehending and holding together the whole world
by His power? And how is heaven the throne
of God, and the earth His footstool, as the
Saviour Himself declares, save by His power
filling all things both in heaven and earth, ac-
cording to the Lord's own words? And that
God, the Father of all things, fills and holds to-
gether the world with the fulness of His power,
according to those passages which we have
quoted, no one, I think, will have any difficulty
in admitting. And now, since the course of the
preceding discussion has shown that the different
movements of rational beings, and their varying
opinions, have brought about the diversity that
is in the world, we must see whether it may not
be appropriate that this world should have a ter-
mination like its beginning. For there is no
doubt that its end must be sought amid much
diversity and variety ; which variety, being found
to exist in the termination of the world, will again
furnish ground and occasion for the diversities of
the other world which is to succeed the present.

4. If now, in the course of our discussion, it
has been ascertained that these things are so, it
seems to follow that we next consider the nature
of corporeal being, seeing the diversity in the
world cannot exist without bodies. It is evident


' " Et diversi motus propositi earum (rationabilium subsistenti-
arum) ad unius mundi consonantiam compeienter atque utiliter
aptarentur, dum alise. juvari indigent, alise juvare possunt, aliae vero

Eroficientibus certamina atque agones movent, in quibus eorum pro-
abilior haberetur industria, et certior post victoriam reparati gradus
statio teneretiir, qua; per difficultates laborantium constitisset."
^ Jer. xxiii. 24.
3 Isa. Ixvi. I.
^ Matt. V. 34.
S Acts xvii. 28.


from the nature of things themselves, that bodily
nature admits of diversity and variety of change,
so that it is capable of undergoing all possible
transformations, as, e.g., the conversion of wood
into fire, of fire into smoke, of smoke into air,
of oil into fire. Does not food itself, whether of
man or of animals, exhibit the same ground of
change ? For whatever we take as food, is con-
verted into the substance of our body. 13ut how
water is changed into earth or into air, and air
again into fire, or fire into air, or air into water,
although not difficult to explain, yet on the
present occasion it is enough merely to mention
them, as our object is to discuss the nature of
bodily matter. By matter, therefore, we under-
stand that which is placed under bodies, viz.,
that by which, through the bestowing and im-
planting of qualities, bodies exist ; and we men-
tion four qualities — heat, cold, dryness, humidity.
These four qualities being implanted in the vkyj,
or matter (for matter is found to exist in its own
nature without those qualities before mentioned),
produce the different kinds of bodies. Although
this matter is, as we have said above, adtording
to its own proper nature without qualities, it is
never found to exist without a quality. And I
cannot understand how so many distinguished
men have been of opinion that this matter, which
is so great, and possesses such properties as to
j enable it to be sufficient for all the bodies in the
world which God willed to exist, and to be the
attendant and slave of the Creator for whatever
forms and species He wished in all things, re-
! ceiving into itself whatever qualities He desired
to bestow upon it, was uncreated, i.e., not formed
by God Himself, who is the Creator of all things,
but that its nature and power were the result of
i chance. And I am astonished that they should
' find fault with those who deny either God's crea-
tive power or His providential administration of
the world, and accuse them of impiety for think-
ing that so great a work as the world could exist
without an architect or overseer ; while they
j themselves incur a similar charge of impiety in
[ saying that matter is uncreated, and co-eternal
with the uncreated God. According to this view,
then, if we suppose for the sake of argument that
matter did not exist, as these maintain, saying
that God could not create anything when noth-
ing existed, without doubt He would have been
idle, not having matter on which to operate,
which matter they say was furnished Him not
by His own arrangement, but by accident ; and
they think that this, which was discovered by
chance, was able to suffice Him for an under-
taking of so vast an extent, and for the mani-
festadon of the power of His might, and by
admitting the plan of all His wisdom, might be
distinguished and formed into a world. Now
this appears to me to be very absurd, and to be


2 70


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


the opinion of those men who are altogether
ignorant of the power and intelligence of un-
created nature. But that we may see the nature
of things a little more €learly, let it be granted
that for a little time matter did not exist, and
that God, when nothing formerly existed, caused
those things to come into existence which He
desired, why are we to suppose that God would
create matter either better or greater, or of an-
other kind, than that which He did produce
from His own power and wisdom, in order that
that might exist which formerly did not ? Would
He create a worse and inferior matter, or one
the same as that which they eall uncreated?
Now I think it will very easily appear to any
one, that neither a better nor inferior matter
could have assumed the forms and species of
the world, if it had not been such as that which
actually did assume them. And does it not then
seem impious to call that uncreated, which, if
believed to be formed by God, would doubtless
be found to be such as that which they call
uncreated ?

5. But that we may believe on the authority
of holy Scripture that such is the case, hear how
in the book of Maccabees, where the mother of
seven martyrs exhorts her son to endure torture,
this truth is confirmed ; for she says, " I ask of
thee, my son, to look at the heaven and the '•■
earth, and at all things which are in them, and j
beholding these, to know that God made all
these things when they did not exist." ' In the
book of the Shepherd also, in the first com-
mandment, he speaks as follows ; " First of all
believe that there is one God who created and
arranged all things, and made all things to come
into existence, and out of a state of nothing-
ness." ^ Perhaps also the expression in the
Psalms has reference to this : " He spake, and
they were made ; He commanded, and they
were created." ^ For the words, "He spake,
and they were made," appear to show that the
substance of those things which exist is meant ;
while the others, " He commanded, and they
were created," seem spoken of the qualities by
which the substance itself has been moulded.

CHAP. II. — ON THE PERPETUITY OF BODILY
NATURE.

I. On this topic some are wont to inquire ■
whether, as the Father generates an uncreated i
Son, and brings forth a Holy Spirit, not as if
He had no previous existence, but because the
Father is the origin and source of the Son or
Holy Spirit, and no anteriority or posteriority
can be understood as existing in them ; so also


' 2 Mac. vii. 28.

* Hermce Past., book ii. [See vol. ii. p. 20, of this series, S.]

3 Ps. cxlviii. 5.


a similar kind of union or relationship can be
uixierstood as subsisting between rational na-
tures and bodily matter. And that this point
may be more fully and thoroughly examined, the
commencement of the discussion is generally
directed to the inquiry whether this very bodily
nature, which bears the lives and contains the
movements of spiritual and rational minds, will
be equally eternal with them, or will altogether
perish and be destroyed. And that the question
may be determined with greater precision, we
have, in the first place, to inquire if it is possible
for rational natures to remain altogether incor-
poreal after they have reached the summit of
holiness and happiness (which seems to me a
most difficult and almost impossible attainment),
or whether they must always of necessity be
united to bodies. If, then, any one could show
a reason why it was possible for them to dis-
pense wholly with bodies, it will appear to follow,
that as a bodily nature, created out of nothing
after intervals of time, was produced when it
did not exist, so also it must cease to be when
the purposes which it served had no longer an
existence.

2. If, however, it is impossible for this point
to be at all maintained, viz., that any other na-
ture than the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit can
live without a body, the necessity of logical rea-
soning compels us to understand that rational
natures were indeed created at the beginning,
but that material substance was separated from
them only in thought and understanding, and
appears to have been formed for them, or after
them, and that they never have lived nor do live
without it ; for an incorporeal life will rightly be
considered a prerogative of the Trinity alone.
As we have remarked above, therefore, that ma-
terial substance of this world, possessing a nature
admitting of all possible transformations, is,
when dragged down to beings of a lower order,
moulded into the crasser and more solid condi-
tion of a body, so as to distinguish those visible
and varying forms of the world ; but when it
becomes the servant of more perfect and more
blessed beings, it shines in the splendour of ce-
lestial bodies, and adorns either the angels of
God or the sons of the resurrection with the
clothing of a spiritual body, out of all which will
be filled up the diverse and varying state of the
one world. But if any one should desire to dis-
cuss these matters more fully, it will be neces-
sary, with all reverence and fear of God, to
examine the sacred Scriptures with greater at-
tention and diligence, to ascertain whether the
secret and hidden sense within them may per-
haps reveal anything regarding these matters ;
and something may be discovered in their ab-
struse and mysterious language, through the
demonstration of the Holy Spirit to those who


Chap. III.]


ORIGEN DE PRIXCIPIIS.


271


are worthy, after many testimonies have been
collected on this very point.

CHAP. III. — ON THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD,
AND ITS CAUSES.

I. The next subject of inquiry is, whether
there was any other world before the one which
now exists ; and if so, whether it was such as
the present, or somewhat different, or inferior ;
or whether there was no world at all, but some-
thing like that which we understand will be after
the end of all things, when the kingdom shall be
delivered up to God, even the Father ; which '
nevertheless may have been the end of another \
world, — of that, namely, after which this world
took its beginning ; and whether the various
lapses of intellectual natures provoked God to
produce this diverse and varying condition of
the world. This point also, I think, must be
investigated in a similar way, viz., whether after
j this world there wiil be any (system of) pres-
I ervation and am^dment, severe indeed, and
1 attended with much pain to those who were
unwilling to obey the word of God, but a
process through which, by means of instruction
j and rational training, those may arrive at a fuller
j understanding of the truth who have devoted
themselves in the present life to these pursuits,
and who, after having had their minds purified,
have adv-anced onwards so as to become capable
of attaining divine wisdom ; and after this the
end of all things will immediately follow, and
there will be again, for the correction and im-
provement of those who stand in need of it,
another world, either resembling that which now
exists, or better than it, or greatly inferior ; and
how long that world, whatever it be that is to
come after this, shall continue ; and if there will
be a time when no world shall anywhere exist,
or if there has been a time when there was no
world at all ; or if there have been, or will be
several ; or if it shall ever come to pass that
there will be one resembling another, like it in

I every respect, and indistinguishable from it.
2. That it may appear more clearly, then,
whether bodily matter can exist during intervals
of time, and whether, as it did not exist before
it was made, so it may again be resolved into
non-existence, let us see, first of all, whether it
is possible for any one to live without a body.
For if one person can live without a body, all
j things also may dispense with them ; seeing our
I former treatise has shown that all things tend
towards one end. Now, if all things may exist
without bodies, there will undoubtedly be no
bodily substance, seeing there will be no use for
it. But how shall we understand the words of
L the apostle in those passages, in which, discuss-
I ing the resurrection of the dead, he says, " This
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this


mortal must put on immortality. When this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and
this mortal shall have put on immortality, then
shall be brought to p^iss the saying which is
written. Death is swallowed up in victory !
Where, O death, is thy victory? O death, thy
sting has been swallowed up : the sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the law." ' Some
such meaning, then, as this, seems to be suggested
by the apostle. For can the expression which
he employs, " this corruptible," and " this mor-
tal," with the gesture, as it were, of one who
touches or points out, apply to anything else
than to bodily matter? This matter of the
body, then, which is now corruptible shall put
on incorruption when a perfect soul, and one
furnished with the marks ^ of incorruption, shall
have begun to inhabit it. And do not be sur-
prised if we speak of a perfect soul as the cloth-
ing of the body (which, on account of the Word
of God and His wisdom, is now named incor-
ruption), when Jesus Christ Himself, who is the
Lord and Creator of the soul, is said to be the
clothing of the saints, according to the language
of the aposde, " Put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ." 3 As Christ, then, is the clothing of
the soul, so for a kind of reason sufficiently
intelligible is the soul said to be the clothing of
the body, seeing it is an ornament to it, cover-
ing and concealing its mortal nature. The ex-
pression, then, "This corruptible must put on
incorruption," is as if the aposUe had said,
" This corruptible nature of the body must
receive the clothing of incorruption — a soul
possessing in itself incorruptibility," because it
has been clothed with Christ, who is the \\'isdom
and Word of God. But when this body, which
at some future period we shall possess in a more
glorious state, shall have become a partaker of
] Hfe, it will then, in addition to being immortal,
become also incorruptible. For whatever is
! mortal is necessarily also corruptible ; but what-
ever is corruptible cannot also be said to be
mortal. We say of a stone or a piece of wood
that it is corruptible, but we do not say that it
follows that it is also mortal. But as the body
partakes of life, then because life may be, and
is, separated from it, we consequently name it
mortal, and according to another sense also we
speak of it as corruptible. The holy apostle
therefore, with remarkable insight, referring to
the general first cause of bodily matter, of which
(matter), whatever be the qualities with which
it is endowed (now indeed carnal, but by and
by more refined and pure, which are termed
spiritual), the soul makes constant use, says,


' I Cor, XV. 53-56; cf. Hos xiii. 14 and Isa. xxv. 8.

2 Doematibus. Schnitzer says that •' dogmatibus " here yields no
sense. He conjectures Uiy/xaai, and renders " proofs," " marks."

3 Rom. xiii. 14.


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


"This corruptible must put on incorruption."
And in the second place, looking to the special
cause of the body, he says, " I'his mortal must
put on immortality." Now, what else will in-
corruption and immortality be, save the wisdom,
and the word, and the righteousness of God,
which mould, and clothe, and adorn the soul?
And hence it happens that it is said, " The cor-
ruptible will put on incorruption, and the mortal
immortality." For although we may now make
great proficiency, yet as we only know in part,
and prophesy in part, and see through a glass,
darkly, those very things which we seem to un-
derstand, this corruptible does not yet put on
incorruption, nor is this mortal yet clothed with
immortality ; and as this training of ours in the
body is protracted doubtless to a longer period,
up to the time, viz., when those very bodies of
ours with which we are enveloped may, on ac-
count of the word of God, and His wisdom and
perfect righteousness, earn incorruptibility and
immortality, therefore is it said, "This corrupt-
ible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality."

3. But, nevertheless, those who think that
rational creatures can at any time lead an exist-
ence out of the body, may here raise such ques-
tions as the following. If it is true that this
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this
mortal put on immortality, and that death is
swallowed up at the end ; this shows that noth-
ing else than a material nature is to be destroyed,
on which death could operate, while the mental
acumen of those who are in the body seems to
be blunted by the nature of corporeal matter.
If, however, they are out of the body, then they
will altogether escape the annoyance arising from
a disturbance of that kind. But as they will not
be able immediately to escape all bodily cloth-
ing, they are just to be considered as inhabiting
more refined and purer bodies, which possess
the property of being no longer overcome by
death, or of being wounded by its sting ; so that
at last, by the gradual disappearance of the ma-
terial nature, death is both swallowed up, and
even at the end exterminated, and all its sting
completely blunted by the divine grace which
the soul has been rendered capable of receiving,
and has thus deserved to obtain incorruptibility
and immortality. And then it will be deservedly
said by all, " O death, where is thy victory? O
death, where is thy sting? The sting of death
is sin." If these conclusions, then, seem to hold
good, it follows that we must believe our con-
dition at some future time to be incorporeal ;
and if this is admitted, and all are said to be
subjected to Christ, this (incorporeity) also must
necessarily be bestowed on all to whom the sub-
jection to Christ extends ; since all who are
subject to Christ will be in the end subject to


God the Father, to whom Christ is said to de-
liver up the kingdom ; and thus it appears that
then also the need of bodies will cease.' And
if it ceases, bodily matter returns to nothing, as
formerly also it did not exist.

Now let us see what can be said in answer to
those who make these assertions. For it will
appear to be a necessary consequence that, if
bodily nature be annihilated, it must be again
restored and created ; since it seems a possible
thing that rational natures, from whom the fac-
ulty of free-will is never taken away, may be
again subjected to movements of some kind,
through the special act of the Lord Himself,
lest perhaps, if they were always to occupy a
condition that was unchangeable, they should
be ignorant that it is by the grace of God and
not by their own merit that they have been
placed in that final state of happiness ; and these
movements will undoubtedly again be attended
by variety and diversity of bodies, by which the
world is always adorned ; ifor will it ever be
composed (of anything) save of variety and di-
versity, — an effect which cannot be produced
without a bodily matter.

4. And now I do not understand by what
proofs they can maintain their position, who as-
sert that worlds sometimes come into existence
which are not dissimilar to each other, but in
all respects equal. For if there is said to be a
world similar in all respects (to the present),
then it will come to pass that Adam and Eve
will do the same things which they did before :
there will be a second time the same deluge,
and the same Moses will again lead a nation
numbering nearly six hundred thousand out of
Egypt ; Judas will also a second time betray the
Lord ; Paul will a second time keep the gar-
ments of those who stoned Stephen ; and every-
thing which has been done in this life will be
said to be repeated, — a state of things which I
think cannot be established by any reasoning, if
souls are actuated by freedom of will, and main-
tain either their advance or retrogression accord-
ing to the power of their will. For souls are


' This passage is found in Jerome's Epistle to Avitns; and, liter-
ally translated, his rendering is as follows: " If these (views) are not
contrary to the faith, we shall perhaps at some future time live with-
out bodies. But if he who is perfectly subject to Christ is understood
to be without a body, and all are to be subjected to Christ, we also
shall be without bodies when we have been completely subjected to
Him. If all have been subjected to God, all will lay aside their
bodies, and the whole nature of bodily things will be dissolved into
nothing; but if, in the second place, necessity shall demand, it will
again come into existence on account of the fall of rational creatures.
For God has abandoned souls to struggle and wrestling, that they
may understand that they have obtained a full and perfect victory,
not by their own bravery, but by the grace of God. And therefore I
think that for a variety of causes are different worlds created, and the
errors of those refuted who contend that worlds resemble each other."
A fragment of the Greek original of the above is found in the Epistle
of Justinian to the patriarch of Constantinople. " If the things sub-
ject to Christ shall at the end be subjected also to God, all will lay
aside their bodies; and then, I think, there will be a dissolution
{a.va.kv(Ti<i) of the nature of bodies into non-existence (ei5 to ixi\ of),
to come a second time into existence, if rational (beings) should again
gradually come down {vnoKaTa/ii) ."


Chap. III.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


273


not dri\en on in a cycle which returns after
many ages to the same round, so as either to do
or desire this or that ; but at whatever point the
freedom of their own will aims, thither do they
direct the course of their actions. For what
these persons say is much the same as if one
were to assert that if a medimnus of grain were
to be poured out on the ground, the fall of the
grain would be on the second occasion identi-
cally the same as on the first, so that every indi-
vidual grain would lie for the second time close
beside that grain where it had been thrown be-
fore, and so the medimnus would be scattered
in the same order, and with the same marks as
formerly ; which certainly is an impossible result
with the countless grains of a medimnus, even
if they were to be poured out without ceasing
for many ages. So therefore it seems to me
impossible for a world to be restored for the
second time, with the same order and with the
same amount of births, and deaths, and actions ;
but that a diversity of worlds may exist with
changes of no unimportant kind, so that the
state of another world may be for some un-
mistakeable reasons better (than this), and for
others worse, and for others again intermediate.
But what may be the number or measure of this
I confess myself ignorant, although, if any one
can tell it, I would gladly learn.

5. But this world, which is itself called an age,
is said to be the conclusion of many ages. Now
the holy apostle teaches that in that age which
preceded this, Christ did not suffer, nor even in
the age which preceded that again ; and I know
not that I am able to enumerate the number of
anterior ages in which He did not suffer. I will
show, however, from what statements of Paul I
have arrived at this understanding. He says,
" But now once in the consummation of ages,
He was manifested to take away sin by the sacri-
fice of Himself." ' For He says that He was
once made a victim, and in the consummation
of ages was manifested to take away sin. Now
that after this age, which is said to be formed for
the consummation of other ages, there will be
other ages again to follow, we have clearly
learned from Paul himself, who says, "That in
the ages to come He might show the exceeding
riches of His grace in His kindness towards us."^
He has not said, " in the age to come," nor " in
the two ages to come," whence I infer that by
his language many ages are indicated. Now if
there is something greater than ages, so that
among created beings certain ages may be un-
derstood, but among other beings which exceed
and surpass visible creatures, (ages still greater)
(which perhaps will be the case at the restitution
of all things, when the whole universe will come


Heb. ix. 26.
Eph. ii. 7.


to a perfect termination), perhaps that period in
which the consummation of all things will take
place is to be understood as something more
than an age. But here the authority of holy
Scripture moves me, which says, " For an age
and more." ^ Now this word " more " undoubt-
edly means something greater than an age ; and
see if that expression of the Saviour, " I will that
where I am, these also may be with Me ; and as I
and Thou are one, these also may be one in Us," ■♦
may not seem to convey something more than an
age and ages, perhaps even more than ages of
ages, — that period, viz., when all things are now
no longer in an age, but when God is in all.

6. Having discussed these points regarding
the nature of the world to the best of our ability,,
it does not seem out of place to inquire what is
the meaning of the term world, which in holy
Scripture is shown frequently to have different
significations. For what we call in Latin mun~
diis, is termed in Greek Kotrixo'i, and KoVittos signi-
fies not only a world, but also an ornament.
Finally, in Isaiah, where the language of reproof
is directed to the chief daughters of Sion, and
where he says, " Instead of an ornament of a
golden head, thou wilt have baldness on account
of thy works," s he employs the same term to
denote ornament as to denote the world, viz.,
Kocr/Aos. For the plan of the world is said to be
contained in the clothing of the high priest, as
we find in the Wisdom of Solomon, where he
says, " For in the long garment was the whole
world." ^ That earth of ours, with its inhabit-
ants, is also termed the world, as when Scripture
says, "The whole world lieth in wickedness." ^
Clement indeed, a disciple of the apostles, makes
mention of those whom the Greeks called 'Amx-
6ov(.<i, and other parts of the earth, to which no
one of our people can approach, nor can any one
of those who are there cross over to us, which
he also termed worlds, saying, "The ocean is
impassable to men ; and those are worlds which
are on the other side of it, which are governed
by these same arrangements of the ruling God." *^
That universe which is bounded by heaven and
earth is also called a world, as Paul declares :
" For the fashion of this world will pass away." ^
Our Lord and Saviour also points out a certain
other world besides this visible one, which it
would indeed be difficult to describe and make
known. He says, " I am not of this world." '°
For, as if He were of a certain other world. He


3 In saeculum et adhuc.
^ Cf. John xvii. 24, 21, 22.

5 Cf. Isa. iii. 24. Origen here quotes the Septuagitit, which
differs both from the Hebrew and the Vulgate: ko.\ ai-Ti tou icoanou
Tij$ KC</)aA7)5 TOU ^puaiou (lia\dKf}u}fxa efct? 6ld to. (pya <J"OV,

6 Wisd. xviii. 24. Poderis, lit. " reaching to the feet."

7 I John V. 19.

8 Clemens Rom., Ep. i., ati Cor., c. 20. [See vol. i. p. 10, of
this series. S.]

9 I Cor. vii 31.
«o John xvii. 16.


2 74


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II,


says, " I am not of this world." Now, of this
world we have said beforehand, that the explana-
tion was difficult ; and for this reason, that there
might not be afforded to any an occasion of en-
tertaining the supposition that we maintain the
existence of certain images which the Greeks
call "ideas:" for it is certainly alien to our
(writers) to speak of an incorporeal world exist-
ing in the imagination alone, or in the fleeting
world of thoughts ; and how they can assert
either that the Saviour comes from thence, or
that the saints will go thither, I do not see.
There is no doubt, however, that something
more illustrious and excellent than this present
world is pointed out by the Saviour, at which He
incites and encourages believers to aim. But
whether that world to which He desires to al-
lude be far separated and divided from this,
either by situation, or nature, or glory; or
whether it be superior in glory and quality, but
confined within the limits of this world (which
seems to me more probable), is nevertheless
uncertain, and in my opinion an unsuitable sub-
ject for human thought. But from what Clement
seems to indicate when he says, " The ocean is
impassable to men, and those worlds which are
behind it," speaking in the plural number of the
worlds which are behind it, which he intimates
are administered and governed by the same
providence of the Most High God, he appears
to throw out to us some germs of that view
by which the whole universe of existing things,
celestial and super-celestial, earthly and infernal,
is generally called one perfect world, within
which, or by which, other worlds, if any there
are, must be supposed to be contained. For
which reason he wished the globe of the sun or
moon, and of the other bodies called planets, to
be each termed worlds. Nay, even that pre-
eminent globe itself which they call the non-
wandering (aTrAavTy), they nevertheless desire to
have properly called world. Finally, they sum-
mon the book of Baruch the prophet to bear
witness to this assertion, because in it the seven
worlds or heavens are more clearly pointed out.
Nevertheless, above that sphere which they call
non-wandering (dTrXavrj), they will have another
sphere to exist, which they say, exactly as our
heaven contains all things which are under it,
comprehends by its immense size and indescrib-
able extent the spaces of all the spheres together
within its more magnificent circumference ; so
that all things are within it, as this earth of ours
is under heaven. And this also is believed to
be called in the holy Scriptures the good land,
and the land of the living, having its own heaven,
which is higher, and in which the names of the
saints are said to be written, or to have been
written, by the Saviour ; by which heaven that
earth is confined and shut in, which the Saviour


in the Gospel promises to the meek and merci-
ful. For they would have this earth of ours,
which formerly was named " Dry," to have de-
rived its appellation from the name of that earth,
as this heaven also was named firmament from
the title of that heaven. But we have treated at
greater length of such opinions in the place
where we had to inquire into the meaning of the
declaration, that in the beginning " God made
the heavens and the earth." For another heaven
and another earth are shown to exist besides that
" firmament " which is said to have been made
after the second day, or that " dry land " which
was afterwards called "earth." Certainly, what'
some say of this world, that it is corruptible be-
cause it was made, and yet is not corrupted,
because the will of God, who made it and holds
it together lest corruption should rule over it, is
stronger and more powerful than corruption, may
more correctly be supposed of that world which
we have called above a " non- wandering " sphere,
since by the will of God it is not at all subject
to corruption, for the reason that it has not ad-
mitted any causes of corruption, seeing it is the
world of the saints and of the thoroughly puri-
fied, and not of the wicked, hke that world of„
ours. We must see, moreover, lest perhaps it
is with reference to this that the apostle says,
"While we look not at the things which are
seen, but at the things which are not seen ; for
the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are unseen are eternal. For we
know that if our earthly house of this taberna-
cle were dissolved, we have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens." ' And when he says elsewhere, " Be-
cause I shall see the heavens, the works of Thy
fingers," ^ and when God said, regarding all
things visible, by the mouth of His prophet,
"My hand has formed all these things," 3 He
declares that that eternal house in the heavens
which He promises to His saints was not made
with hands, pointing out, doubtless, the differ-
ence of creation in things which are seen and in
those which are not seen. For the same thing
is not to be understood by the expressions,
" those things which are not seen," and " those
things which are invisible." For those things
which are invisible are not only not seen, but do
not even possess the property of visibility, being
what the Greeks call do-wyaara, i.e., incorporeal;
whereas those of which Paul sa}'s, " They are
not seen," possess indeed the property of being
seen, but, as he explains, are not yet beheld by
those to whom they are promised.

7. Having sketched, then, so far as we could
understand, these three opinions regarding the


1 2 Cor. iv. 18-V,

2 Ps. viii. 3.

3 Isa. Ixvi. 2.


Chap. IV.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


275


end of all things, and the supreme blessedness,
let each one of our readers determine for him-
self, with care and diligence, whether any one
of them can be approved and adopted.' For it
has been said that we must suppose either that
an incorporeal existence is possible, after all
things have become subject to Christ, and
through Christ to God the Father, when God
will be all and in all ; or that when, notwith-
standing all things have been made subject to
Christ, and through Christ to God (with whom
they formed also one spirit, in respect of spirits
being rational natures), then the bodily substance
itself also being united to most pure and excel-
lent spirits, and being changed into an ethereal
condition in proportion to the quality or merits
of those who assume it (according to the apos-
tle's words, "We also shall be changed "), will
shine forth in splendour ; or at least that when
the fashion of those things which are seen passes
away, and all corruption has been shaken off and
cleansed away, and when the whole of the space
occupied by this world, in which the spheres of
the planets are said to be, has been left behind
and beneath,^ then is reached the fixed abode of
the pious and the good situated above that
sphere, which is called non-wandering (dTrAarr;?),
as in a good land, in a land of the living, which
will be inherited by the meek and gentle ; to
which land belongs that heaven (which, with its
more magnificent extent, surrounds and contains
that land itself) which is called truly and chiefly
heaven, in which heaven and earth, the end and
perfection of all things, may be safely and most
confidently placed, — where, viz., these, after
their apprehension and their chastisement for
the offences which they have undergone by way
of purgation, may, after having fulfilled and dis-
charged every obligation, deserve a habitation in
that land ; while those who have been obedient
to the word of God, and have henceforth by
their obedience shown themselves capable of
wisdom, are said to deserve the kingdom of that
heaven or heavens ; and thus the prediction is
more worthily fulfilled, " Blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the earth ; " 3 and, " Blessed
are the poor in spirit, for they shall inherit the


' Ihis passage is found in Jerome's Epistle to Avitus, and, liter-
ally translated, is as follows: "A threefold suspicion, therefore, is
suggested to us regarding the end, of which the reader may examine
which is the true and the better one. For we shall either live without
a body, when, being subject to Christ, we shall be subject to God,
and God shall be all in all ; or, as things subject to Christ will be sub-
ject along with Christ Himself to God, and enclosed in one covenant,
so all substance will be reduced to the best quality and dissolved into
an ether, which is of a purer and simpler nature; or at least that
sphere which we have called above an-Aai'rj, and whatever is con-
tained within its circumference {circulo), will be dissolved into notli-
ing, but that one by which the anti-zone (titi^wi'i)) itself is held
together and surrounded will be called a good land; and, moreover,
another sphere which surrounds this very earth itself with its revolu-
tion, and is called heaven, will be preserved for a habitation of the
saints."

- Omnique hoc mundi statu, in quo planetarum dicuntur sphaerae,
supergresso atque superato.

•3 Matt. V. 5.


kingdom of heaven ; " ■+ and the declaration in
the Psalm, " He shall exalt thee, and thou shalt
inherit the land." 5 For it is called a descent to
this earth, but an exaltation to that which is on
high. In this way, therefore, does a sort of road
seem to be opened up by the departure of the
saints from that earth to those heavens ; so tliat
[ they do not so much appear to abide in that
land, as to inhabit it with an intention, viz., to
pass on to the inheritance of the kingdom of
heaven, when they have reached that degree
of perfection also.

CHAP. rv. THE GOD OF THE LAW AND THE

PROPHETS, AND THE FATHER OF OUR LORD
JESUS CHRIST, IS THE SAME GOD.

I. Having now briefly arranged these points
in order as we best could, it follows that, agree-
ably to our intention from the first, we refute
those who think that the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ is a different God from Him who
gave the answers of the law to Moses, or com-
missioned the prophets, who is the God of our
fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For in this
article of faith, first of all, we must be firmly
grounded. We have to consider, then, the ex-
pression of frequent recurrence in the Gospels,
and subjoined to all the acts of our Lord and
Saviour, "that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by this or that prophet," it being mani-
fest that the prophets are the prophets of that
God who made the world. From this therefore
we draw the conclusion, that He who sent the
prophets. Himself predicted what was to be fore-
told of Christ. And there is no doubt that the
Father Himself, and not another different from
Him, uttered these predictions. The practice,
moreover, of the Saviour or His apostles, fre-
quently quoting illustrations from the Old Testa-
ment, shows that they attribute authority to the
ancients. The injunction also of the Saviour,
when exhorting His disciples to the exercise of
kindness, " Be ye perfect, even as your Father
who is in heaven is perfect ; for He commands
His sun to rise upon the evil and the good, and
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust,"^
most evidently suggests even to a person of
feeble understanding, that He is proposing to the
imitation of His disciples no other God than
the maker of heaven and the bestower of the
rain. Again, what else does the expression,
which ought to be used by those who pray,
" Our Father who art in heaven," ^ appear to
indicate, save that God is to be sought in the
better parts of the world, i.e., of His creation ?
Further, do not those admirable principles which


■♦ Matt. V. 3.
S Ps. xxxvii. 34.
^ Matt. V. 48, 45
^ Matt. vi. 9.


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


He lays down respecting oaths, saying that we
ought not to " swear either by heaven, because
it is the throne of God ; nor by the earth, be-
cause it is His footstool," ' harmonize most
clearly with the words of the prophet, " Heaven
is My throne, and the earth is My footstool? " ^ !
And also when casting out of the temple those
who sold sheep, and oxen, and doves, and pouring
out the tables of the money-changers, and say-
ing, " Take these things hence, and do not make .
My Father's house a house of merchandise," ^ j
He undoubtedly called Him His Father, to whose
name Solomon had raised a magnificent temple.
The words, moreover, " Have you not read what
was spoken by God to Moses : I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob ; He is not a God of the dead, but of
the living,"-* most clearly teach us, that He
called the God of the patriarchs (because they
were holy, and were alive) the God of the living,
the same, viz., who had said in the prophets, " I
am God, and besides Me there is no God." s
For if the Saviour, knowing that He who is
written in the law is the God of Abraham, and
that it is the same who says, " I am God, and
besides Me there is no God," acknowledges that
very one to be His Father who is ignorant of the
existence of any other God above Himself, as
the heretics suppose. He absurdly declares Him
to be His Father who does not know of a greater
God. But if it is not from ignorance, but from
deceit, that He says there is no other God than
Himself, then it is a much greater absurdity to
confess that His Father is guilty of falsehood.
From all which this conclusion is arrived at, that
He knows of no other Father than God, the
Founder and Creator of all things.

2. It would be tedious to collect out of all the
passages in the Gospels the proofs by which the
God of the law and of the Gospels is shown to
be one and the same. Let us touch briefly upon
the Acts of the Apostles,^ where Stephen and the
other apostles address their prayers to that God
who made heaven and earth, and who spoke by
the mouth of His holy prophets, calling Him the
"God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob;"
the God who " brought forth His people out
of the land of Egypt." Which expressions un-
doubtedly clearly direct our understandings to
faith in the Creator, and implant an affection for
Him in those who have learned piously and
faithfully thus to think of Him ; according to
the words of the Saviour Himself, who, when He
was asked which was the greatest commandment
in the law, replied, " Thou shalt love the Lord


thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind. And the second is like
unto it. Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."
And to these He added : " On these two com-
mandments hang all the law and the prophets." 7
How is it, then, that He commends to him whom
He was instructing, and was leading to enter on
the office of a disciple, this commandment above
all others, by which undoubtedly love was to be
kindled in him towards the God of that law, in-
asmuch as such had been declared by the law in
these very words? But let it be granted, not-
withstanding all these most evident proofs, that
it is of some other unknown God that the Saviour
says, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart," etc., etc. How, in that case, if
the law and the prophets are, as they say, from
the Creator, i.e., from another God than He
whom He calls good, shall that appear to be
logically said which He subjoins, viz., that " on
these two commandments hang the law and the
prophets? " For how shall that which is strange
and foreign to God depend upon Him? And
when Paul says, " I thank my God, whom I serve
in my spirit from my forefathers with pure con-
science," ^ he clearly shows that he came not
to some new God, but to Christ. For what other
forefathers of Paul can be intended, except those
of whom he says, "Are they Hebrews? so am I :
are they Israelites? so am I." 9 Nay, will not
the very preface of his Epistle to the Romans
clearly show the same thing to those who know
how to understand the letters of Paul, viz., what
God he preaches ? For his words are : " Paul,
the sei-vant of Jesus Christ, called to be an
apostle, set apart to the Gospel of God, which
He had promised afore by His prophets in the
holy Scriptures concerning His Son, who was
made of the seed of David according to the
flesh, and who was declared to be the Son of
God with power, according to the spirit of holi-
ness, by the resurrection from the dead of Christ
Jesus our Lord," '° etc. Moreover, also the fol-
lowing, "Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of
the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God
take care for oxen? or saith he it altogether for
our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is
written, that he that plougheth should plough in
hope, and he that thresheth in hope of partaking
of the fruits." " By which he manifestly shows
that God, who gave the law on our account, i.e.,
on account of the apostles, says, " Thou shalt not
muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the
corn ; " whose care was not for oxen, but for
the apostles, who were preaching the Gospel of


1 J'l^'V V, 34, 35-

2 Isa. Ixvi. I.

3 John ii. i6.

4 Matt. xxii. 31, 32; cf. Ex. iii. 6.

5 Isa. xlv. 6.

6 Acts vii.


^ Matt. xxii. 37, 39, 40.
^ 2 Tim. i. 3.
9 2 Cor. xi. 22.
>o Rom. i. 1-4.
I' I Cor. ix. 9, 10; cf. Deut. xxv. 4.


Chap. IV.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


277


Christ. In other passages also, Paul, embracing
the promises of the law, says, " Honour thy father
and thy mother, which is the first commandment
with promise ; that it may be well with thee, and
that thy days may be long upon the land, the
good land, which the Lord thy God will give
thee." ' By which he undoubtedly makes known
that the law, and the God of the law, and His
promises, are pleasing to him.

3. But as those who uphold this heresy are
sometimes accustomed to mislead the hearts of
the simple by certain deceptive sophisms, I do
not consider it improper to bring forward the
assertions which they are in the habit of making,
and to refute their deceit and falsehood. The
following, then, are their declarations. It is
written, that " no man hath seen God at any
time." ^ But that God whom Moses preaches
was both seen by Moses himself, and by his
fathers before him ; whereas He who is an-
nounced by the Saviour has never been seen
at all by any one. Let us therefore ask them
and ourselves whether they maintain that He
whom they acknowledge to be God, and allege
to be a different God from the Creator, is visible
or invisible. And if they shall say that He is
visible, besides- being proved to go against the
declaration of Scripture, which sa)'S of the Sav-
iour, " He is the image of the invisible God, the
first-born of every creature," 3, they will fall also
into the absurdity of asserting that God is cor-
poreal. For nothing can be seen except by help
of form, and size, and colour, which are special
properties of bodies. And if God is declared to
be a body, then He will also be found to be
material, since every body is composed of mat-
ter. But if He be composed of matter, and
matter is undoubtedly corruptible, then, accord-
ing to them, God is liable to corruption ! We
shall put to them a second question. Is matter
made, or is it uncreated, i.e., not made? And
if they shall answer that it is not made, i.e.,
uncreated, we shall ask them if one portion of
matter is God, and the other part the world?
But if they shall say of matter that it is made, it
will undoubtedly follow that they confess Him
whom they declare to be God to have been
made ! — a result which certainly neither their
reason nor ours can admit. But they will say,
God is invisible. And what will you do? If
you say that He is invisible by nature, then
neither ought He to be visible to the Saviour.
Whereas, on the contrary, God, the Father of
Christ, is said to be seen, because " he who sees
the Son," he says, "sees also the Father." + This
certainly would press us very hartl, were the


' Eph. vi. 2, 3;

2 John i. 18.

3 Col. i. 15.

4 John xiv. 9.


expression not understood by us more correctly
of understanding, and not of seeing. For he
who has understood the Son will understand the
Father also. In this way, then, Moses too must
be supposed to have seen God, not beholding
Him with the bodily eye, but understanding Him
with the vision of the heart and the percep-
tion of the mind, and that only in some de-
gree. For it is manifest that He, viz., who gave
answers to Moses, said, " You shall not see My
face, but My hinder parts." 5 These words are,
of course, to be understood in that mystical sense
which is befitting divine words, those old wives'
fables being rejected and despised which are
invented by ignorant persons respecting the an-
terior and posterior parts of God. Let no one
indeed suppose that we have indulged any feel-
ing of impiety in saying that even to the Saviour
the Father is not visible. Let him consider the
distinction which we employ in dealing with
heretics. For we have explained that it is one
thing to see and to be seen, and another to know
and to be known, or to understand and to be
understood.^ To see, then, and to be seen, is a
property of bodies, which certainly will not be
appropriately applied either to the Father, or to
the Son, or to the Holy Spirit, in their mutual
relations with one another. For the nature of
the Trinity surpasses the measure of vision,
granting to those who are in the body, i.e., to
all other creatures, the property of vision in
reference to one another. But to a nature that
is incorporeal and for the most part intellectual,
no other attribute is appropriate save that of
knowing or being known, as the Saviour Him-
self declares when He says, " No man knoweth
the Son, save the Father ; nor does any one
know the Father, save the Son, and he to whom
the Son will reveal Him." ^ It is clear, then,
that He has not said, " No one has seen the
Father, save the Son ; " but, " No one knoweth
the Father, save the Son."

4. And now, if, on account of those expres-
sions which occur in the Old Testament, as when
God is said to be angry or to repent, or when
any other human affection or passion is de-
scribed, (our opponents) think that they are
furnished with grounds for refuting us, who
maintain that God is altogether impassible, and
is to be regarded as wholly free from all affec-
tions of that kind, we have to show them that
similar statements are found even in the para-
bles of the Clospel ; as when it is said, that he
who planted a vineyard, and let it out to hus-
bandmen, who slew the servants that were sent
to them, and at last put to death even the son,


5 Ex. xxxiii. 20, cf. 23.
*> Aliud sit videre et videri, et ahud 1
atque cognosci.
7 Matt. xi. 27.


i, vel cognoscere


278


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


is said in anger to liave taken away the vine-
yard from them, and to have delivered over the
wicked husbandmen to destruction, and to have
handed over the vineyard to others, who would
yield him the fruit in its season. And so also
with regard to those citizens who, when the head
of the household had set out to receive for him-
self a kingdom, sent messengers after him, say-
ing, " \Ve will not have this man to reign over
us ; " ' for the head of the household having
obtained the kingdom, returned, and in anger
commanded them to be put to death before
him, and burned their city with fire. But when
we read either in the Old Testament or in the
New of the anger of God, we do not take such
expressions literally, but seek in them a spiritual
meaning, that we may think of God as He de-
serves to be thought of. And on these points,
when expounding the verse in the second Psalm,
" Then shall He speak to them in His anger,
and trouble them in His fury," ^ we showed, to
the best of our poor ability, how such an expres-
sion ought to be understood.

CHAP. V. ON JUSTICE AND GOODNESS.

I. Now, since this consideration has weight
with some, that the leaders of that heresy (of
which we have been speaking) think they have
established a kind of division, according to which
they have declared that justice is one thing and
goodness another, and have applied this division
even to divine things, maintaining that the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ is indeed a good God,
but not a just one, whereas the God of the law
and the prophets is just, but not good ; I think
it necessary to return, with as much brevity as
possible, an answer to these statements. These
persons, then, consider goodness to be some
such affection as would have benefits conferred
on all, although the recipient of them be un-
worthy and undeserving of any kindness ; but
here, in my opinion, they have not rightly applied
their definition, inasmuch as they think that no
benefit is conferred on him who is visited with
any suffering or calamity. Justice, on the other
hand, they view as that quality which rewards
every one according to his deserts. But here,
again, they do not rightly interpret the meaning
of their own definition. For they think that it
is just to send evils upon the wicked and benefits
upon the good ; i.e., so that, according to their
view, the just God does not appear to wash well
to the bad, but to be animated by a kind of
hatred against them. And they gather together
instances of this, wherever they find a history in
the Scriptures of the Old Testament, relating,
e.g., the punishment of the deluge, or the fate
of those who are described as perishing in it, or


' Luke xix.
2 Ps. ii. s.


the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by a
shower of fire and brimstone, or the falling of
all the people in the wilderness on account of
their sins, so that none of those who had left
Egypt were found to have entered the promised
land, with the exception of Joshua and Caleb.
Whereas from the New Testament they gather
together words of compassion and piety, through
which the disciples are trained by the Saviour,
and by which it seems to be declared that no
one is good save God the Father only ; and by
this means they have ventured to style the Father
of the Saviour Jesus Christ a good God, but to
say that the God of the world is a different one,
whom they are pleased to term just, but not also
good.

2. Now I think they must, in the first place,
be required to show, if they can, agreeably to
their own definition, that the Creator is just in
punishing according to their deserts, either those
who perished at the time of the deluge, or the
inhabitants of Sodom, or those who haci quitted
Egypt, seeing we sometimes behold committed
crimes more wicked and detestable than those
for which the above-mentioned persons were
destroyed, while we do not yet see every sinner
paying the penalty of his misdeeds. Will they
say that He who at one time was just has been
made good ? Or will they rather be of opinion
that He is even now just, but is patiently endur-
ing human offences, while that then He was not
even just, inasmuch as He exterminated inno-
cent and sucking children along with cruel and
ungodly giants ? Now, such are their opinions,
because they know not how to understand any-
thing beyond the letter ; otherwise they would
show how it is literal justice for sins to be visited
upon the heads of children to the third and
fourth generation, and on children's children
after them. By us, however, such things are not
understood literally; but, as Ezekiel taught ^
when relating the parable, we inquire what is the
inner meaning contained in the parable itself.
Moreover, they ought to explain this also, how
He is just, and rewards every one according to
his merits, who punishes earthly-minded per-
sons and the devil, seeing they have done noth-
ing worthy of punishment.* For they could not
do any good if, according to them, they were of
a wicked and ruined nature. For as they style
Him a judge, He appears to be a judge not so
much of actions as of natures ; and if a bad
nature cannot do good, neither can a good na-
ture do evil. Then, in the next place, if He
whom they call good is good to all, He is un-
doubtedly good also to those who are destined
to perish. And why does He not save them?
If He does not desire to do so, He will be no


3 Ezek. xviii. 3.

* [Cum nihil dignum pcena commiserint. S.J


Chap. V.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


279


longer good ; if He does desire it, and cannot
effect it, He will not be omnipotent. Why do
they not rather hear the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ in the Gospels, preparing fire for the
devil and his angels ? And how shall that pro-
ceeding, as penal as it is sad, appear to be, ac-
cording to their view, the work of the good God?
Even the Saviour Himself, the Son of the good
God, protests in the Gospels, and declares that
" if signs and wonders had been done in Tyre
and Sidon, they would have repented ' long ago,
sitting in sackcloth and ashes." And when He
had come near to those very cities, and had en-
tered their territory, why, pray, does He avoid
entering those cities, and exhibiting to them
abundance of signs and wonders, if it were certain
that they would have repented, after they had
been performed, in sackcloth and ashes ? But as
He does not do this. He undoubtedly abandons
to destruction those whom the language of the
Gospel shows not to have been of a wicked or
ruined nature, inasmuch as it declares they were
capable of repentance. Again, in a certain par-
able of the Gospel, where the king enters in to
see the guests reclining at the banquet, he beheld
a certain individual not clothed with wedding
raiment, and said to him, " Friend, how camest
thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? "
and then ordered his servants, " Bind him hand
and foot, and cast him into outer darkness ; there
will be weeping and gnashing of teeth." ^ Let
them tell us who is that king who entered in to
see the guests, and finding one amongst them
with unclean garments, commanded him to be
bound by his servants, and thrust out into outer
darkness. Is he the same whom they call just?
How then had he commanded good and bad
alike to be invited, without directing their merits
to be inquired into by his servants? By such
procedure would be indicated, not the character
of a just God who rewards according to men's
deserts, as they assert, but of one who displays
undiscriminating goodness towards all. Now, if
this must necessarily be understood of the good
God, i.e., either of Christ or of the Father of
Christ, what other objection can they bring
against the justice of God's judgment? Nay,
what else is there so unjust charged by them
against the God of the law as to order him who
had been invited by His servants, whom He had
sent to call good and bad alike, to be bound
hand and foot, and to be thrown into outer dark-
ness, because he had on unclean garments?

3. And now, what we have drawn from the
authority of Scripture ought to be sufficient to
refute the arguments of the heretics. It will
not, however, appear improper if we discuss the


' Poenitentiam egissent.
2 Matt. xxii. 12, 13.


matter with them shortly, on the grounds of rea-
son itself. We ask them, then, if they know
what is regarded among men as the ground of
virtue and wickedness, and if it appears to follow
that we can speak of virtues in God, or, as they
think, in these two Gods. Let them give an
answer also to the question, whether they con-
sider goodness to be a virtue ; and as they will
undoubtedly admit it to be so, what will they say
of injustice? They will never certainly, in my
opinion, be so foolish as to deny that justice
is a virtue. Accordingly, if virtue is a blessing,
and justice is a virtue, then without doubt jus-
tice is goodness. But if they say that justice is
not a blessing, it must either be an evil or an in-
different thing. Now I think it folly to return
any answer to those who say that justice is an
evil, for I shall have the appearance of replying
either to senseless words, or to men out of their
minds. How can that appear an evil which is
able to reward the good with blessings, as they
themselves also admit? But if they say that it
is a thing of indifference, it follows that since
justice is so, sobriety also, and prudence, and
all the other virtues, are things of indifference.
And what answer shall we make to Paul, when
he says, " If there be any virtue, and if there be
any praise, think on these things, which ye have
learned, and received, and heard, and seen in
me ? " 3 Let them learn, therefore, by searching
the holy Scriptures, what are the individual
virtues, and not deceive themselves by saying
that that God who rewards every one according
to his merits, does, through hatred of evil, rec-
ompense the wicked with evil, and not because
those who have sinned need to be treated with
severer remedies, and because He applies to
them those measures which, with the prospect
of improvement, seem nevertheless, for the pres-
ent, to produce a feeling of pain. They do not
read what is written respecting the hope of those
who were destroyed in the deluge ; of which
hope Peter himself thus speaks in his first Epis-
tle : " That Christ, indeed, was put to death in
the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, by which
He went and preached to the spirits who were
kept in prison, who once were unbelievers, when
they awaited the long-suffering of God in the
days of Noah, when the ark was preparing, in
which a few, i.e., eight souls, were saved by
water. Whereunto also baptism by a like figure
now saves you." ■* And with regard to Sodom
and Gomorrah, let them tell us whether they
believe the prophetic words to be those of the
Creator God — of Him, viz., who is related to
have rained upon them a shower of fire and
brimstone. What does Ezekiel the prophet say


3 Phil. iv. 8, 9.
■* I Pet. iii. 18-21.


2 So


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IL


of them ? " Sodom," he says, " shall be restored
to her former condition." ' But why, in afflict-
ing those who are deserving of punishment, does
He not afflict them for their good? — who also
says to Chaldea, " Thou hast coals of fire, sit
upon them ; they will be a help to thee." ^ And
of those also who fell in the desert, let them
hear what is related in the seventy-eighth Psalm,
which bears the superscription of Asaph ; for
he says, " When He slew them, then they sought
Him." 3 He does not say that some sought Him
after others had been slain, but he says that the
destruction of those who were killed was of such
a nature that, when put to death, they sought
God. By all which it is established, that the
God of the law and the Gospels is one and the
same, a just and good God, and that He confers
benefits justly, and punishes with kindness ; since
neither goodness without justice, nor justice with-
out goodness, can display the (real) dignity of
the divine nature.

We shall add the following remarks, to which
we are driven by their subtleties. If justice is a
different thing from goodness, then, since evil is
the opposite of good, and injustice of justice,
injustice will doubtless be something else than an
evil ; and as, in your opinion, the just man is
not good, so neither will the unjust man be
wicked ; and again, as the good man is not just,
so the wicked man also will not be unjust. But
who does not see the absurdity, that to a good
God one should be opposed that is evil ; while
to a just God, whom they allege to be inferior
to the good, no one should be opposed ! For
there is none who can be called unjust, as there
is a Satan who is called wicked. What, then,
are we to do ? Let us give up the position which
we defend, for they will not be able to maintain
that a bad man is not also unjust, and an unjust
man wicked. And if these qualities be indis-
solubly inherent in these opposites, viz., injustice
in wickedness, or wickedness in injustice, then
unquestionably the good man will be inseparable
from the just man, and the just from the good ;
so that, as we speak of one and the same wicked-
ness in malice and injustice, we may also hold
the virtue of goodness and justice to be one
and the same.

4. They again recall us, however, to the words
of Scripture, by bringing forward that celebrated
question of theirs, affirming that it is written,
" A bad tree cannot produce good fruits ; for a
tree is known by its fruit." ^ What, then, is their
position ? What sort of tree the law is, is shown
by its fruits, i.e., by the language of its precepts.


1 Ezek. xyi. 55, cf. 53.

2 Isa. xlvii. 14, 15. The Septuagint here differs from the He-
brew: t'xei! avSpa/cas TTupds, KoLSto-ai e?r' aOrovs, oi/Toc iaovTo-i <70i


3 Ps. Ixxviii. 34.

4 Matt. vii. 18, cf.


For if the law be found to be good, then un-
doubtedly He who gave it is believed to be a
good God. But if it be just rather than good,
then God also will be considered a just legisla-
tor. The Apostle Paul makes use of no circum-
locution, when he says, " The law is good ; and
the commandment is holy, and just, and good." s
From which it is clear that Paul had not learned
the language of those who separate justice from
goodness, but had been instructed by that God,
and illuminated by His Spirit, who is at the same
time both holy, and good, and just ; and speak-
ing by whose Spirit he declared that the com-
mandment of the law was holy, and just, and
good. And that he might show more clearly
that goodness was in the commandment to a
greater degree than justice and holiness, repeat-
ing his words, he used, instead of these three
epithets, that of goodness alone, saying, " Was
then that which is good made death unto me ?
God forbid." ^ As he knew that goodness was
the ge/11/s of the virtues, and that justice and
holiness were species belonging to the gcni/s,
and having in the former verses named gciu/s and
species together, he fell back, when repeating his
words, on the genus alone. But in those which
follow he says, " Sin wrought death in me by
that which is good," ^ where he sums up generi-
cally what he had beforehand explained speci-
fically. And in this way also is to be understood
the declaration, " A good man, out of the good
treasure of his heart, bringeth forth good things ;
and an evil man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth
forth evil things." 7 For here also he assumed
that there was a genus in good or evil, pointing
out unquestionably that in a good man there were
both justice, and temperance, and prudence, and
piety, and everything that can be either called
or understood to be good. In like manner also
he said that a man was wicked who should with-
out any doubt be unjust, and impure, and un-
holy, and everything which singly makes a bad
man. For as no one considers a man to be
wicked without these marks of wickedness (nor
indeed can he be so), so also it is certain that
without these virtues no one will be deemed to
be good. There still remains to them, however,
that saying of the Lord in the Gospel, which they
think is given them in a special manner as a
shield, viz., " There is none good but one, God
the Father." ^ This word they declare is peculiar
to the Father of Christ, who, however, is different
from the God who is Creator of all things, to
which Creator he gave no appellation of good-
ness. Let us see now if, in the Old Testament,
the God of the prophets and the Creator and


5 Rom. vii. 12.

6 Rom. V,.. 13.

7 Matt. x.i. 35.

8 Matt. xix. 17.


Chap. VI.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


281


Legislator of the world is not called good.
What are the expressions which occur in the
Psalms ? " How good is God to Israel, to the
upright in heart ! " ' and, " Let Israel now say
that He is good, that His mercy endureth for
ever ; " ^ the language in the Lamentations of
Jeremiah, " The Lord is good to them that wait
for Him, to the soul that seeketh Him."^ As
therefore God is frequently called good in the
Old Testament, so also the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ is styled just in the Gospels. Fi-
nally, in the Gospel according to John, our Lord
Himself, when praying to the Father, says, " O
just Father, the world hath not known Thee." ■♦
And lest perhaps they should say that it was
owing to His having assumed human flesh that
He called the Creator of the world " Father,"
and styled Him "Just," they are excluded from
such a refuge by the words that immediately
follow, " The world hath not known Thee."
But, according to them, the world is ignorant of
the good God alone. For the world unques-
tionably recognises its Creator, the Lorcftiimself
saying that the world loveth what is its own.
Clearly, then. He whom they consider to be the
good God, is called just in the Gospels. Any
one may at leisure gather together a greater
number of proofs, consisting of those passages,
where in the New Testament the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ is called just, and in the Old
also, where the Creator of heaven and earth is
called good ; so that the heretics, being con-
j victed by numerous testimonies, may perhaps
some time be put to the blush.

CHAP. VI. ON THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST.

I . It is now time, after this cursory notice of
these points, to resume our investigation of the
incarnation of our Lord and Saviour, viz., how
or why He became man. Having therefore,
to the best of our feeble ability, considered His
divine nature from the contemplation of His own
works rather than from our own feelings, and
having nevertheless beheld (with the eye) His
visible creation while the invisible creation is
seen by faith, because human frailty can neither
see all things with the bodily eye nor compre-
hend them by reason, seeing we men are weaker
and frailer than any other rational beings (for
those which are in heaven, or are supposed to
exist above the heaven, are superior), it remains
that we seek a being intermediate between all
created things and God, i.e., a Mediator, whom
the Apostle Paul styles the " first-born of every
creature." s Seeing, moreover, those declarations
regarding His majesty which are contained in


' Ps. Ixxiii. I.

2 Ps. cxviii. 2.

3 Lam. lii 25.

* John xvii. 25: Juste Pater,
5 Col. i. 15.


holy Scripture, that He is called the " image of
the invisible God, and the first-born of every
creature," and that "in Him were all things
created, visible and invisible, whether they be
thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers,
all things were created by Him, and in Him :
and He is before all things, and by Him all things
consist,"^ who is the head of all things, alone
having as head God the Father ; for it is written,
" The head of Christ is God ; " ? seeing clearly
also that it is written, " No one knoweth the Fa-
ther, save the Son, nor doth any one know the
Son, save the Father "^ (for who can know what
wisdom is, save He who called it into being? or,
who can understand clearly what truth is, save
the Father of truth? who can investigate with
certainty the universal nature of His Word, and
of God Himself, which nature proceeds from
God, except God alone, with whom the Word
was), we ought to regard it as certain that this
Word, or Reason (if it is to be so termed), this
Wisdom, this Truth, is known to no other than
the Father only ; and of Him it is written, that " I
do not think that the world itself could contain
the books which might be written," ^ regarding,
viz., the glory and majesty of the Son of God.
For it is impossible to commit to writing (all)
those particulars which belong to the glory of
the Saviour. After the consideration of questions
of such importance concerning the being of the
Son of God, we are lost in the deepest amaze-
ment that such a nature, pre-eminent above all
others, should have divested itself of its condi-
tion of majesty and become man, and tabernacled
amongst men, as the grace that was poured upon
His lips testifies, and as His heavenly Father bore
Him witness, and as is confessed by the various
signs and wonders and miracles '° that were per-
formed by Him ; who also, before that appear-
ance of His which He manifested in the body,
sent the prophets as His forerunners, and the
messengers of His advent ; and after His ascen-
sion into heaven, made His holy apostles, men
ignorant and unlearned, taken from the ranks of
tax-gatherers or fishermen, but who were filled
with the power of His divinity, to itinerate
throughout the world, that they might gather
together out of every race and every nation a
multitude of devout believers in Himself.

2. But of all the marvellous and mighty acts
related of Him, this altogether surpasses human
admiration, and is beyond the power of mortal
frailness to understand or feel, how that mighty
power of divine majesty, that very \\'ord of the
Father, and that very wisdom of God, in which
were created all things, visible and invisible, can


6 Col. i. 16, 17.

7 I Cor. xi. 3.
* Matt. xi. 27.
9 John xxi. 25.

■° Virtutibus, probably for Surofieo-iv


282


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


be believed to have existed within the Hmits of
that man who appeared in Judea ; nay, that the
Wisdom of God can have entered the womb of
a woman, and have been born an infant, and
have uttered waiHngs hke the cries of Uttle chil-
dren ! And that afterwards it should be related
that He was greatly troubled in death, saying,
as He Himself declared, " My soul is sorrowful,
even unto death ; " ' and that at the last He was
brought to that death which is accounted the
most shameful among men, although He rose
again on the third day. Since, then, we see in
Him some things so human that they appear to
differ in no respect from the common frailty of
mortals, and some things so divine that they can
appropriately belong to nothing else than to the
primal and ineffable nature of Deity, the narrow-
ness of human understanding can find no outlet ;
but, overcome with the amazement of a mighty
admiration, knows not whither to withdraw, or
what to take hold of, or whither to turn. If it
think of a God, it sees a mortal ; if it think of a
man, it beholds Him returning from the grave,
after o\-erthro\ving the empire of death, laden
with its spoils. And therefore the spectacle is
to be contemplated with all fear and reverence,
that the truth of both natures may be clearly
shown to exist in one and the same Being ; so
that nothing unworthy or unbecoming may be
perceived in that divine and ineffable substance,
nor yet those things which were done be supposed
to be the illusions of imaginary appearances. To
utter these things in human ears, and to explain
them in words, far surpasses the powers either
of our rank, or of our intellect and language. I
think that it surpasses the power even of the holy
apostles ; nay, the explanation of that mystery
may perhaps be beyond the grasp of the entire
creation of celestial powers. Regarding Him,
then, we shall state, in the fewest possible words,
the contents of our creed rather than the asser-
tions which human reason is wont to advance ;
and this from no spirit of rashness, but as called
for by the nature of our arrangement, laying
before you rather (what may be termed) our
suspicions than any clear affirmations.

3. The Only-begotten of God, therefore,
through whom, as the previous course of the
discussion has shown, all things were made,
visible and invisible, according to the view of
Scripture, both made all things, and loves what
He made. For since He is Himself the invisible
image of the invisible God, He conveyed invisi-
bly a share in Himself to all His rational crea-
tures, so that each one obtained a part of Him
exactly proportioned to the amount of affection
with which he regarded Him. But since, agree-
ably to the faculty of free-will, variety and di-


xxvi. 38.


versify characterized the individual souls, so that
one was attached with a warmer love to the
Author of its being, and another with a feebler
and weaker regard, that soul {anima) regarding
which Jesus said, " No one shall take my life
{ani?nam) from me,"^ inhering, from the be-
ginning of the creation, and afterwards, insepa-
rably and indissolubly in Him, as being the
Wisdom and Word of God, and the Truth and
the true Light, and receiving Him wholly, and
passing into His light and splendour, was made
with Him in a pre-eminent degree ^ one spirit,
according to the promise of the apostle to those
who ought to imitate it, that " he who is joined
in the Lord is one spirit." ^ This substance of a
soul, then, being intermediate between God and
the flesh — it being impossible for the nature of
God to intermingle with a body without an inter-
mediate instrument — the God-man is born, as
we have said, that substance being the interme-
diary to whose nature it was not contrary to
assume a body. But neither, on the other hand,
was it opposed to the nature of that soul, as a
rational existence, to receive God, into whom,
as stated above, as into the Word, and the Wis-
dom, and the Truth, it had already wholly en-
tered. And therefore deservedly is it also called,
along with the flesh which it had assumed, the
Son of God, and the Power of God, the Christ,
and the Wisdom of God, either because it was
wholly in the Son of God, or because it received
the* Son of God wholly into itself. And again,
the Son of God, through whom all things were
created, is named Jesus Christ and the Son of
man. For the Son of God also is said to have
died — in reference, viz., to that nature which
could admit of death ; and He is called the Son
of man, who is announced as about to come in
the glory of God the Father, with the holy
angels. And for this reason, throughout the
whole of Scripture, not only is the divine nature
spoken of in human words, but the human na-
ture is adorned by appellations of divine dignity.
More truly indeed of this than of any other can
the statement be affirmed, " They shall both be
in one flesh, and are no longer two, but one
flesh." 5 For the Word of God is to be con-
sidered as being more in one flesh with the soul
than a man with his wife. But to whom is it
more becoming to be also one spirit with God,
than to this soul which has so joined itself to
God by love as that it may justly be said to be
one spirit with Him ?


2 John X. 18. " No other soul which descended into a human
body has stamped on itself a pure and unstained resemblance of its
former stamp, save that one of which the Saviour says, ' No one will
take my soul from me, but I lay it down of mysell.' " — Jerome,
Epistle to Avztits, p. 763.

3 Principaliter.
■* I Cor. vi. 17.

5 Gen. ii. 24; cf. Mark x. 8.


Chap. VI.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


283


4. That the perfection of his love and the
sincerity of his deserved affection ' formed for it
this inseparable union with God, so that the as-
sumption of that soul was not accidental, or the
result of a personal preference, but was conferred
as the reward of its virtues, listen to the prophet
addressing it thus : " Thou hast loved righteous-
ness, and hated wickedness : therefore God, thy
God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above thy fellows."^ As a reward for its love,
then, it is anointed with the oil of gladness ; i.e.,
the soul of Christ along with the Word of God
is made Christ. Because to be anointed with
the oil of gladness means nothing else than to be
filled with the Holy Spirit. And when it is said
" above thy fellows," it is meant that the grace
of the Spirit was not given to it as to the proph-
ets, but that the essential fulness of the Word
of God Himself was in it, according to the say-
ing of the apostle, " In whom dwelt all the fulness
of the Godhead bodily." ^ Finally, on this ac-
count he has not only said, " Thou hast loved
righteousness ; " but he adds, " and Thou hast
hated wickedness." For to have hated wicked-
ness is what the Scripture says of Him, that
" He did no sin, neither was any guile found in
His mouth," ■♦ and that " He was tempted in all
things like as we are, without sin." s Nay, the
Lord Himself also said, "Which of you will con-
vince Me of sin?" ^ And again He says with
reference to Himself, " Behold, the prince of this
world cometh, and findeth nothing in Me." ^
All which (passages) show that in Him there
was no sense of sin ; and that the prophet might
show more clearly that no sense of sin had ever
entered into Him, he says, " Before the boy
could have knowledge to call upon father or
mother. He turned away from wickedness." *^

5 . Now, if our having shown above that Christ
possessed a rational soul should cause a difficulty
to any one, seeing we have frequently proved
throughout all our discussions that the nature of
souls is capable both of good and evil, the difii-
culty will be explained in the following way.
That the nature, indeed, of His soul was the
same as that of all others cannot be doubted,
otherwise it could not be called a soul were it
not truly one. But since the power of choosing
good and evil is within the reach of all, this soul
which belonged to Christ elected to love right-
eousness, so that in proportion to the immensity
of its love it clung to it unchangeably and in-


' Meriti affectus.

2 Ps. xlv. 7.

3 Col. ii. 9.
^ Isa. liii. 9.

S Heb. iv. 15.

*> John viii. 46.

7 John xiv. 30.

' This quotation is made up of two different parts of Isaiah : chap,
viii. 4, " Before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father and
my mother;" and chap. vii. 16, "Before the child shall know to
refuse the evil, and choose the good."


separably, so that firmness of purpose, and im-
mensity of affection, and an inextinguishable
warmth of love, destroyed all susceptibility {sen-
suin) for alteration and change ; and that which
formerly depended upon the will was changed
by the power of long custom into nature ; and
so we must believe that there existed in Christ a
human and rational soul, without supposing that
it had any feeling or possibility of sin.

6. To explain the matter more fully, it will
not appear absurd to make use of an illustration,
although on a subject of so much difficulty it is
not easy to obtain suitable illustrations. How-
ever, if we may speak without offence, the metal
iron is capable of cold and heat. If, then, a
mass of iron be kept constantly in the fire, re-
ceiving the heat through all its pores and veins,
and the fire being continuous and the iron never
removed from it, it become wholly converted
into the latter ; could we at all say of this, which
is by nature a mass of iron, that wlien placed in
the fire, and incessantly burning, it was at any
time capable of admitting cold? On the con-
trary, because it is more consistent with truth,
do we not rather say, what we often see happen-
ing in furnaces, that it has become wholly fire,
seeing nothing but fire is visible in it ? And if
any one were to attempt to touch or handle it,
he would experience the action not of iron, but
of fire. In this way, then, that soul which, like
an iron in the fire, has been perpetually placed
in the Word, and perpetually in the Wisdom, and
perpetually in God,'? is God in all that it does,
feels, and understands, and therefore can be
called neither convertible nor mutable, inasmuch
as, being incessandy heated, it possessed immu-
tability from its union with the Word of God.
To all the saints, finally, some warmth from the
Word of God must be supposed to have passed ;
and in this soul the divine fire itself must be
believed to have rested, from which some warmth
may have passed to others. Lastly, the expres-
sion, " God, thy God, anointed thee with the oil
of gladness above thy fellows," '° shows that that
soul is anointed in one way with the oil of glad-
ness, i.e., with the word of God and wisdom ;
and his fellows, i.e., the holy prophets and
apostles, in another. For they are said to have
" run in the odour of his ointments ; " " and that
soul was the vessel which contained that very
ointment of whose fragrance all the worthy
prophets and apostles were made partakers.
As, then, the suljstance of an ointment is one
thing and its odour another, so also Christ is
one thing and His fellows another. And as the
vessel itself, which contains the substance of the


9 Semper in verbo, semper in sapientia, semper in Deo.
'o Ps. xlv. 7.

" llli enim in odore unjEiientorum ejus circumire dicuntur; per-
haps an allusion to Song of Sol. i. 3 or to Ps


, xlv. 8.


284


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


ointment, can by no means admit any foul smell ;
whereas it is possible that those who enjoy its !
odour may, if they remove a little way from its
fragrance, receive any foul odour which comes
upon them : so, in the same way, was it impos-
sible that Christ, being as it were the vessel itself,
in which was the substance of the ointment,
should receive an odour of an opposite kind,
while they who are His " fellows " will be par-
takers and receivers of His odour, in proportion
to their nearness to the vessel.

7. I think, indeed, that Jeremiah the prophet,
also, understanding what was the nature of the
wisdom of God in him, which was the same also
which he had assumed for the salvation of the
world, said, " The breath of our countenance is
Christ the Lord, to whom we said, that under
His shadow we shall live among the nations." '
And inasmuch as the shadow of our body is in-
separable from the body, and unavoidably per-
forms and repeats its movements and gestures, I
think that he, wishing to point out the work of
Christ's soul, and the movements inseparably
belonging to it, and which accomplished every-
thing according to His movements and will,
called this the shadow of Christ the Lord, under
which shadow we were to live among the nations.
For in the mystery of this assumption the nations
live, who, imitating it through faith, come to sal-
vation. David also, when saying, " Be mindful
of my reproach, O Lord, with which they re-
proached me in exchange for Thy Christ," ^
seems to me to indicate the same. And what
else does Paul mean when he says, " Your life is
hid with Christ in God ; " 3 and again in another
passage, " Do you seek a proof of Christ, who
speaketh in me?"'* And now he says that
Christ was hid in God. The meaning of which
expression, unless it be shown to be something
such as we have pointed out above as intended
by the prophet in the words " shadow of Christ,"
exceeds, perhaps, the apprehension of the hu-
man mind. But we see also very many other
statements in holy Scripture respecting the mean-
ing of the word " shadow," as that well-known
one in the Gospel according to Luke, where
Gabriel says to Mary, " The Spirit of the Lord
shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee." 5 And the
apostle says with reference to the law, that they
who have circumcision in the flesh, " serve for
the similitude and shadow of heavenly things." *"
And elsewhere, " Is not our life upon the earth
a shadow? "7 If, then, not only the law which
is upon the earth is a shadow, but also all our


1 Lam. iv. 20.

2 Ps. Ixxxix. 50, 51.

3 Col. iii. 3.

■* 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

5 Luke i. 35.

6 Heb. viii. s.

7 Job viii. g.


life which is upon the earth is the same, and we
live among the nations under the shadow of
Christ, we must see whether the truth of all these
shadows may not come to be known in that
revelation, when no longer through a glass, and
darkly, but face to face, all the saints shall de-
serve to behold the glory of God, and the causes
and truth of things. And the pledge of this
truth being already received through the Holy
Spirit, the apostle said, " Yea, though we have
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth
know we Him no more." ^

The above, meanwhile, are the thoughts which
have occurred to us, when treating of subjects
of such difficulty as the incarnation and deity of
Christ. If there be any one, indeed, who can
discover something better, and who can estab-
lish his assertions by clearer proofs from holy
Scriptures, let his opinion be received in prefer-
ence to mine.

CHAP. Vn. ON THE HOLY SPIRIT.

I. As, then, after those first discussions which,
according to the requirements of the case, we
held at the beginning regarding the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, it seemed right that we should
retrace our steps, and show that the same God
was the creator and founder of the world, and
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, i.e., that the
God of the law and of the prophets and of the
Gospel was one and the same ; and that, in
the next place, it ought to be shown, with re-
spect to Christ, in what manner He who had
formerly been demonstrated to be the Word and
Wisdom of God became man ; it remains that
we now return with all possible brevity to the
subject of the Holy Spirit.

It is time, then, that we say a few words to
the best of our ability regarding the Holy Spirit,
whom our Lord and Saviour in the Gospel ac-
cording to John has named the Paraclete. For
as it is the same God Himself, and the same
Christ, so also is it the same Holy Spirit who
was in the prophets and apostles, -i.e., either in
those who believed in God before the advent of
Christ, or in those who by means of Christ have
sought refuge in God. We have heard, indeed,
that certain heretics have dared to say that there
are two Gods and two Christs, but we have never
known of the doctrine of two Holy Spirits being
preached by any one.9 For how could they
maintain this out of Scripture, or what distinc-
tion could they lay down between Holy Spirit
and Holy Spirit, if indeed any definition or de-
scription of Holy Spirit can be discovered ? For


8 2 Cor. V. 16.

9 According to Pamphilus in his Apology, Origen, in .i note on
Tit. iii. 10, has m.ade a statement the opposite of this. His words
are : " But there are some also who say, that it was one Holy Spirit
who was in the prophets, and another who was in the apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ." — Ru^us.


Chap. VII.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


285


although we should concede to INIarcion or to
Valentinus that it is possible to draw distinctions 1
in the question of Deity, and to describe the
nature of the good God as one, and that of the
just God as another, what will he devise, or what |
will he discover, to enable him to introduce a
distinction in the Holy Spirit? I consider, then, 1
that they are able to discover nothing which
may indicate a distinction of any kind what-
ever. !

2. Now we are of opinion that every rational
creature, without any distinction, receives a share
of Him in the same way as of the Wisdom and
of the Word of God. I observe, however, that
the chief advent of the Holy Spirit is declared
to men, after the ascension of Christ to heaven,
rather than before His coming into the world.
For, before that, it was upon the prophets alone,
and upon a few individuals — if there happened
to be any among the people deserving of it —
that the gift of the Holy Spirit was conferred ;
but after the advent of the Saviour, it is written
that the prediction of the prophet Joel was ful-
filled, " In the last days it shall come to pass,
and I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and
they shall prophesy," ' which is similar to the
well-known statement, "All nations shall serve
Him." ^ By the grace, then, of the Holy Spirit,
along with numerous other results, this most
glorious consequence is clearly demonstrated,
that with regard to those things which were writ-
ten in the prophets or in the law of Moses, it
was only a few persons at that time, viz., the
prophets themselves, and scarcely another indi-
vidual out of the whole nation, who were able
to look beyond the mere corporeal meaning and
discover something greater, i.e., something spir-
itual, in the law or in the prophets ; but now
there are countless multitudes of believers who,
although unable to unfold methodically and
clearly the results of their spiritual understand-
ing,3 are nevertheless most firmly persuaded that
neither ought circumcision to be understood liter-
ally, nor the rest of the Sabbath, nor the pouring
out of the blood of an animal, nor that answers
were given by God to Moses on these points.
And this method of apprehension is undoubtedly
suggested to the minds of all by the power of
the Holy Spirit.

3. And as there are many ways of apprehend-
ing Christ, who, although He is wisdom, does
not act the part or possess the power of wisdom
in all men, but only in those who give themselves
to the study of wisdom in Him ; and who, al-
though called a physician, does not act as one
towards all, but only towards those who under-


1 Joel ii. 28.

2 Ps. Ixxii. II.

3 Qui licet non omnes possint per ordinem atque ad liquidum
spiritualis intelligentiae explanare consequeniiam.


Stand their feeble and sickly condition, and flee
to His compassion that they may obtain health ;
so also I think is it with the Holy Spirit, in whom
is contained every kind of gifts. For on some
is bestowed by the Spirit the word of wisdom,
on others the word of knowledge, on others
faith ; and so to each individual of those who
are capable of receiving Him, is the Spirit Him-
self made to be that quality, or understood to 1
be that which is needed by the individual who u
has deserved to participate.^ These divisions •
and differences not being perceived by those
who hear Him called Paraclete in the Gospel,
and not duly considering in consequence of what
work or act He is named the Paraclete, they
have compared Him to some common spirits or
other, and by this means have tried to disturb
the Churches of Christ, and so excite dissensions
of no small extent among brethren ; whereas the
Gospel shows Him to be of such power and
majesty, that it says the apostles could not yet
receive those things which the Saviour wished to
teach them until the advent of the Holy Spirit,
who, pouring Himself into their souls, might en-
lighten them regarding the nature and faith of
the Trinity. But these persons, because of the
ignorance of their understandings, are not only
unable themselves logically to state the truth,
but cannot even give their attention to what is
advanced by us ; and entertaining unworthy ideas
of His divinity, have delivered themselves over
to errors and deceits, being depraved by a spirit
of error, ratlier than instructed by the teaching of
the Holy Spirit, according to the declaration
of the apostle, " Following the doctrine of devils,
forbidding to marry, to the destruction and ruin
of many, and to abstain from meats, that by
an ostentatious exhibition of stricter observance
they may seduce the souls of the innocent." s

4. We must therefore know that the Paraclete
is the Holy Spirit, who teaches truths which can-
not be uttered in words, and which are, so to
speak, unutterable, and "which it is not lawful for
a man to utter," ^ i.e., which cannot be indicated
by human language. The phrase " it is not law-
ful " is, we think, used by the apostle instead of
" it is not possible ; " as also is the case in the
passage where he says, " All things are lawful for
me, but all things are not expedient : all things
are lawful for me, but all things edify not." ?
For those things which are in our power because
we may have them, he says are lawful for us.
But the Paraclete, who is called the Holy Spirit,
is so called from His work of consolation, />ara-


* Ita per singulos, qui eum capere possiint, hoc efficitur, vel hoc
intelligitur ipse Spiritus, quo indiget ille, qui eum parlicipare meruerit.
Schnitzer renders, " And so, in every one who is susceptible of them,
the .Spirit is exactly that which the receiver chiefly needs.

5 I Tim. iy. 1-3.

6 2 Cor. xii. 4.

7 I Cor. X. 23.


286


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


clesis being termed in Latin consolado. For if
any one has deserved to participate in the Holy
Spirit by the knowledge of His ineffable myste-
ries, he undoubtedly obtains comfort and joy
of heart. For since he comes by the teaching of
the Spirit to the knowledge of the reasons of all
things which happen — how or why they occur —
his soul can in no respect be troubled, or admit
any feeling of sorrow ; nor is he alarmed by any-
thing, since, clinging to the Word of God and
His wisdom, he through the Holy Spirit calls
Jesus Lord. And since we have made mention
of the Paraclete, and have explained as we were
able what sentiments ought to be entertained
regarding Him ; alid since our Saviour also is
called the Paraclete in the Epistle of John, when
he says, " If any of us sin, we have a Paraclete
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and
He is the propitiation for our sins ; " ' let us
consider whether this term Paraclete should hap-
pen to have one meaning when applied to the
Saviour, and another when applied to the Holy
Spirit. Now Paraclete, when spoken of the
Saviour, seems to mean intercessor. For in
Greek, Paraclete has both significations — that
of intercessor and comforter. On account, then,
of the phrase which follows, when he says, " And
He is the propitiation for our sins," the name
Paraclete seems to be understood in the case of
our Saviour as meaning intercessor ; for He is
said to intercede with the Father because of our
sins. In the case of the Holy Spirit, the Para-
clete must be understood in the sense of com-
forter, inasmuch as He bestows consolation upon
the souls to whom He openly reveals the appre-
hension of spiritual knowledge.

CHAP. VIII. — • ON THE SOUL (aNIMA) .

I. The order of our arrangement now requires
us, after the discussion of the preceding sub-
jects, to institute a general inquiry regarding the
soul ; 2 and, beginning with points of inferior
importance, to ascend to those that are of
greater. Now, that there are souls ^ in all living
things, even in those which live in the waters, is,
I suppose, doubted by no one. For the general
opinion of all men maintains this ; and confirma-
tion from the authority of holy Scripture is added,
when it is said that " God made great whales,
and every living creature ■* that moveth which
the waters brought forth after their kind." s It
is confirmed also from the common intelligence
of reason, by those who lay down in certain
words a definition of soul. For soul is defined
as follows : a substance (ftavTaa-TiKTij and bpix-qTiK-q,


which may be rendered into Latin, although not
so appropriately, sensibilis et mobilis.^ This cer-
tainly may be said appropriately of all living
beings, even of those which abide in the waters ;
and of winged creatures too, this same definition
oi anima may be shown to hold good. Scrip-
ture also has added its authority to a second
opinion, when it says, "Ye shall not eat the
blood, because the life ^ of all flesh is its blood ;
and ye shall not eat the life with the flesh ; " ^ in
which it intimates most clearly that the blood of
every animal is its life. And if any one now
were to ask how it can be said with respect to
bees, wasps, and ants, and those other things
which are in the waters, oysterg and cockles,
and all others which are without blood, and are
most clearly shown to be living things, that the
" life of all flesh is the blood," we must answer,
that in living things of that sort the force which
is exerted in other animals by the power of red
blood is exerted in them by that liquid which is
within them, although it be of a different colour ;
for colour is a thing of no importance, provided
the substance be endowed with life.9 That
beasts of burden or cattle of smaller size are
endowed with souls, '° there is, by general assent,
no doubt whatever. The opinion of holy Scrip-
ture, however, is manifest, when God says, " Let
the earth bring forth the living creature after its
kind, four-footed beasts, and creeping things,
and beasts of the earth after their kind." " And
now with respect to man, although no one enter-
tains any doubt, or needs to inquire, yet holy
Scripture declares that " God breathed into his
countenance the breath of life, and man became
a living soul." '^ It remains that we inquire re-
specting the angelic order whether they also
have souls, or are souls ; and also respecting the
other divine and celestial powers, as well as
those of an opposite kind. We nowhere, indeed,
find any authority in holy Scripture for asserting
that either the angels, or any other divine spirits
that are ministers of God, either possess souls
or are called souls, and yet they are felt by very
many persons to be endowed with life. But
with regard to God, we find it written as follows :
" And I will put My soul upon that soul which
has eaten blood, and I will root him out from
among his people ; " '^ and also in another pas-
sage, " Your new moons, and sabbaths, and great
days, I will not accept ; your fasts, and holidays.


' I John ii. I, 2.

2 Anjma.

3 Animse.

* Animam animantium.

^ Gen. i. 2i: no-aav i/'ux')" ^wwi') Sept.


6 Erasmus remarks, that (ba.vra<TTi.Kri may be rendered imagini-
tiva, which is the understanding; hp^t\T\.Ki),inipulsiva,^\\\c\\ refers
to the affections (Schnitzer).

7 Animam.

^ Lev. xvii. 14; y\ ^vx(\ Trdarjs aopfcbs at/ita avToO eo'Ti, Sept.
9 Vitalis.
'° Animantia.

" Gen. i. 24, living creature, anintam.
'^ Gen. ii. 7, animam 7itvenie>n.

" Lev. xvii. 10. It is clear that in the text which Origan or his
translator had before him he must have read 'iivxr] instead of Trpocru)-
irov; otherwise the quotation would be inappropriate (Schnitzer).


Chap. VIII.]


ORIGEN DE PRIXCIPIIS.


287


and festal days, My soul hateth." ' And in the '
twenty-second Psalm, regarding Christ — for it [
is certain, as the Gospel bears witness, that this j
Psalm is spoken of Him — the following words '
occur : " O Lord, be not far from helping me ; j
look to my defence : O God, deliver my soul
from the sword, and my beloved one from the
hand of the dog ; " ^ although there are also
many other testimonies respecting the soul of
Christ when He tabernacled in the flesh. >

2. But the nature of the incarnation will ren- 1
der unnecessary any inquiry into the soul of
Christ. For as He truly possessed flesh, so also
He truly possessed a soul. It is difficult indeed
both to feel and to state how that which is called
in Scripture the soul of God is to be understood ; i
for we acknowledge that nature to be simple,
and without any intermixture or addition. In
whatever way, however, it is to be understood, it
seems, meanwhile, to be named the soul of God ; ,
whereas regarding Christ there is no doubt, j
And therefore there seems to me no absurdity
in either understanding or asserting some such
thing regarding the holy angels and the other
heavenly powers, since that definition of soul
a]:)pears applicable also to them. For who can
rationally deny that they are " sensible and
moveable?" But if that definition appear to
be correct, according to which a soul is said
to be a substance rationally " sensible and move-
able," the same definition would seem also to
apply to angels. For what else is in them than
rational feeling and motion ? Now those beings
who are comprehended under the same defi- 1
nition have undoubtedly the samg substance, j
Paul indeed intimates that there is a kind of
animal-man 3 who, he says, cannot receive the
things of the Spirit of God, but declares that
the doctrine of the Holy Spirit seems to him
foolish, and that he cannot understand what is
to be spiritually discerned. In another passage
he says it is sown an animal body, and arises a ,
spiritual body, pointing out that in the resurrec-
tion of the just there will be nothing of an ani-
mal nature. And therefore we inquire whether
tliere happen to be any substance which, in re-
s])ect of its being anima, is imperfect. But
whether it be imperfect because it falls away
from perfection, or because it was so created by
God, will form the subject of inquiry when each
individual topic shall begin to be discussed in
order. For if the animal man receive not the
things of the Spirit of God, and because he is
animal, is unable to admit the understanding of a
better, i.e., of a divine nature, it is for this rea-
son perhaps that Paul, wishing to teach us more
plainly what that is by means of which we are


able to comprehend those things which are of
the Spirit, i.e., spiritual things, conjoins and asso-
ciates with the Holy Spirit an understanding '^
rather than a soul.s For this, I think, he indi-
cates when he says, " I will pray with .the spirit,
I will pray with the understanding also ; I will
sing with the spirit, I will sing with the under-
standing also."'' And he does not say that " I
will pray with the soul," but with the spirit and
the understanding. Nor does he say, " I will
sing with the soul," but with the spirit and the
understanding.

3. But perhaps this question is asked. If it be
the understanding which prays and sings with
the spirit, and if it be the same which receives
both perfection and salvation, how is it that
Peter says, " Receiving the end of your faith,
even the salvation of your souls? " ^ If the soul
neither prays nor sings with the spirit, how shall
it hope for salvation ? or when it attains to bless-
edness, shall it be no longer called a soul?**
Let us see if perhaps an answer may be given in
this way, that as the Saviour came to save what
was lost, that which formerly was said to be lost
is not lost when it is saved ; so also, perhaps,
this which is saved is called a soul, and when it
has been placed in a state of salvation will re-
ceive a name from the Word that denotes its
more perfect condition. But it appears to some
that this also may be added, that as the thing
which was lost undoubtedly existed before it was
lost, at which time it was something else than
destroyed, so also will be the case when it is no
longer in a ruined condition. In like manner
also, the soul which is said to have perished will
appear to have been something at one time,
when as yet it had not perished, and on that
account would be termed soul, and being again
freed from destruction, it may become a second
time what it was before it perished, and be called
a soul. But from the very signification of the
name soul which the Greek word conveys, it has
appeared to a few curious inquirers that a mean-
ing of no small importance may be suggested.
For in sacred language God is called a fire, as
when Scripture says, " Our God is a consuming
fire." 9 Respecting the substance of the angels
also it speaks as follows : " Who maketh His


" Isa.
2 Ps.


unicam meam, /ixot'oyei'T) /aou.


■♦ Mens.

S Anima.

* I Cor. xiv. 15.

^ I Pet. i. 9.

8 These words .are found in Jerome's Epistle to Avitus, and,
literally translated, are as follows: " Whence infinite caution is to be
employed, lest perchance, after souls have obtained salvation and
come to the blessed life, they should cease to be souls For as our
Lord and Saviour came to seek and to save what was lost, that it mipht
cease to be lost; so the soul which was lost, and for whose salvation
the Lord came, shall, when it has been saved, cease to be a soul.
This point in like manner must be examined, whether, as that which
has been lost was at one time not lost, and a time will come when it
will be no longer lost; so also at .some time a soul may not have been
a soul, and a time may be when it will by no means continue to be a
soul." .K portion of the above is also found, in the original Greek, in
the Emperor Justinian's Letter to Menas, Patriarch of Constantinople.

9 Deut. iv. 24.


288


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


angels spirits, and His ministers a burning
fire;"' and in another place, "The angel of
the Lord appeared in a flame of fire in the
bush."- We have, moreover, received a com-
mandment to be " fervent in spirit ;" ^ by which
expression undoubtedly the Word of God is
shown to be hot and fiery. The prophet Jere-
miah also hears from Him, who gave him his
answers, " Behold, I have given My words into
thy mouth a fire." •* As God, then, is a fire, and
the angels a flame of fire, and all the saints are
fervent in spirit, so, on the contrary, those who
have fallen away from the love of God are un-
doubtedly said to have cooled in their affection
for Him, and to have become cold. For the
Lord also says, that, " because iniquity has
abounded, the love of many will grow cold." 5
Nay, all things, whatever they are, which in holy
Scripture are compared with the hostile power,
the devil is said to be perpetually finding cold ;
and what is found to be colder than he? In
the sea also the dragon is said to reign. For
the prophet*^ intimates that the serpent and
dragon, which certainly is referred to one of the
wicked spirits, is also in the sea. And elsewhere
the prophet says, " I will draw out my holy
sword upon the dragon the flying serpent, upon
the dragon the crooked serpent, and will slay
him." 7 And again he says : " Even though
they hide from my eyes, and descend into the
depths of the sea, there will I command the
serpent, and it shall bite them." ^ In the book
of Job also, he is said to be the king of all
things in the waters.^ The prophet '° threatens
that evils will be kindled by the north wind
upon all who inhabit the earth. Now the north
wind is described in holy Scripture as cold, ac-
cording to the statement in the book of Wisdom,
"That cold north wind;"" which same thing
also must undoubtedly be understood of the
devil. If, then, those things which are holy are
named fire, and hght, and fervent, while those
which are of an opposite nature are said to be
cold ; and if the love of many is said to wax
cold ; we have to inquire whether perhaps the
name soul, which in Greek is termed i//wx'^» t)e
so termed from growing cold '^ out of a better
and more divine condition, and be thence de-
rived, because it seems to have cooled from that
natural and divine warmth, and therefore has
been placed in its present position, and called


' Ps. civ. 4; cf. Heb. i. 7.

2 Ex. iii. 2.

3 Rom, .\ii. II.

* Cf. Jer. i. g. The word " fire" is found neither in the Hebrew
jr in the .Septuagint.

5 Matt. xxiv. 12.

6 Cf. Ezek. xxxii. 2 seqq.
' Isa. xxvii. i.

6 Amos ix. 3.

9 Job xli. 34 [LXX.].
«o Jer. i. 14.

" Ecclus. xliii. 20. ,

'2 i|;uxrj from tjivx^aOM,


by its present name. Finally, see if you can
easily find a place in holy Scripture where the
soul is properly mentioned in terms of praise : it
frequently occurs, on the contrary, accompanied
with expressions of censure, as in the passage,
"An evil soul ruins him who possesses it ; " 'S
and, "The soul which sinneth, it shall die.""*
For after it has been said, "All souls are Mine ;
as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the
son is Mine," '5 it seemed to follow that He
would say, " The soul that doeth righteousness, it
shall be saved," and "The soul which sinneth,
it shall die." But now we see that He has asso-
ciated with the soul what is censurable, and has
been silent as to that which was deserving of
praise. We have therefore to see if, perchance,
as we have said is declared by the name itself,
it was called i/'vx^j i-^v anima, because it has
waxed cold from the fervour of just things,'^ and
from participation in the divine fire, and yet has
not lost the power of restoring itself to that con-
dition of fervour in which it was at the begin-
ning. Whence the prophet also appears to point
out some such state of things by the words^,^^
" Return, O my soul, unto thy rest." '^ From all \
which this appears to be made out, that the \
understanding, falling away from its status and
dignity, was made or named soul ; and that, if I
repaired and corrected, it returns to the con-J
dition of the understanding.'**

4. Now, if this be the case, it seems to me
that this very decay and falling away of the un-
derstanding is not the same in all, but that this
conversion into a soul is carried to a greater or
less degree in different instances, and that cer-
tain understandings retain something even of
their former vigour, and others again either
nothing or a very small amount. Whence some "
are found from the very commencement of their
lives to be of more active intellect, others again
of a slower habit of mind, and some are born
wholly obtuse, and altogether incapable of in-
struction. Our statement, however, that the


'3 Ecclus. vi. 4.

14 Ezek. xviii. 4, cf. 20.

'5 Ezek. xviii. 4, 19.

'f" " By falling away and growing cold from a spiritual life, the soiil
has become what it now is, but is capable also of returning to what it
was at the beginning, which 1 think is intimated by the prophet in the
words, ' Return, O my soul, unto thy rest,' so as to be wholly this." —
Epistle of Justinian to Patriarch of Constantinople.

'7 Ps. cxvi. 7.

'8 " The understanding (N0O9) somehow, then, has become a soul,
and the soul, being restored, becomes an understanding. The under-
standing falling aw,^y, was made a soul, and the soul, again, when
furnished with virtues, will become an understanding. For if we ex-
amine the case of Esau, we may find that he was condemned because
of his ancient sins in a worse course of life. And respecting the
heavenly bodies we must inquire, that not at the time when the world
was created did the .soul of the sun, or whatever else it ought to be
called, begin to exist, but before that it entered that shining and burn-
ing body. We may hold similar opinions regarding the moon and
stars, that, for the foregoing reasons, they were compelled, unwill-
ingly, to subject themselves to vanity on account of the rewards of
the future; and to do, not their own will, but the will of their Cre-
ator, by whom they were arranged among their different offices." —
f cronies Epistle to Avitus. From these, as well as other passages,
It may be seen how widely Rufinus departed in his translation from
the original,


i


Chap. IX ]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


289


understanding is converted into a soul, or what-
ever else seems to have such a meaning, the
reader must carefully consider and settle for
himself, as these views are not be regarded as
advanced by us in a dogmatic manner, but
simply as opinions, treated in the style of inves-
tigation and discussion. Let the reader take
this also into consideration, that it is observed
with regard to the soul of the Saviour, that of
those things which are written in the Gospel,
some are ascribed to it under the name of soul,
and others under that of spirit. For when it
wishes to indicate any suffering or perturbation
affecting Him, it indicates it under the name of
soul ; as when it says, " Now is My soul trou-
bled ; " ' and, " My soul is sorrowful, even unto
death ; " - and, " No man taketh My souU from
Me, but I lay it down of Myself." ■♦ Into the
hands of His Father He commends not His
soul, but His spirit ; and when He says that the
flesh is weak, He does not say that the soul is
willing, but the spirit : whence it appears that
the soul is something intermediate between the
weak flesh and the willing spirit. |

5. But perhaps some one may meet us with
one of those objections which we have ourselves
warned you of in our statements, and say, '• How
then is there said to be also a soul of God?" |
To which we answer as follows : That as with |
respect to everything corporeal which is spoken
of God, such as fingers, or hands, or arms, or
eyes, or feet, or mouth, we say that these are not I
to be understood as human members, but that j
certain of His powers are indicated by these j
names of members of the body ; so also we are
to suppose that it is something else which is
pointed out by this title — soul of God. And if
it is allowable for us to venture to say anything
more on such a subject, the soul of God may
perhaps be understood to mean the only- begot-
ten Son of God. For as the soul, when im-
planted in the body, moves all things in it, and
exerts its force over everything on which it oper-
ates ; so also the only-begotten Son of God,
who is His Word and Wisdom, stretches and
extends to every power of God, being implanted
in it ; and perhaps to indicate this mystery is
God either called or described in Scripture as a
body. We must, indeed, take into considera-
tion whether it is not perhaps on this account
that the soul of God may be understood to mean
His only-begotten Son, because He Himself
came into this world of affliction, and descended
into this valley of tears, and into this place of
our humiliation ; as He says in the Psalm, " Be-
cause Thou hast humiliated us in the place of


affliction." 5 Finally, I am aware that certain
critics, in explaining the words used in the Gos-
pel by the Saviour, " My soul is sorrowful, even
unto death," have interpreted them of the apos-
tles, whom He termed His soul, as being better
than the rest of His body. For as the multitude
of believers is called His body, they say that
the apostles, as being better than the rest of the
body, ought to be understood to mean His soul.
We have brought forward as we best could
these points regarding the rational soul, as topics
of discussion for our readers, rather than as dog-
matic and well-defined propositions. And with
respect to the souls of animals and other dumb
creatures, let that suffice which we have stated
above in general terms.

CHAP. IX. ON THE WORLD AND THE MOVEMENTS

OF RATIONAL CREATURES, WHETHER GOOD OR
BAD ; AND ON THE CAUSES OF THEM.

I, But let US now return to the order of our
proposed discussion, and behold the commence-
ment of creation, so far as the understanding
can behold the beginning of the creation of God.
In that commencement,'' then, we are to suppose
that God created so great a number of rational
or intellectual creatures (or by whatever name
they are to be called), which we have formerly
termed understandings, as He foresaw would be
sufficient. It is certain that He made them
according to some definite number, predeter-
mined by Himself: for it is not to be imagined,
as some would have it, that creatures have not a
limit, because where there is no limit there can
neither be any comprehension nor any limitation.
Now if this were the case, then certainly created
things could neither be restrained nor adminis-
tered by God. For, naturally, whatever is in-
finite will also be incomprehensible. Moreover,
as Scripture says, " God has arranged all things
in number and measure ; " ^ and therefore num-
ber will be correctly applied to rational creatures
or understandings, that they may be so numerous
as to admit of being arranged, governed, and
controlled by God. But measure will be appro-
priately applied to a material body ; and this
measure, we are to believe, was created by God
such as He knew would be sufficient for the
adorning of the world. These, then, are the


' John xii. 27.

2 Matt. xxvi. 38.

3 Animam.

< John X. 18,


5 Ps. xliv. 19.

6 The original of this passage is found in Justinian's Epistle to
Menas, Patriarch of Constantinople, apnd finem. " In that begin-
ning which is cognisable by the understandmg, God, by His own will,
caused to exist as great a number of intelligent beings as was suffi-
cient; for we must say that the power of God is finite, and not, under
pretence of praising Him, take away His limitation. For if the divme
power be infinite, it must of necessity be unable to understand even
Itself, since that which is naturally illimitable is incapable of being
comprehended. He made things therefore so great as to be able to
apprehend and keep them under His power, and control them by His
providence : so also He prepared matter of such a si2e fToo-auTrjv
vKr)v) as He had the power to ornament."

7 Wisdom xi. 20: " Thou hast ordered all things in measure, and
number, and weight."


290


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II,


things which we are to beUeve were created by
God in the beginning, i.e., before all things.
And this, we think, is indicated even in that be-
ginning which Moses has introduced in terms
somewhat ambiguous, when he says, " In the be-
ginning God made the heaven and tlie earth." '
For it is certain that the firmament is not spoken
of, nor the dry land, but that heaven and earth
from which this present heaven and earth which
we now see afterwards borrowed their names.

2. But since those rational natures, which we
have said above were made in the beginning,
were created when they did not previously exist,
in consequence of this very fact of their non-
existence and commencement of being, are they
necessarily changeable and mutable ; since what-
ever power was in their substance was not in it
by nature, but was the result of the goodness of
their Maker. What they are, therefore, is neither
their own nor endures for ever, but is bestowed
by God. For it did not always exist ; and every-
thing which is a gift may also be taken away, and
disappear. And a reason for removal will consist
in the movements of souls not being conducted
according to right and propriety. For the Crea-
tor gave, as an indulgence to the understandings
created by Him, the power of free and voluntary
action, by which the good that was in them
might become their own, being preserved by
the exertion of their own will ; but slothfulness,
and a dislike of labour in preserving what is
good, and an aversion to and a neglect of better
things, furnished the beginning of a departure
from goodness. But to depart from good is
nothing else than to be made bad. For it is
certain that to want goodness is to be wicked.
Whence it happens that, in proportion as one
falls away from goodness, in the same proportion
does he become involved in wickedness. In
which condition, according to its actions, each
understanding, neglecting goodness either to a
greater or more limited extent, was dragged into
the opposite of good, which undoubtedly is evil.
From which it appears that the Creator of all
things admitted certain seeds and causes of va-
riety and diversity, that He might create variety
and diversity in proportion to the diversity of
understandings, i.e., of rational creatures, which
diversity they must be supposed to have con-
ceived from that cause which we have mentioned
above. And what we mean by variety and di-
versity is what we now wish to explain.

3. Now we term world everything which is
above the heavens, or in the heavens, or upon
the earth, or in those places which are called the
lower regions, or all places whatever that any-
where exist, together with their inhabitants. This
whole, then, is called world. In which world


certain beings are said to be super-celestial, i.e.,
placed in happier abodes, and clothed with
heavenly and resplendent bodies ; and among
these many distinctions are shown to exist, the
apostle, e.g., saying, " That one is the glory of
the sun, another the glory of the moon, another
the glory of the stars ; for one star differeth from
another star in glory." ^ Certain beings are
called earthly, and among them, i.e., among men,
there is no small difference ; for some of them
are Barbarians, others Greeks ; and of the Bar-
barians some are savage and fierce, and others
of a milder disposition. And certain of them
live under laws that have been thoroughly ap-
proved ; others, again, under laws of a more
common or severe kind ; ^ while some, again,
possess customs of an inhuman and savage char-
acter, rather than laws. And certain of them,
from the hour of their birth, are reduced to
humiliation and subjection, and brought up as
slaves, being placed under the dominion either
of masters, or princes, or tyrants. Others, again,
are brought up in a manner more consonant with
freedom and reason : some with sound bodies,
some with bodies diseased from their early years ;
some defective in vision, others in hearing and
speech ; some born in that condition, others de-
prived of the use of their senses immediately
after birth, or at least undergoing such misfortune
on reaching manhood. And why should I repeat
and enumerate all the horrors of human misery,
from which some have been free, and in which
others have been involved, when each one can
weigh and consider them for himself? There
are also certain invisible powers to which earthly
things have been entrusted for administration ;
and amongst them no small difference must be
believed to exist, as is also found to be the case
among men. The Apostle Paul indeed intimates
that there are certain lower powers,"* and that
among them, in like manner, must undoubtedly
be sought a ground of diversity. Regarding
dumb animals, and birds, and those creatures
which live in the waters, it seems superfluous to
inquire ; since it is certain that these ought to be
regarded not as of primary, but of subordinate
rank.

4. Seeing, then, that all things which have
been created are said to have been made through
Christ, and in Christ, as the Apostle Paul most
clearly indicates, when he says, " For in Him
and by Him were all things created, whether
things in heaven or things on earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be thrones, or powers, or
principalides, or dominions ; all things were cre-
ated by Him, and in Him ; " s and as in his


2 I Cor. XV. 41.

3 Vilioribus et asperioribu
•• Inferna.

5 Col. i. 16.


Chap. IX.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


291


Gospel John indicates the same thing, saying,
" In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God : the same
was in the beginning with God : all things were
made by Him ; and without Him was not any-
thing made ; " ' and as in the Psalm also it is
written, " In wisdom hast Thou made them all ; " ^
— seeing, then, Ghrist is, as it were, the Word
and Wisdom, and so also the Righteousness, it
will undoubtedly follow that those things which
were created in the Word and Wisdom are said
to be created also in that righteousness which
is Christ ; that in created things there may ap-
pear to be nothing unrighteous or accidental, but
that all things may be shown to be in conformity
with the law of equity and righteousness. How,
then, so great a variety of things, and so great a
diversity, can be understood to be altogether just
and righteous, I am sure no human power or
language can explain, unless as prostrate suppli-
ants we pray to the Word, and Wisdom, and
Righteousness Himself, who is the only-begotten
Son of God, and who, pouring Himself by His
graces into our senses, may deign to illuminate
what is dark, to lay open what is concealed, and
to reveal what is secret ; if, indeed, we should
be found either to seek, or ask, or knock so
worthily as to deserve to receive when we ask,
or to find when we seek, or to have it opened to
us when we knock. Not relying, then, on our
own powers, but. on the help of that Wisdom
which made all things, and of that Righteousness
which we believe to be in all His creatures, al-
though we are in the meantime unable to declare
it, yet, trusting in His mercy, we shall endeavour
to examine and inquire how that great variety
and diversity in the world may appear to be
consistent with all righteousness and reason. I
mean, of course, merely reason in general ; for
it would be a mark of ignorance either to seek,
or of folly to give, a special reason for each indi-
vidual case.

5. Now, when we say that this world was
established in the variety in which we have above
explained that it was created by God, and when
we say that this God is good, and righteous, and
most just, there are numerous individuals, espe-
cially those who, coming from the school of
Marcion, and Valentinus, and Basilides, have
heard that there are souls of different natures,
who object to us, that it cannot consist with the
justice of God in creating the world to assign to
some of His creatures an abode in the heavens,
and not only to give such a better habitation, but
also to grant them a higher and more honour-
able position ; to favour others with the grant of
principalities ; to bestow powers upon^ some,
dominions on others ; to confer upon some the


' John i. I, 2.
2 Ps. civ. 24.


most honourable seats in the celestial tribunals ;
to enable some to shine with more resplendent
glory, and to glitter with a starry splendour ; to
give to some the glory of the sun, to others
the glory of the moon, to others the glory of the
stars ; to cause one star to differ from another
star in glory. And, to speak once for all, and
briefly, if the Creator God wants neither the will
to undertake nor the power to complete a good
and perfect work, what reason can there be that,
in the creation of rational natures, i.e., of beings
of whose existence He Himself is the cause. He
should make some of higher rank, and others of
second, or third, or of many lower and inferior
degrees? In the next place, they object to us,
with regard to terrestrial beings, that a happier
lot by birth is the case with some rather than
with others ; as one man, e.g., is begotten of
Abraham, and born of the promise ; another,
too, of Isaac and Rebekah, and who, while still
in the womb, supplants his brother, and is said
to be loved by God before he is born. Nay, this
very circumstance, — especially that one man is
born among the Hebrews, with whom he finds
instruction in the divine law ; another among
the Greeks, themselves also wise, and men of
no small learning ; and then another amongst
the Ethiopians, who are accustomed to feed on
human flesh ; or amongst the Scythians, with
whom parricide is an act sanctioned b)' law ; or
amongst the people of Taurus, where strangers
are offered in sacrifice, — is a ground of strong
objection. Their argument accordingly is this :
If there be this great diversity of circumstances,
and this diverse and varying condition by birth,
in which the faculty of free-will has no scope
(for no one chooses for himself either where, or
with whom, or in what condition he is born) ; if,
then, this is not caused by the difference in the
nature of souls, i.e., that a soul of an evil nature
is destined for a wicked nation, and a good soul
for a righteous nation, what other conclusion re-
mains than that these things must be supposed
to be regulated by accident and chance ? And
if that be admitted, then it will be no longer
believed that the world was made . by God, or
administered by His providence ; and as a con-
sequence, a judgment of God upon the deeds
of each individual will appear a thing not to be
looked for. In which matter, indeed, what is
clearly the truth of things is the privilege of Him
alone to know who searches all things, even the
deep things of God.

6. We, however, although but men, not to
nourish the insolence of . the heretics by our
silence, will return to their objections such an-
swers as occur to us, so far as our abilities enable
us. We have frequently shown, by those dec-
larations which we were able to produce from
the holy Scriptures, that God, the Creator of all


2g:


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


things, is good, and just, and all-powerful. When
He in the beginning created those beings which
He desired to create, i.e., rational natures. He
had no other reason for creating them than on
account of Himself, i.e.. His own goodness. As
He Himself, then, was the cause of the existence
of those things which were to be created, in
whom there was neither any variation nor change,
nor want of power. He created all whom He
made equal and alike, because there was in Him-
self no reason for producing variety and diversity.
But since those rational creatures themselves, as
we have frequently shown, and will yet show in
the proper place, were endowed with the power
of free-will, this freedom of will incited each one
either to progress by imitation of God, or re-
duced him to failure through negligence. And
this, as we have already stated, is the cause of
the diversity among rational creatures, deriving
its origin not from the will or judgment of the
Creator, but from the freedom of the individual
will. Now God, who deemed it just to arrange j
His creatures according to their merit, brought
down these different understandings into the
harmony of one world, that He might adorn, as
it were, one dwelling, in which there ought to be
not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of j
wood and clay (and some indeed to honour, and j
others to dishonour), with those different vessels,
or souls, or understandings. And these are the |
causes, in my opinion, why that world .presents j
the aspect of diversity, while Divine Providence
continues to regulate each individual according !
to the variety of his movements, or of his feel- I
ings and purpose. On which account the Creator j
will neither appear to be unjust in distributing
(for the causes already mentioned) to every one
according to his merits ; nor will the happiness
or unhappiness of each one's birth, or whatever
be the condition that falls to his lot, be deemed
accidental ; nor will different creators, or souls
of different natures, be believed to exist.

7. But even holy Scripture does not appear to
me to be altogether silent on the nature of this
secret, as when the Apostle Paul, in discussing
the case of Jacob and Esau, says : " For the
children being not yet born, neither having done
any good or evil, that the purpose of God ac-
cording to election might stand, not of works,
but of Him who calleth, it was said, The elder
shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated." ' And
after that, he answers himself, and says, " What
shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness
with God?" And that he might furnish us with
an opportunity of inquiring into these matters,
and of ascertaining how these things do not hap-
pen without a reason, he answers himself, and


says, " God forbid." ^ For the same question, as
it seems to me, which is raised concerning Jacob
and Esau, may be raised regarding all celestial
and terrestrial creatures, and even those of the
lower world as well. And in like manner it
seems to me, that as he there says, "The chil-
dren being not yet born, neither having done
any good or evil," so it might also be said of all
other things, " When they were not yet " cre-
ated, " neither had yet done any good or evil,
that the decree of God according to election
may stand," that (as certain think) some things
on the one hand were created heavenly, some on
the other earthly, and others, again, beneath the
earth, " not of works " (as they think), " but of
Him who calleth," what shall we say then, if
these things are so? "Is there unrighteousness
with God? God forbid." As, therefore, when
the Scriptures are carefully examined regarding
Jacob and Esau, it is not found to be unright-
eousness with God that it should be said, before
they were born, or had done anything in this
life, " the elder shall serve the younger ; " and
as it is found not to be unrighteousness that even
in the womb Jacob supplanted his brother, if we
feel that he was worthily beloved by God, ac-
cording to the deserts of his previous life, so as
to deserve to be preferred before his brother ; so
also is it with regard to heavenly creatures, if we
notice that diversity was not the original condi-
tion of the creature, but that, owing to causes
that have previously existed, a different office is
prepared by the Creator for each one in propor-
tion to the degree of his merit, on this ground,
indeed, that each one, in respect of having been
created by God an understanding, or a rational
spirit, has, according to the movements of his
mind and the feelings of his soul, gained for
himself a greater or less amount of merit, and
has become either an object of love to God, or
else one of dislike to Him ; while, nevertheless,
some of those who are possessed of greater merit
are ordained to suffer with others for the adorn-
ing of the state of the world, and for the dis-
charge of duty to creatures of a lower grade, in
order that by this means they themselves may be
participators in the endurance of the Creator,
according to the words of the apostle : " For
the creature was made subject to vanity, not will-
ingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected
the same in hope." ^ Keeping in view, then, the
sentiment expressed by the apostle, when, speak-
ing of the birth of Esau and Jacob, he says, " Is
there unrighteousness with God ? God forbid,"
I think it right that this same sentiment should
be carefully applied to the case of all other


2 The text runs, " Respondet sibi ipse, et ait," on which Rujeus
remarks that the sentence is incomplete, and that "absit" probably
should be supplied. This conjecture has been adopted in the transla-
tion.

3 Rom. viii. 20, 21,


Chap. X.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


293


creatures, because, as we formerly remarked, the
righteousness of the Creator ought to appear in
everything. And this, it appears to me, will be
seen more cleady at last, if each one, whether
of celestial or terrestrial or infernal beings, be
said to have the causes of his diversity in him-
self, and antecedent to his bodily birth. For all
things were created by the Word of God, and
by His Wisdom, and were set in order by His
Justice. And by the grace of His compassion
He provides for all men, and encourages all to
the use of whatever remedies may lead to their
cure, and incites them to salvation.

8. As, then, there is no doubt that at the day
of judgment the good will be separated from the
bad, and the just from the unjust, and all by
the sentence of God will be distributed according
to their deserts throughout those places of which
they are worthy, so I am of opinion some such
state of things was formerly the case, as, God
willing, we shall show in what follows. For God
must be believed to do and order all things and
at all times according to His judgment. For the
words which the aposUe uses when he says, " In
a great house there are not only vessels of gold
and silver, but also of wood and of earth, and
some to honour and some to dishonour ; " ' and
those which he adds, saying, " If a man purge
himself, he will be a vessel unto honour, sancti-
fied and meet for the Master's use, unto every
good work," ^ undoubtedly point out this, that
he who shall purge himself when he is in this
life, will be prepared for every good work in that
which is to come ; while he who does not purge
himself will be, according to the amount of his
impurity, a vessel unto dishonour, i.e., unworthy.
It is therefore possible to understand that there
have been also formerly rational vessels, whether
purged or not, i.e., which either purged them-
selves or did not do so, and that consequenUy
every vessel, according to the measure of its
purity or impurity, received a place, or region,
or condition by birth, or an office to discharge,
in this world. All of which, down to the hum-
blest, God providing for and distinguishing by
the power of His wisdom, arranges all things
by His controlling judgment, according to a most
impartial retribution, so far as each one ought to
be assisted or cared for in conformity with his
deserts. In which certainly every principle of
equity is shown, while the inequality of circum-
stances preserves the justice of a retribution
according to merit. But the grounds of the
merits in each individual case are only recog-
nised truly and clearly by God Himself, along
with His only-begotten Word, and His Wisdom,
and the Holy Spirit.


CH.4P. X. ON THE RESURRECTION, AND THE

JUDGMENT, THE FIRE OF HELL, AND PUNISH-
MENTS.

I. But since the discourse has reminded us
of the subjects of a future judgment and of
retribution, and of the punishments of sinners,
according to the threatenings of holy Scripture
and the contents of the Church's teaching —
viz., that when the time of judgment comes,
everlasting fire, and outer darkness, and a prison,
and a furnace, and other punishments of like
nature, have been prepared for sinners — let us
see what our opinions on these points ought to
be.3 But that these subjects may be arrived at
in proper order, it seems to me that we ought
first to consider the nature of the resurrection,
that we may know what that (body) is which
shall come either to punishment, or to rest, or
to happiness ; which question in other treatises
which we have composed regarding the resur-
rection we have discussed at greater length, and
have shown what our opinions were regarding it.
But now, also, for the sake of logical order in
our treatise, there will be no absurdity in re-
stating a few points from such works, especially
since some take offence at the creed of the
Church, as if our belief in the resurrection were
foolish, and altogether devoid of sense ; and
these are principally heretics, who, I think, are
to be answered in the following manner. If
they also admit that there is a resurrection of
the dead, let them answer us this. What is that
which died ? Was it not a body ? It is of the
body, then, that there will be a resurrection.
Let them next tell us if they think that we are
i to make use of bodies or not. I think that
when the Apostle Paul says, that " it is sown a
natural body, it will arise a spiritual body," ■* they
cannot deny that it is a body which arises, or
that in the resurrection we are to make use of
bodies. What then? If it is certain that we
are to make use of bodies, and if the bodies
which have fallen are declared to rise again (for
only that which before has fallen can be properly
said to rise again), it can be a matter of doubt
to no one that they rise again, in order that we
may be clothed with them a second time at the
resurrection. The one thing is closely connected
with the other. For if bodies rise again, they
undoubtedly rise to be coverings for us ; and if
it is necessary for us to be invested with bodies,
as it is certainly necessary, we ought to be in-
vested with no other than our own. But if it is
true that these rise again, and that they arise
" spiritual " bodies, there can be no doubt that
they are said to rise from the dead, after casting
away corruption and laying aside mortality ;


2 Tim. ii.
2 Tim. ii.


3 [Elucidation I,


natural, animale (4(ux"">»').


294


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


otherwise it will appear vain and superfluous for
any one to arise from the dead in order to die a
second time. And this, finally, may be more
distinctly comprehended thus, if one carefully
consider what are the qualities of an animal ■
body, which, when sown into the earth, recovers :
the qualities of a spiritual body. For it is out
of the animal body that the very power and
grace of the resurrection educe the spiritual
body, when it transmutes it from a condition of
indignity to one of glory.

2. Since the heretics, however, think them-
selves persons of great learning and wisdom, we
shall ask them if every body has a form of some
kind, i.e., is fashioned according to some shape.
And if they shall say that a body is that which
is fashioned according to no shape, they will
show themselves to be the most ignorant and
foolish of mankind. For no one will deny this,
save him who is altogether without any learning.
But if, as a matter of course, they say that every
body is certainly fashioned according to some
definite shape, we shall ask them if they can
point out and describe to us the shape of a
spiritual body ; a thing which they can by no
means do. We shall ask them, moreover, about
the differences of those who rise again. How will
they show that statement to be true, that there
is " one flesh of birds, another of fishes ; bodies
celestial, and bodies terrestrial ; that the glory
of the celestial is one, and the glory of the ter-
restrial another ; that one is the glory of the sun,
another the glory of the moon, another the glory
of the stars ; that one star differeth from another
star in glory ; and that so is the resurrection of
the dead ? " ' According to that gradation, then,
which exists among heavenly bodies, let them
show to us the differences in the glory of those
who rise again ; and if they have endeavoured
by any means to devise a principle that may be
in accordance with the differences in heavenly
bodies, we shall ask them to assign the differ-
ences in the resurrection by a comparison of
earthly bodies. Our understanding of the pas-
sage indeed is, that the apostle, wishing to de-
scribe the great difference among those who rise
again in glory, i.e., of the saints, borrowed a
comparison from the heavenly bodies, saying,
" One is the glory of the sun, another the glory
of the moon, another the glory of the stars."
And wishing again to teach us the differences
among those who shall come to the resurrection,
without having purged themselves in this life,
i.e., sinners, he borrowed an illustration from
earthly things, saying, "There is one flesh of
birds, another of fishes." For heavenly things
are worthily compared to the saints, and earthly
things to sinners. These statements are made


Cor. XV. 39-42.


in reply to those who deny the resurrection of
the dead, i.e., the resurrection of bodies.

3. We now turn our attention to some of our
own (believers), who, either from feebleness of
intellect or want of proper instruction, adopt a
very low and abject view of the resurrection of
the body. We ask these persons in what man-
ner they understand that an animal body is to
be changed by the grace of the resurrection, and
to become a spiritual one ; and how that which
is sown in weakness will arise in power ; how
that which is planted in dishonour will arise in
glory ; and that which was sown in corruption,
will be changed to a state of incorruption. Be-
cause if they believe the apostle, that a body
which arises in glory, and power, and incorrup-
tibility, has already become spiritual, it appears
absurd and contrary to his meaning to say that
it can again be entangled with the passions of
flesh and blood, seeing the apostle manifestly
declares that " flesh and blood shall not inherit
the kingdom of God, nor shall corruption inherit
incorruption." But how do they understand
the declaration of the apostle, " We shall all be
changed?" This transformation certainly is to
be looked for, according to the order which we
have taught above ; and in it, undoubtedly, it
becomes us to hope for something worthy of
divine grace ; and this we believe will take place
in the order in which the apostle describes the
sowing in the ground of a " bare grain of corn,
or of any other fruit," to which " God gives a
body as it pleases Him," as soon as the grain of
corn is dead. For in the same way also our
bodies are to be supposed to fall into the earth
I like a grain ; and (that germ being implanted in
them which contains the bodily substance) al-
though the bodies die, and become corrupted,
and are scattered abroad, yet by the word of
God, that very germ which is always safe in
the substance of the body, raises them from the
earth, and restores and repairs them, as the
power which is in the grain of wheat, after its
corruption and death, repairs and restores the
grain into a body having stalk and ear. And so
also to those who shall deserve to obtain an in-
heritance in the kingdom of heaven, that germ
of the body's restoration, which we have before
mentioned, by God's command restores out of
the earthly and animal body a spiritual one,
capable of inhabiting the heavens ; while to each
one of those who may be of inferior merit, or of
more abject condition, or even the lowest in the
scale, and altogether thrust aside, there is yet
given, in proportion to the dignity of his life
and soul, a glory and dignity of body, — never-
theless in such a way, that even the body which
rises again of those who are to be destined to
everlasting fire or to severe punishments, is by the
very change of the resurrection so incorruptible,


Chap. X.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


295


that it cannot be corrupted and dissolved even
by severe punishments. If, then, such be the
quahties of that body which will arise from the
dead, let us now see what is the meaning of
the threatening of eternal fire.

4. We find in the prophet Isaiah, that the fire
with which each one is punished is described as
his own ; for he says, " Walk in the light of your
own fire, and in the flame which ye have kin-
dled." ' By these words it seems to be indi-
cated that every sinner kindles for himself the
flame of his own fire, and is not plunged into
some fire which has been already kindled by
another, or was in existence before himself. Of
this fire the fuel and food are our sins, which are
called by the Apostle Paul wood, and hay, and
stubble."^ And I think that, as abundance of
food, and provisions of a contrary kind and
amount, breed fevers in the body, and fevers,
too, of different sorts and duration, according to
the proportion in which the collected poison ^
supplies material and fuel for disease (the qual-
ity of this material, gathered together from dif-
ferent poisons, proving the causes either of a
more acute or more lingering disease) ; so, when
the soul has gathered together a multitude of
evil works, and an abundance of sins against
itself, at a suitable time all that assembly of
evils boils up to punishment, and is set on fire
to chastisements ; when the mind itself, or con-
science, receiving by divine power into the mem-
ory all those things of which it had stamped on
itself certain signs and forms at the moment of
sinning, will see a kind of history, as it were,
of all the foul, and shameful, and unholy deeds
which it has done, exposed before its eyes : then
is the conscience itself harassed, and, pierced by
its own goads, becomes an accuser and a witness
against itself. And this, I think, was the opinion
of the Apostle Paul himself, when he said, "Their
thoughts mutually accusing or excusing them in
the day when God will judge the secrets of men
by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel."'*
I'rom which it is understood that around the
substance of the soul certain tortures are pro-
duced by the hurtful affections of sins them-
selves.

5. And that the understanding of this matter
may not appear very difficult, we may draw some
considerations from the evil effects of those pas-
sions which are wont to befall some souls, as
when a soul is consumed by the fire of love, or
wasted away by zeal or envy, or when the passion
of anger is kindled, or one is consumed by the
greatness of his madness or his sorrow ; on which
occasions some, finding; the excess of these evils


Isa. 1. II.
I Cor. iii. 12.
Intemperies.
Rora. ii. 15, 16.


unbearable, have deemed it more tolerable to
submit to death than to endure perpetually tor-
ture of such a kind. You will ask indeed whether,
in the case of those who have been entangled in
the evils arising from those vices above enu-
merated, and who, while existing in this life,
have been unable to procure any amelioration
for themselves, and have in this condition de-
parted from the world, it be sufficient in the way
of punishment that they be tortured by the
remaining in them of these hurtful affections,
i.e., of the anger, or of the fury, or of the mad-
ness, or of the sorrow, whose fatal poison was in
this life lessened by no healing medicine ; or
whether, these affections being changed, they
will be subjected to the pains of a general pun-
ishment. Now I am of opinion that another
species of punishment may be understood to
exist ; because, as we feel that when the limbs
of the body are loosened and torn away from
their mutual supports, there is produced pain of
a most excruciating kind, so, when the soul shall
be found to be beyond the order, and connec-
tion, and harmony in which it was created by
God for the purposes of good and useful action
and observation, and not to harmonize with itself
in the connection of its rational movements, it
must be deemed to bear the chastisement and
torture of its own dissension, and to feel the
punishments of its own disordered condition.
And when this dissolution and rending asunder of
soul shall have been tested by the application
of fire, a solidification undoubtedly into a firmer
structure will take place, and a restoration be
effected.

6. There are also many other things which
escape our notice, and are known to Him alone
who is the physician of our souls. For if, on
account of those bad effects which we bring
upon ourselves by eating and drinking, we deem
it necessary for the health of the body to make
use of some unpleasant and painful drug, some-
times even, if the nature of the disease demand,
requiring the severe process of the amputating
knife ; and if the virulence of the disease shall
transcend even these remedies, the evil has at
last to be burned out by fire ; how much more
is it to be understood that God our Physician,
desiring to remove the defects of our souls, which
they had contracted from their different sins and
crimes, should employ penal measures of this
sort, and should apply even, in addition, the
punishment of fire to those who have lost their
soundness of mind ! Pictures of this method of
procedure are found also in the holy Scriptures.
In the book of Deuteronomy, the divine word
threatens sinners with the punishments of fevers,
and colds, and jaundice,5 and with the pains of

5 Aurigine [aurugine]. Deut. xxviii.


296


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


feebleness of vision, and alienation of mind,
and paralysis, and blindness, and weakness of
the reins. If any one, then, at his leisure gather
together out of the whole of Scripture all the
enumerations of diseases which in the threaten-
ings addressed to sinners are called by the names
of bodily maladies, he will find tJiat either the
vices of souls, or their punishments, are figura-
tively indicated by them. To understand now,
that in the same way in which physicians apply
remedies to the sick, in order that by careful
treatment they may recover their health, God so
deals towards those who have lapsed and fallen
into sin, is proved by this, that the cup of God's
fury is ordered, through the agency of the prophet
Jeremiah,' to be offered to all nations, that they
may drink it, and be in a state of madness, and
vomit it forth. In doing which, He threatens
them, saying. That if any one refuse to drink, he
shall not be cleansed.- By which certainly it is
understood that the fury of God's vengeance
is profitable for the purgation of souls. That
the punishment, also, which is said to be applied
by fire, is understood to be applied with the
object of healing, is taught by Isaiah, who speaks
thus of Israel : " The Lord will wash away the
filth of the sons or daughters of Zion, and shall
l)urge away the blood from the midst of them
by the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of burn-
ing." ^ Of the Chaldeans he thus speaks : "Thou
hast the coals of fire ; sit upon them : they will
be to thee a help." ^ And in other passages he
says, "The Lord will sanctify in a burning fire ; "5
and in the prophecies of Malachi he says, " The
Lord sitting will blow, and purify, and will pour
forth the cleansed sons of Judah."*"

7. But that fate also which is mentioned in

the Gospels as overtaking unfaithful stewards,

who, it is said, are to be divided, and a portion

of them placed along with unbelievers, as if that

portion which is not their own were to be sent

elsewhere, undoubtedly indicates some kind of

punishment on those whose spirit, as it seems to

me, is shown to be separated from the soul. For

if this Spirit is of divine nature, i.e., is understood

to be a Holy Spirit, we shall understand this to

\ be said of the gift of the Holy Spirit : that when,

I whether by baptism, or by the grace of the Spirit,

; the word of wisdom, or the word of knowledge,

/ or of any other gift, has been bestowed upon a

/ man, and not rightly administered, i.e., either

I buried in the earth or tied up in a napkin, the

gift of the Spirit will certainly be withdrawn from

his soul, and the other portion which remains,

that is, the substance of the soul, will be assigned


' Cf. Jer. XXV. 15, 16.

2 Cf. Jer XXV. 28, 29.

3 Isa. iv. 4.

* Isa. xlvii. 14, 15; vi'd. note, chap. v. § 3 [p 280, supra. S.].

5 Isa. X. 17, cf. Ixvi. 16.

6 Cf. Mai. iii. 3.


its place with unbelievers, being divided and
separated from that Spirit with whom, by joining
itself to the Lord, it ought to have been one
spirit. Now, if this is not to be understood
of the Spirit of God, but of the nature of the
soul itself, that will be called its better part
which was made in the image and likeness of
God ; whereas the other part, that which after-
wards, through its fall by the exercise of free-
will, was assumed contrary to the nature of its
original condition of purity, — this part, as being
the friend and beloved of matter, is punished
with the fate of unbelievers. There is also a
third sense in which that separation may be un-
derstood, this viz., that as each believer, although
the humblest in the Church, is said to be attended
by an angel, who is declared by the Saviour al-
ways to behold the face of God the Father, and
as this angel was certainly one with the object
of his guardianship ; so, if the latter is rendered
unworthy by his want of obedience, the angel of
God is said to be taken from him, and then that
part of him — the part, viz., which belongs to his
human nature — being rent away from the divine
part, is assigned a place along with unbelievers,
because it has not faithfully observed the admo-
nitions of the angel allotted it by God.

8. But the outer darkness, in my judgment, is
to be understood not so much of some dark
atmosphere without any light, as of those per-
sons who, being plunged in the darkness of pro-
found ignorance, have been placed beyond the
reach of any light of the understanding. We
must see, also, lest this perhaps should be the
meaning of the expression, that as the saints will
receive those bodies in which they have lived in
holiness and purity in the habitations of this life,
bright and glorious after the resurrection, so the
wicked also, who in this life have loved the dark-
ness of error and the night of ignorance, may be
clothed with dark and black bodies after the
resurrection, that the very mist of ignorance
which had in this life taken possession of their
minds within them, may appear in the future
as the external covering of the body. Similarjs
the view to be entertained regarding the prison.
Let these remarks, which have been made as
brief as possible, that the order of our discourse
in the meantime might be preserved, suffice for
the present occasion.

CHAP. XI. ON COUNTER PR0MI.SES.7

I. Let us now briefly see what views we are
to form regarding promises.

It is certain that there is no Hving thing which
can be altogether inactive and immoveable, but
delights in motion of every kind, and in per-
petual activity and volition ; and this nature, I


Repromissionibus.


Chap. XL]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


297


think it evident, is in all living things. Much
more, then, must a rational animal, i.e., the na-
ture of man, be in perpetual movement and ac-
tivity. If, indeed, he is forgetful of himself, and
ignorant of what becomes him, all his efforts are
directed to serve the uses of the body, and in all his
movements he is occupied with his own pleasures
and bodily lusts ; but if he be one who studies
to care or provide for the general good, then,
either by consulting for the benefit of the state
or by obeying the magistrates, he exerts himself
for that, whatever it is, which may seem certainly
to promote the public advantage. And if now
any one be of such a nature as to understand
that there is something better than those things
which seem to be corporeal, and so bestow his
labour upon wisdom and science, then he will im-
doubtedly direct all his attention towards pursuits
of that kind, that he may, by inquiring into the
truth, ascertain the causes and reason of things.
As therefore, in this life, one man deems it the
highest good to enjoy bodily pleasures, another
to consult for the benefit of the community, a
third to devote attention to study and learning ;
so let us inquire whether in that life which is
the true one (which is said to be hidden with
Christ in Ciod, i.e., in that eternal life), there j
will be for us some such order and condition of 1
existence.

2. Certain persons, then, refusing the labour j
of thinking, and adopting a superficial view ofj
the letter of the law, and yielding rather in some !
measure to the indulgence of their own desires !
and lusts, being disciples of the letter alone, are '
of opinion that the fulfilment of the promises of
the future are to be looked for in bodily pleasure
and luxury ; and therefore they especially desire
to have again, after the resurrection, such bodily
structures ' as may never be without the power
of eating, and drinking, and performing all the
functions of flesh and blood, not following the
opinion of the Apostle Paul regarding the resur-
rection of a spiritual body. And consequently
they say, that after the resurrection there will be
marriages, and the begetting of children, imagin-
ing to themselves that the earthly city of Jerusalem
is to be rebuilt, its foundations laid in precious
stones, and its walls constructed of jasper, and
its battlements of crystal ; that it is to have a
wall composed of many precious stones, as jas-
per, and sapphire, and chalcedony, and emer-
ald, and sardonyx, and onyx, and chrysolite, and
chrysoprase, and jacinth, and amethyst. More-
over, they think that the natives of other coun-
tries are to be given them as the ministers of
their pleasures, whom they are to employ either
as tillers of the field or builders of walls, and by
whom their ruined and fallen city is again to be


raised up ; and they think that they are to re-
ceive the wealth of the nations to live on, and
that they will have control over their riches ;
that even the camels of Midian and Kedar will
come, and bring to them gold, and incense, and
precious stones. And these views they think to
establish on the authority of the prophets by
those promises which are written regarding Jeru-
salem ; and by those passages also where it is
said, that they who serve the Lord shall eat and
drink, but that sinners shall hunger and thirst ;
that the righteous shall be joyful, but that sorrow
shall possess the wicked. And from the New
Testament also they quote the saying of the
Saviour, in which He makes a promise to His
disciples concerning the joy of wine, saying,
"Henceforth I shall not drink of this cup, until I
drink it with you new in My Father's kingdom."^
They add, moreover, that declaration, in which
the Saviour calls those blessed who now hunger
and thirst,^ promising them that they shall be
satisfied ; and many other scriptural illustrations
are adduced by them, the meaning of which they
do not perceive is to be taken figuratively. Then,
again, agreeably to the form of things in this life,
and according to the gradations of the dignities
or ranks in this world, or the greatness of their
powers, they think they are to be kings and
princes, like those earthly monarchs who now
exist ; chiefly, as it appears, on account of that
expression in the Gospel : " Have thou power
over five cities." •* And to speak shortly, accord-
ing to the manner of things in this life in all
similar matters, do they desire the fulfilment of
all things looked for in the promises, viz., that
what now is should exist again. Such are the
views of those who, while believing in Christ,
understand the divine Scriptures in a sort of
Jewish sense, drawing from them nothing worthy
of the divine promises.

3. Those, however, who receive the represen-
tations of Scripture according to the under-
standing of the apostles, entertain the hope that
the saints will eat indeed, but that it will be the
bread of life, which may nourish the soul with
the food of truth and wisdom, and enlighten the
mind, and cause it to drink from the cup of di-
vine wisdom, according to the declaration of
holy Scripture : " Wisdom has prepared her table,
she has killed her beasts, she has mingled her
wine in her cup, and she cries with a loud voice,
Come to me, eat the bread which I have pre-
pared for you, and drink the wine wliich I have
mingled." 5 By this food of wisdom, the under-
standing, being nourished to an entire and per-
fect condition like that in which man was made at


2 Matt. xxvi. 29.

3 Matt. V. 6.

•♦ Cf. Luke xix. 19 anj 17.
5 Cf. Prov. ix. 1-5.


298


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


the beginning, is restored to the image and hke-
ness of God ; so that, aUhough an individual may
depart from this hfe less perfectly instructed, but
who has done works that are approved of,' he
will be capable of receiving instruction in that
Jerusalem, the city of the saints, i.e., he will be
educated and moulded, and made a living stone,
a stone elect and precious, because he has under-
gone with firmness and constancy the struggles
of life and the trials of piety ; and will there
come to a truer and clearer knowledge of that
which here has been already predicted, viz.,
that " man shall not live by bread alone, but by
every word which proceedeth from the mouth of
God." ^ And they also are to be understood to
be the princes and rulers who both govern those
of lower rank, and instruct them, and teach
them, and train them to divine things.

4. But if these views should not appear to
fill the minds of those who hope for such results
with a becoming desire, let us go back a little,
and, irrespective of the natural and innate long-
ing of the mind for the thing itself, let us make
inquiry so that we may be able at last to describe,
as it were, the very forms of the bread of life,
and the quality of that wine, and the peculiar
nature of the principalities, all in conformity
with the spiritual view of things.^ Now, as in
those arts which are usually performed by means
of manual labour, the reason why a thing is done,
or why it is of a special quality, or for a special
purpose, is an object of investigation to the
mind,4 while the actual work itself is unfolded
to view by the agency of the hands ; so, in those
works of God which were created by Him, it is
to be observed that the reason and understand-
ing of those things which we see done by Him
remains undisclosed. And as, when our eye
beholds the products of an artist's labour, the
mind, immechately on perceiving anything of un-
usual artistic excellence, burns to know of what
nature it is, or how it was formed, or to what
purposes it was fashioned ; so, in a much greater
degree, and in one that is beyond all compari-
son, does the mind burn with an inexpressible
desire to know the reason of those things which
we see done by God. This desire, this longing,
we believe to be unquestionably implanted within
us by God ; and as the eye naturally seeks the
light and vision, and our body naturally desires
food and drink, so our mind is possessed with
a becoming and natural desire to become ac-
quainted with the truth of God and the causes
of things. Now we have received this desire
from God, not in order that it should never be


' Opera probabilia.

2 Deut. viii. 3.

3 The passage is somewhat obscure, but the rendering in the text


gratified or be capable of gratification ; other-
wise the love of truth would appear to have been
implanted by God into our minds to no purpose,
if it were never to have an opportunity of satis-
faction. Whence also, even in this life, those
who devote themselves with great labour to the
pursuits of piety and religion, although obtaining
only some small fragments from the numerous
and immense treasures of divine knowledge, yet,
by the very circumstance that their mind and
soul is engaged in these pursuits, and that in the
eagerness of their desire they outstrip themselves,
do they derive much advantage ; and, because
their minds are directed to the study and love
of the investigation of truth, are they made fitter
for receiving the instruction that is to come ; as
if, when one would paint an image, he were first
with a light pencil to trace out the oudines of
the coming picture, and prepare marks for the
reception of the features that are to be after-
wards added, this preliminary sketch in outline
is found to prepare the way for the laying on of
the true colours of the painring ; so, in a meas-
ure, an outline and sketch may be traced on the -
tablets of our heart by the pencil of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And therefore perhaps is it said,
" Unto every one that hath shall be given, and
be added." 5 By which it is established, that to
those who possess in this life a kind of outline
of truth and knowledge, shall be added the
beauty of a perfect image in the future.

5. Some such desire, I apprehend, was indi-
cated by him who said, "I am in a strait betwixt
two, having a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far better ; " ^ knowing that when
he should have returned to Christ he would then
know more clearly the reasons of all things which
are done on earth, either respecting man, or the
soul of man, or the mind ; or regarding any other
subject, such as, for instance, what is the Spirit
that operates, what also is the vital spirit, or
what is the grace of the Holy Spirit that is given
to believers. Then also will he understand what
Israel appears to be, or what is meant by the
diversity of nations ; what the twelve tribes of
Israel mean, and what the individual people
of each tribe. Then, too, will he understand
the reason of the priests and Levites, and of the
different priestly orders, the type of which was
in Moses, and also what is the true meaning of
the jubilees, and of the weeks of years with God,
He will see also the reasons for the festival days,
and holy days, and for all the sacrifices and puri-
fications. He will perceive also the reason of
the purgation from leprosy, and what the differ-
ent kinds of leprosy are, and the reason of the
purgation of those who lose their seed. He will


s Luke xix. 26; cf. Matt. xxv. 29.
6 Phil. i. 23.


Chap. XL]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


299


come to know, moreover, what are the good in-
fluences/ and their greatness, and their quahties ;
and those too which are of a contrary kind, and
what the affection of the former, and what the
strife-causing emulation of the latter is towards
men. He will behold also the nature of the
soul, and the diversity of animals (whether of
those which live in the water, or of birds, or of
wild beasts), and why each of the genera is sub-
divided into so many species ; and what intention
of the Creator, or what purpose of His wisdom,
is concealed in each individual thing. He will
become acquainted, too, with the reason why
certain properties are found associated with cer-
tain roots or herbs, and why, on the other hand,
evil effects are averted by other herbs and roots.
He will know, moreover, the nature of the apos-
tate angels, and the reason why they have power
to flatter in some things those who do not despise
them with the whole power of faith, and why they
exist for the purpose of deceiving and leading
men astray. He will learn, too, the judgment
of Divine Providence on each individual thing ;
and that, of those events which happen to men,
none occur by accident or chance, but in accord-
ance with a plan so carefully considered, and so
stupendous, that it does not overlook even the
number of the hairs of the heads, not merely of
the saints, but perhaps of all human beings, and
the plan of which providential government ex-
tends even to caring for the sale of two sparrows
for a denarius, whether sparrows there be under-
stood figuratively or literally. Now indeed this
l^rovidential government is still a subject of in-
vestigation, but then it will be fully manifested.
From all which we are to suppose, that mean-
while not a little time may pass by until the
reason of those things only which are upon the
earth be pointed out to the worthy and deserv-
ing after their departure from life, that by the
knowledge of all these things, and by the grace
of full knowledge, they may enjoy an unspeakable
joy. Then, if that atmosphere which is between
heaven and earth is not devoid of inhabitants,
and those of a rational kind, as the apostle says,
'■ Wherein in times past ye walked according to
the course of this world, according to the prince
of the power of the air, the spirit who now work-
cth in the children of disobedience."^ And
again he says, " We shall be caught up in the
clouds to meet Christ in the air, and so shall we
ever be with the Lord." ^

6. We are therefore to suppose that the saints
will remain there until they recognise the two-
fold mode of government in those things which
are performed in the air. And when I say " two-


' Virtutes.

2 Eph. ii. 2. There is an evident omission of some words in the
text, such as, " They will enter into it," etc.
■5 I Thess. iv. 17.


fold mode," I mean this : When we were upon
earth, we saw either animals or trees, and beheld
the differences among them, and also the very
great diversity among men ; but although we
saw these things, we did not understand the rea-
son of them ; and this only was suggested to us
from the visible diversity, that we should exam-
ine and inquire upon what principle these things
were either created or diversely arranged. And
a zeal or desire for knowledge of this kind being
conceived by us on earth, the full understanding
and comprehension of it will be granted after
death, if indeed the result should follow ac-
cording to our expectations. When, therefore,
we shall have fully comprehended its nature, we
shall understand in a twofold manner what we saw
on earth. Some such view, then, must we hold
regarding this abode in the air. I think, there-
fore, that all the saints who depart from this life
will remain in some place situated on the earth,
which holy Scripture calls paradise, as in some
place of instruction, and, so to speak, class-room
or school of souls, in which they are to be in-
structed regarding all the things which they had
seen on earth, and are to receive also some in-
formation respecting things that are to follow in
the future, as even when in this life they had
obtained in some degree indications of future
events, although " through a glass darkly," all of
which are revealed more clearly and distinctly
to the saints in their proper time and place. If
any one indeed be pure in heart, and holy in
mind, and more practised in perception, he will,
by making more rapid progress, quickly ascend
to a place in the air, and reach the kingdom of
heaven, through those mansions, so to speak, in
the various places which the Greeks have termed
spheres, i.e., globes, but which holy Scripture
has called heavens ; in each of which he will first
see clearly what is done there, and in the second
place, will discover the reason why things are so
done : and thus he will in order pass through all
gradations, following Him who hath passed into
the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, who said,
" I will that where I am, these may be also." •*
And of this diversity of places He speaks, when
He says, " In My Father's house are many man-
sions." He Himself is every^vhere, and passes
swiftly through all things ; nor are we any longer
to understand Him as existing in those narrow
limits in which He was once confined for our
sakes, i.e., not in that circumscribed body which
He occupied on earth, when dwelling among
men, according to which He might be consid-
ered as enclosed in some one place,

7. When, then, the saints shall have reached
the celestial abodes, they will clearly see the
nature of the stars one by one, and will under-


John xvii. 24.


300


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book II.


stand whether they are endued with Hfe, or their
condition, whatever it is. And they will com-
prehend also the other reasons for the works of
God, which He Himself will reveal to them.
For He will show to them, as to children, the
causes of things and the power of His creation,"
and will explain why that star was placed in that
particular quarter of the sky, and why it was
separated from another by so great an interven-
ing space ; what, e.g., would have been the con-
sequence if it had been nearer or more remote ;
or if that star had been larger than this, how the
totality ot things would not have remained the
same, but all would have been transformed into
a different condition of being. And so, when
they have finished all those matters which are
connected with the stars, and with the heavenly
revolutions, they will come to those which are
not seen, or to those whose names only we have
heard, and to things which are invisible, which
the Apostle Paul has informed us are numerous,
although what they are, or what difference may
exist among them, we cannot even conjecture
by our feeble intellect. And thus the rational
nature, growing by each individual step, not as it
grew in this hfe in flesh, and body, and soul, but
enlarged in understanding and in power of per-


Virtutem suae conditionis. Seine Schbpferkraft (Schnitzer).


ception, is raised as a mind already perfect to
perfect knowledge, no longer at all impeded by
those carnal senses, but increased in intellectual
growth ; and ever gazing purely, and, so to speak,
face to face, on the causes of things, it attains
perfection, firstly, viz., that by which it ascends
to (the truth),^ and secondly, that by which it
abides in it, having problems and the understand-
ing of things, and the causes of events, as the
food on which it may feast. For as in this life
our bodies grow physically to what they are,
through a sufficiency of food in early life supply-
ing the means of increase, but after the due
height has been attained we use food no longer
to grow, but to live, and to be preserved in life
by it ; so also I think that the mind, when it has
attained perfection, eats and avails itself of suit-
able and appropriate food in such a degree, that
nothing ought to be either deficient or super-
fluous. And in all things this food is to be
understood as the contemplation and under-
standing gf God, which is of a measure appro-
priate and suitable to this nature, which was
made and created ; and this measure it is proper
should be observed by every one of those who
are beginning to see God, i.e., to understand
Him through purity of heart.


2 In id : To that state of the soul in which it gazes purely on the
causes of things.


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.

Book hi.


PREFACE OF RUFINUS.


Reader, remember me in your prayers, that
we too may deserve to be made emulators of the
spirit. The two former books on The Principles
I translated not only at your instance, but even
under pressure from you during the days of
Lent ; ' but as you, my devout brother Maca-
rius, were not only living near me during that
time, but had more leisure at your command
than now, so I also worked the harder ; whereas
I have been longer in explaining these two latter
books, seeing you came less frequently from a
distant extremity of the city to urge on my la-
bour. Now if you remember what I warned you
of in my former preface, — that certain persons
would be indignant, if they did not hear that we
spoke some evil of Origen, — that, I imagine,
you have forthwith experienced, has come to
l^ass. But if those demons ^ who excite the
tongues of men to slander were so infuriated by
that work, in which he had not as yet fully un-
veiled their secret proceedings, what, think you,
will be the case in this, in which he will expose
all those dark and hidden ways, by which they
creep into the hearts of men, and deceive weak
and unstable souls ? You will immediately see
all things thrown into confusion, seditions stirred
up, clamours raised throughout the whole city,
and that individual summoned to receive sen-
tence of condemnation who endeavoured to
dispel the diabolical darkness of ignorance by
means of the light of the Gospel lamp.J Let
such things, however, be lightly esteemed by him
who is desirous of being trained in divine learn-
ing, while retaining in its integrity the rule of the
Catholic faith.'t I think it necessary, however.


' Diebus quadragesimae.

2 Dasmones.

3 Evangelicae lucernse lumine diabolicas ignorantije tenebras.

* Salva fidei Catholicse regula. [This remonstrance of Rufinus
deserves candid notice. He reduces the hberties he took with his


to remind you that the principle observed in the
former books has been observed also in these,
viz., not to translate what appeared contrary to
Origen's other opinions, and to our own belief,
but to pass by such passages as being inter-
polated and forged by others. But if he has
appeared to give expression to any novelties
regarding rational creatures (on which subject
the essence of our faith does not depend), for the
sake of discussion and of adding to our knowl-
edge, when perhaps it was necessary for us to
answer in such an order some heretical opinions,
I have not omitted to mention these either in
the present or preceding books, unless when he
wished to repeat in the following books what
he had. already stated in the previous ones, when
I have thought it convenient, for the sake of
brevity, to curtail some of these repetitions.
Should any one, however, peruse these passages
from a desire to enlarge his knowledge, and not
to raise captious objections, he will do better to
have them expounded by persons of skill. For
it is an absurdity to have the fictions of poetry
and the ridiculous plays of comedy s interpreted
by grammarians, and to suppose that without a
master and an interpreter any one is able to learn
those things which are spoken either of God or
of the heavenly virtues, and of the whole uni-
verse of things, in which some deplorable error
either of pagan philosophers or of heretics is
confuted ; and the result of which is, that men
would rather rashly and ignorantly condemn
things that are difificuft and obscure, than ascer-
tain their meaning by diligence and study.


author to two heads: (i) omitting what Origen himself contradicts,
and (2) what was interpolated by those who thus vented their own
heresies under a great name. " To our own belief," may mean what
is contrary to the faith, as reduced to technical formula, at Nic«a:
i.e., Salva regida fidei. Note examples in the parallel columns
following.]

5 Comoediarum ridiculas fabulas.

30'


302


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


TRANSLATED FROM LATIN OF RUFINUS.

CHAP. I. ON THE FREEDOM OF THE WILL.'

I, Some such opinions, we believe, ought to be enter-
tained regarding tlie divine promises, when we direct our
understanding to the contemplation of that eternal and
infinite world, and gaze on its ineffable joy and blessed-
ness. But as the preaching of the Church includes a
belief in a future and just judgment of God, which belief
incites and persuades men to a good and virtuous life,
and to an avoidance of sin by all possible means ; and as
by this it is undoubtedly indicated that it is within our
own power to devote ourselves either to a life that is
worthy of praise, or to one that is worthy of censure, I
therefore deem it necessary to say a few words regarding
the freedom of the will, seeing that this topic has been
treated by very many writers in no mean style. And that
we may ascertain more easily what is the freedom of the
will, let us inquire into the nature of will and of desire.^


2, Of all things which move, some have the cause of
their motion within themselves, others receive it from
without : and all those things only are moved from with-
out which are without life, as stones, and pieces of wood,
and whatever things are of such a nature as to be held
together by the constitution of their matter alone, or of
their bodily substance. s That view must indeed be dis-
missed which would regard the dissolution of bodies by
corruption as motion, for it has no bearing upon our
present purpose. Others, again, have the cause of mo-
tion in themselves, as animals, or trees, and all things
which are held together by natural life or soul ; among
which some think ought to be classed the veins of metals.
Fire, also, is supposed to be the cause of its own motion,
and perhaps also springs of water. And of those things
which have the causes of their motion in themselves,
some are said to be moved out of themselves, others by
themselves. And they so distinguish them, because those
things are moved out of themselves which are aUve in-
deed, but have no soul ; 7 whereas those things which
have a soul are moved by themselves, when a phantasy,^
i.e., a desire or incitement, is presented to them, which
excites them to move towards something. Finally, in
certain things endowed with a soul, there is such a phan-
tasy, i.e., a will or feeling,? as by a kind of natural instinct
calls them forth, and arouses them to orderly and regular
motion ; as we see to be the case with spiders, which are


TRANSLATION FROM THE
GREEK.

CHAP. I. ON THE FREEDOM OF THE

WILL,^ WITH AN EXPLANATION AND
INTERPRETATION OF THOSE STATE-
MENTS OF SCRIPTURE WHICH APPEAR
TO NULLIFY IT.

1. Since in the preaching of the
Church there is included the doctrine
respecting a just judgment of God,
which, when believed to be true, in-
cites those who hear it to live virtu-
ously, and to shun sin by all means,
inasmuch as they manifestly acknowl-
edge that things worthy of praise and
blame are within our own power, come
and let us discuss by themselves a few
points regarding the freedom of the
will — a question of all others most
necessary. And that we may under-
stand what the freedom of the will is,
it is necessary to unfold the conception
of it,-* that this being declared with
precision, the subject may be placed
before us.

2. Of things that move, some have
the cause of their motion within them-
selves ; others, again, are moved only
from without. Now only portable
things are moved from without, such
as pieces of wood, and stones, and all
matter that is held together by their
constitution alone.^ And let that view
be removed from consideration which
calls the flux of bodies motion, since
it is not needed for our present pur-
pose. But animals and plants have
the cause of their motion within them-
selves, and in general whatever is held
together by nature and a soul, to which
class of things they say that metals
also belong. And besides these, fire
too is self-moved, and perhaps also
fountains of water. Now, of those
things which have the cause of their
movement within themselves, some,
they say, are moved out of themselves,
others from themselves : things with-
out Hfe, out of themselves ; animate
things, from themselves. For ani-
mate things are moved from them-
selves, a phantasy '° springing up in


' The whole of this chapter has been preserved in the original Greek, which is literally translated in corresponding portions on each
page, so that the differences between Origen's own words and the amplifications and alterations of the paraphrase of Rufinus may be at
once patent to the reader. ^ Trepi tou nunfouaioy. -3 Natiira ipsius arbitrii voluntatisque. ■» rrji' ivvoi.o.v avToii afaiTTv^ai..

5 Quaecunque hujusmodi sunt, qua: solo habitu materiae sua; vel corporum constant * uwo efews /uonj!.

7 Non tamen animantia sunt. ^ Phantasia. 9 Voluntas vel sensus. '° <j>avTa(riat,


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


303


FROM THE LATIN.


Stirred up in a most orderly manner by a phantasy, i.e.,
a sort of wish and desire for weaving, to undertake the
production of a web, some natural movement undoubt-
edly calling forth the effort to work of this kind. Nor
is this very insect found to possess any other feeling than
the natural desire of weaving ; as in like manner bees also
exhibit a desire to form honeycombs, and to collect, as
they say, aerial honey .2


3. But since a rational animal not only has within itself
these natural movements, but has moreover, to a greater
extent than other animals, the power of reason, by which
it can judge and determine regarding natural movements,
and disapprove and reject some, while approving and
adopting others, so by the judgment of this reason may
the movements of men be governed and directed towards
a commendable life. And from this it follows that, since
the nature of this reason which is in man has within itself
the power of distinguishing between good and evil, and
while distinguishing possesses the faculty of selecting what
it has approved, it may justly be deemed worthy of praise
in choosing what is good, and deserving of censure in
following that which is base or wicked. This indeed
must by no means escape our notice, that in some dumb
animals there is found a more regular movement -♦ than in
others, as in hunting-dogs or war-horses, so that they may
appear to some to be moved by a kind of rational sense.
But we must believe this to be the result not so much of
reason as of some natural instinct,^ largely bestowed for
purposes of that kind. Now, as we had begun to remark,
seeing that such is the nature of a rational animal, some
things may happen to us human beings from without ;
and these, coming in contact with our sense of sight, or
hearing, or any other of our senses, may incite and arouse
us to good movements, or the contrary ; and seeing they
come to us from an external source, it is not within our
own power to prevent their coming. But to determine
and approve what use we ought to make of those things
which thus happen, is the duty of no other than of that
reason within us, i.e., of our own judgment ; by the decis-
ion of which reason we use the incitement, which comes to
us from without for that purpose, which reason approves,
our natural movements being determined by its authority
either to good actions or the reverse.

4. If any one now were to say that those things which
happen to us from an external cause, and call forth our
movements, are of such a nature that it is impossible to
resist them, whether they incite us to good or evil, let the
holder of this opinion turn his attention for a little upon
himself, and carefully inspect the movements of his own


FROM THE GREEK.

them which incites to effort. And
again, in certain animals phantasies
are formed which call forth an effort,
the nature of the phantasy stirring
up the effort in an orderly manner, as
in the spider is formed the phantasy
of weaving ; and the attempt to weave
follows, the nature of its phantasy in-
citing the insect in an orderly manner
to this alone. And besides its phan-
tasial nature, nothing else is believed
to belong to the insect.^ And in the
bee there is formed the phantasy to
produce wax.

3. The rational animal, however,
has, in addidon to its phantasial na-
ture, also reason, which judges the
phantasies, and disapproves of some
and accepts others, in order that the
animal may be led according to
them. Therefore, since there are in
the nature of reason aids towards the
contemplation of virtue and vice, by
following which, after beholding good '
and evil, we select the one and avoid
the other, we are deserving of praise
when we give ourselves to the practice
of virtue, and censurable when we do
the reverse. We must not, however,
be ignorant that the greater part of
the nature assigned to all things is
a varying quantity 5 among animals,
both in a greater and a less degree ;
so that the instinct in hunting-dogs
and in war-horses approaches some-
how, so to speak, to the faculty of
reason. Now, to fall under some one
of those external causes which stir up
within us this phantasy or that, is
confessedly not one of those things
that are dependent upon ourselves ;
but to determine that we shall use the
occurrence in this way or differently,
is the prerogative of nothing else than
of the reason within us, which, as
occasion offers,'' arouses us towards
efforts inciting to what is virtuous and
becoming, or turns us aside to what is
the reverse.

4. But if any one maintain that this
very external cause is of such a nature
that it is impossible to resist it when
it comes in such a way, let him turn
his attention to his own feelings and
movements, (and see) whether there


* <|)iicrecu! (J)ai/Tao-TiK^?. 2 Mella, ut aiiint, aeria congregandi. Rufinus seems to have read, in the original, oepoirAoo-Teii- instead
of KTjpoTrAacTTeri', — an evidence that he followed in general the worst readings (Redepenning). ^ Kal ovS€f'o<; aWov ixtja tijv

<j)ovra<rTiKT)>/ aurou ibvaiv TreTrKTreu/xei-ou Tou ^uiov, * Ordinatior quidem motus. * Troawt. * Incentivo quodam et naturali motu.

7 TTapa TOS a<j)Opixdi.


304


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN


THE GREEK.


mind, unless he has discovered already, that when an
enticement to any desire arises, nothing is accomplished
until the assent of the soul is gained, and the authority
of the mind has granted indulgence to the wicked sugges-
tion ; so that a claim might seem to be made by two
parties on certain probable grounds as to a judge residing
within the tribunals of our heart, in order that, after the
statement of reasons, the decree of execution may pro-
ceed from the judgment of reason.^ For, to take an
illustration : if, to a man who has determined to live con-
tinently and chastely, and to keep himself free from all
pollution with women, a woman should happen to present
herself, inciting and alluring him to act contrary to his
purpose, that woman is not a complete and absolute cause
or necessity of his transgressing,-* since it is in his power,
by remembering his resolution, to bridle the incitements
to lust, and by the stern admonitions of virtue to restrain
the pleasure of the allurement that solicits him ; so that,
all feeling of indulgence being driven away, his determi-
nation may remain firm and enduring. Finally, if to any
men of learning, strengthened by divine training, allure-
ments of that kind present themselves, remembering forth-
with what they are, and calling to mind what has long
been the subject of their meditation and instruction, and
fortifying themselves by the support of a holier doctrine,
they reject and repel all incitement to pleasure, and drive
away opposing lusts by the interposition of the reason
implanted within them.

5. Seeing, then, that these positions are thus established
by a sort of natural evidence, is it not superfluous to
throw back the causes of our actions on those things
which happen to us from without, and thus transfer the
blame from ourselves, on whom it wholly lies ? For this
is to say that we are like pieces of wood, or stones, which
have no motion in themselves, but receive the causes of
their motion from without. Now such an assertion is
neither true nor becoming, and is invented only that the
freedom of the will may be denied ; unless, indeed, we
are to suppose that the freedom of the will consists in
this, that nothing which happens to us from without can
incite us to good or evil. And if any one were to refer
the causes of our faults to the natural disorder '^ of the
body, such a theory is proved to be contrary to the rea-
son of all teaching.9 For, as we see in very many indi-
viduals, that after living unchastely and intemperately,
and after being the captives of luxury and lust, if they
should happen to be aroused by the word of teaching
and instruction to enter upon a better course of life, there
takes place so great a change, that from being luxurious
and wicked men, they are converted into those who are
sober, and most chaste and gentle ; so, again, we see in
the case of those who are quiet and honest, that after
associating with resdess and shameless individuals, their
good morals are corrupted by evil conversation, and they


is not an approval, and assent, and
inclination of the controlling principle
towards some object on account of
some specious arguments.' For, to
take an instance, a woman who has
appeared before a man that has de-
termined to be chaste, and to refrain
from carnal intercourse, and who has
incited him to act contrary to his pur-
pose, is not a perfect ^ cause of annul-
ling his determination. For, being
altogether pleased with the luxury and
allurement of the pleasure, and not
wishing to resist it, or to keep his
purpose, he commits an act of licen-
tiousness. Another man, again (when
the same things have happened to
him who has received more instruc-
tion, and has disciplined himself 5),
encounters, indeed, allurements and
enticements ; but his reason, as being
strengthened to a higher point, and
carefully trained, and confirmed in its
views towards a virtuous course, or
being near to confirmation,^ repels
the incitement, and extinguishes the
desire.

5. Such being the case, to say that
we are moved from without, and to
put away the blame from ourselves, by
declaring that we are like to pieces of
wood and stones, which are dragged
about by those causes that act upon
them from without, is neither true nor
in conformity with reason, but is the
statement of him who wishes to de-
stroy 7 the conception of free-will.
For if we were to ask such an one
what was free-will, he would say that
it consisted in this, that when purpos-
ing to do some thing, no external cause
came inciting to the reverse. But to
blame, on the other hand, the mere
constitution of the body,'° is absurd ;
for the disciplinary reason," taking
hold of those who are most intemper-
ate and savage (if they will follow her
exhortation), effects a transformation,
so that the alteration and change for
the better is most extensive, — the
most licentious men frequently becom-
ing better than those who formerly did
not seem to be such by nature ; and


J Sia Tao-Se Ta^ 7ri.9ai'dTT)Ta!. ^ jtj ^t etiam verisimilibus quibusdam causis intra cordis nostri tribunalia velut judici resident! ex
utraque parte adhiberi videatur assertio, ut causis prius expositis gerendi sententia de rationis judicio proferatur. 3 avToreArj?,
"t Causa ei perfecta et absoluta vel necessitas prajvaricniidi. S rja-KTjxoTi. f iyyv; ye tou at iaL.oHriv.xL yeyev-qixei'oc:. _
7 napaxoLpaTTeif. 8 Naiuralem corporis intemperiem; i//iAr]i' ti?^ KaracTKfvriv, 9 Contra rationem totius eruditionis. In the
Greek. " contra rationem" is expressed by irapa to h'aoye; i<T~< : and the words Aoyov TraiSeuriKou (rendered by Rufinus "totius erudi-
tionis, ' and connected with " contra rationem") belong to the following clause. '° <pi.Kriv ttjc (caraa-Kcuiji'. " \6yo\j irai.&evTi.KOv.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


305


FROM THE LATIN.

become like those whose wickedness is complete.' And
this is the case sometimes with men of mature age, so
that such have lived more chastely in youth than when
more advanced years have enabled them to indulge in a
freer mode of life. The result of our reasoning, there-
fore, is to show that those things which happen to us
from without are not in our own power; but that to
make a good or bad use of those things which do so
happen, by help of that reason which is within us, and
which distinguishes and determines how these things
ought to be used, is within our power.


6. And now, to confirm the deductions of reason by
the authority of Scripture — viz., that it is our own doing
whether we live rightly or not, and that we are not com-
pelled, either by those causes which come to us from
without, or, as some think, by the presence of fate — we
adduce the testimony of the prophet Micah, in these
words : " If it has been announced to thee, O man, what
is good, or what the Lord requires of thee, except that
thou shouldst do justice, and love mercy, and be ready
to walk with the Lord thy God." + Moses also speaks as
follows : " I have placed before thy face the way of life
and the way of death : choose what is good, and walk in
it." 5 Isaiah, moreover, makes this declaration: "If you
are willing, and hear me, ye shall eat the good of the
land. But if you be unwilling, and will not hear me, the
sword shall consume you ; for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken this." ? In the Psalm, too, it is written : " If
My people had heard Me, if Israel had walked in My
ways, I would have humbled her enemies to nothing ; " ^
by which he shows that it was in the power of the people
to hear, and to walk in the ways of God. The Saviour
also saying, " I say unto you. Resist not evil ; " 9 and,
"Whoever shall be angry with his brother, shall be in
danger of the judgment ; " '° and, " Whosoever shall look
upon a woman to lust after her, hath already committed
adultery with her in his heart ; " "^ and in issuing certain
other commands, — conveys no other meaning than this,
that it is in our own power to observe what is com-
manded. And therefore we are rightly rendered liable
to condemnation if we transgress those commandments
which we are able to keep. And hence He Himself also
declares : " Every one who hears my words, and doeth


FROM THE GREEK.

the most savage men passing into such
a state of mildness,- that those persons
who never at any time were so savage
as they were, appear savage in com-
parison, so great a degree of gentle-
ness having been produced within
them. And we see other men, most
steady and respectable, driven from
their state of respectability and steadi-
ness by intercourse with evil customs,
so as to fall into habits of licentious-
ness, often beginning their wickedness
in middle age, and plunging into dis-
order after the period of youth has
passed, which, so far as its nature is
concerned, is unstable. Reason, there-
fore, demonstrates that external events
do not depend on us, but that it is
our own business to use them in this
way or the opposite, having received
reason as a judge and an investigator ^
of the manner in which we ought to
meet those events that come from
without.

6. Now, that it is our business to
live virtuously, and that God asks this
of us, as not being dependent on Him
nor on any other, nor, as some think,
upon fate, but as being our own doing,
the prophet Micah will prove when he
says : " If it has been announced to
thee, O man, what is good, or what
does the Lord require of thee, except
to do justice and to love mercy ?"■♦
Moses also : " I have placed before
thy face the way of life, and the way
of death : choose what is good, and
walk in it."^' Isaiah too : "If you are
willing, and hear me, ye shall eat the
good of the land ; but if ye be unwill-
ing, and will not hear me, the sword
will consume you : for the mouth of
the Lord hath spoken it." 7 And in
the Psalms : " If My people had heard
Me, and Israel had walked in My
ways, I would have humbled their
enemies to nothing, and laid My hand
upon those that afflicted tliem ; " "
showing that it was in the power of
His i)eople to hear and to walk in the
ways of God. And the Saviour also,
when He commands, " But I say unto
you. Resist not evil; "9 and, "Whoso-
ever shall be angry with his brother,
shall be in danger of the judgment ; " '°
and, "Whosoever shall look upon a


' Quibus nihil ad turpitudinem deest. ' rinepoTTiTot. 3 cfeTao-T^f. ■♦ Mic. vi. 8. S Deut. xxx. 15. * Cf. Deut. xxx.
16, cf. 19. 7 Isa. i. 19, 2o. 8 Ps. Ixxxi. 13, 14. 9 Matt. v. 39. 1° Matt. v. 22. " Ps. Ixxxi. 13, 14. " Matt. v. 28.


3o6


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


them, I will show to whom he is like : he is like a wise
man who built his house upon a rock," etc' So also the
declaration : " Whoso heareth these things, and doeth
them not, is like a foolish man, who built his house upon
the sand," etc.^ Even the words addressed to those who
are on His right hand, " Come unto Me, all ye blessed
of My Father," etc. ; " for I was an hungered, and ye
gave Me to eat ; I was thirsty, and ye gave Me drink," s
manifestly show that it depended upon themselves, that
either these should be deserving of praise for doing what
was commanded and receiving what was promised, or
those deserving of censure who either heard or received
the contrary, and to whom it was said, " Depart, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire." Let us observe also, that
the Apostle Paul addresses us as having power over our
own will, and as possessing in ourselves the causes either
of our salvation or of our ruin : " Dost thou despise the
riches of His goodness, and of His patience, and of His
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God
leadeth thee to repentance ? But, according to thy hard-
ness and impenitent heart, thou art treasuring up for thy-
self wrath on the day of judgment and of the revelation
of the just judgment of God, who will render to every one
according to his work : to those who by patient continu-
ance in well-doing seek for glory and immortality, eternal
life ;^ while to those who are contentious, and believe not
the truth, but who believe iniquity, anger, indignation,
tribulation, and distress, on every soul of man that work-
eth evil, on the Jew first, and (afterwards) on the Greek ;
but glory, and honour, and peace to every one that doeth
good, to the Jew first, and (afterwards) to the Greek." "
You will find also innumerable other passages in holy
Scripture, which manifestly show that we possess freedom
of will. Otherwise there would be a contrariety in com-
mandments being given us, by observing which we may
be saved, or by transgressing which we may be con-
demned, if the power of keeping them were not implanted
in us.


7. But, seeing there are found in the sacred Scriptures


woman to lust after her, hath already
committed adultery with her in his
heart ; "^ and by any other command-
ment which He gives, declares that it
lies with ourselves to keep what is
enjoined, and that we shall reason-
ably + be liable to condemnation if we
transgress. And therefore He says in
addition : " He that heareth My words,
and doeth them, shall be likened to a
prudent man, who built his house upon
a rock," etc., etc. ; " while he that
heareth them, but doeth them not, is
like a foolish man, who built his house
upon the sand," etc.^ And when He
says to those on His right hand,
" Come, ye blessed of My Father,"
etc. ; " for I was an hungered, and ye
gave Me to eat ; I was athirst, and ye
gave Me to drink," 7 it is exceedingly
manifest that He gives the promises
to these as being deserving of praise.
But, on the contrary, to the others, as
being censurable in comparison with
them, He says, " Depart, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire ! " 9 And let us
observe how Paul also converses '° with
us as having freedom of will, and as
being ourselves the cause of ruin or
salvation, when he says, " Dost thou
despise the riches of His goodness,
and of His patience, and of His long-
suffering ; not knowing that the good-
ness of God leadeth thee to repent-
ance ? But, according to thy hardness
and impenitent heart, thou art treasur-
ing up for thyself wrath on the day of
wrath and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God ; who will render to
every one according to his works : to
those who, by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for glory and immor-
tality, eternal life ; while to those who
are contentious, and believe not the
truth, but who believe iniquity, anger,
wrath, tribulation, and distress, on
every soul of man that worketh evil ;
on the Jew first, and on the Greek :
but glory, and honour, and peace to
every one that worketh good ; to the
Jew first, and to the Greek." " There
are, indeed, innumerable passages in
the Scriptures which establish with
exceeding clearness the existence of
freedom of will.

7. But, since certain declarations of


' Matt. vii. 24. 2 Matt. v. 28. 3 Matt. vii. 26. ■» cvAoyios. S Matt.

8 The words in the text are: His qui secundum patientiam boni operis, gloria el

9 Matt. XXV. 41. ■° SiaAeyerai. >' Rom. ii. 4-10.


XXV. 34 sq. 6 Cf. Matt. vii. 26. 7 Matt. xxv. 34.

incorruptio, qui quaerunt vitam eternam.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


307


FROM THE LATIN


FROM THE GREEK.


themselves certain expressions occurring in such a con-
nection, that the opposite of this may appear capable of
being understood from them, let us bring them forth
before us, and, discussing them according to the rule of
piety, ■ let us furnish an explanation of them, in order
that from those few passages which we now expound, the
solution of those others which resemble them, and by
which any power over the will seems to be excluded, may
become clear. Those expressions, accordingly, make an
impression on very many, which are used by God in
speaking of Pharaoh, as when He frequently says, " I will
harden Pharaoh's heart." ^ For if he is hardened by
God, and commits sin in consequence of being so hard-
ened, the cause of his sin is not himself. And if so,
it will appear that Pharaoh does not possess freedom of
will ; and it will be maintained, as a consequence, that,
agreeably to this illustration, neither do others who perish
owe the cause of their destruction to the freedom of their
own will. That expression, also, in Ezekiel, when he
says, " I will take away their stony hearts, and will give
them hearts of flesh, that they may walk in My precepts,
and keep My ways," * may impress some, inasmuch as it
seems to be a gift of God, either to walk in His ways or
to keep His precepts, 5 if He take away that stony heart
which is an obstacle to the keeping of His command-
ments, and bestow and implant a better and more im-
pressible heart, which is called now ^ a heart of flesh.
Consider also the nature of the answer given in the
Gospel by our Lord and Saviour to those who inquired
of Him why He spoke to the multitude in parables.
His words are : " That seeing they may not see ; and
hearing they may hear, and not understand ; lest they
should be converted, and their sins be forgiven them." 7
The words, moreover, used by the Apostle Paul, that " it
is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but
of God that showeth mercy ; " ^ in another passage also,
" that to will and to do are of God : " ^ and again, else-
where, " Therefore hath He mercy upon whom He will,
and whom He will He hardeneth. Thou wilt say then
unto me. Why doth He yet find fault? For who shall
resist His will ? O man, who art thou that repliest against
God ? Shall the thing formed say to him who hath formed
it. Why hast thou made me thus ? Hath not the potter
power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel
unto honour, and another to dishonour?" '° — these and
similar declarations seem to have no small influence in
preventing very many from believing that every one is to
be considered as having freedom over his own will, and
in making it appear to be a consequence of the will of
God whether a man is either saved or lost.


the Old Testament and of the New
lead to the opposite conclusion —
namely, that it does not depend on
ourselves to keep the commandments
and to be saved, or to transgress them
and to be lost — let us adduce them
one by one, and see the explanations
of them, in order that from those
which we adduce, any one selecting
in a similar way all the passages that
seem to nullify free-will, may consider
what is said about them by way of
explanation. And now, the state-
ments regarding Pharaoh have trou-
bled many, respecting whom God
declared several times, " I will harden
Pharaoh's heart." ^ For if he is hard-
ened by God, and commits sin in
consequence of being hardened, he
is not the cause of sin to himself;
and if so, then neither does Pharaoh
possess free-will. And some one will
say that, in a similar way, they who
perish have not free-will, and will not
perish of themselves. The declara-
tion also in Ezekiel, " I will take away
their stony hearts, and will put in them
hearts of flesh, that they may walk in
My precepts, and keep My command-
ments," •* might lead one to think that
it was God who gave the power to
walk in His commandments, and to
keep His precepts, by His withdraw-
ing the hindrance — the stony heart,
and implanting a better — a heart of
flesh. And let us look also at the
passage in the Gospel — the answer
which the Saviour returns to those
who inquired why He spake to the
multitude in parables. His words
are : " That seeing they might not
see ; and hearing they may hear, and
not understand ; lest they should be
converted, and their sins be forgiven
them." " The passage also in Paul :
" It is not of him that willeth, nor of
him that runneth, but of God that
showeth mercy." ^ The declarations,
too, in other places, that " both to
will and to do are of God ; " '- " that
God hath mercy upon whom He will
have mercy, and whom He will He
hardeneth. Thou wilt say then, Why
doth He yet find fi^ult? For who
hath resisted His will? " " The per-


■ Secundum pietatis regulam. ^ e^. iv. 21, etc. 3 Ex. iv. 21, cf. vii. 3. * Ezek. xi. 19, 20. 5 Justificationes.

* The word " now " is added, as the term " flesh" is frequently used in the New Testament in a bad sense (Redepenninp).

' Mark iv. 12. 8 Rom. Jx. 16. 9 Phil. ii. 13. '^° Rom. ix. 18 sq. " Cf. Mark iv. 12 and Luke viii. 10. •- Cf Phil. ii. 13.


3o8


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


8. Let US begin, then, with those words which were
spoken to Pharaoh, who is said to have been hardened
by God, in order that he might not let the people go ;
and, along with his case, the language of the apostle also
will be considered, where he says, " Therefore He hath
mercy on whom He will, and whom He will He harden-
eth." 3 For it is on these passages chiefly that the here-
tics rely, asserting that salvation is not in our own power,
but that souls are of such a nature as inust by all means be
either lost or saved ; and that in no way can a soul which
is of an evil nature become good, or one which is of a
virtuous nature be made bad. And hence they maintain
that Pharaoh, too, being of a ruined nature, was on that
account hardened by God, who hardens those that are
of an earthly nature, but has compassion on those who
are of a spiritual nature. Let us see, then, what is the
meaning of their assertion ; and let us, in the first place,
request them to tell us whether they maintain that the
soul of Pharaoh was of an earthly nature, such as they
term lost. They will undoubtedly answer that it was of
an earthly nature. If so, then to believe God, or to obey
Him, when his nature opposed his so doing, was an im-
possibility. And if this were his condition by nature,
what further need was there for his heart to be hardened,
and this not once, but several times, unless indeed be-
cause it was possible for him to yield to persuasion ? Nor
could any one be said to be hardened by another, save
him who of himself was not obdurate. And if he were
not obdurate of himself, it follows that neither was he of
an earthly nature, but such an one as might give way when
overpowered s by signs and wonders. But he was neces-
sary for God's purpose, in order that, for the saving of the
multitude. He might manifest in him His power by his
offering resistance to numerous miracles, and struggling
against the will of God, and his heart being by this means
said to be hardened. Such are our answers, in the first
place, to these persons ; and by these their assertion may
be overturned, according to which they think that Pharaoh
was destroyed in consequence of his evil nature.^ And
with regard to the language of the Apostle Paul, we must
answer them in a similar way. For who are they whom
God hardens, according to your view? Those, namely,
whom you term of a ruined nature, and who, I am to


suasion is of Him that calleth, and
not of us." ' " Nay, O man, who art
thou that repliest against God ? Shall
the thing formed say to him that hath
formed it, Why hast thou made me
thus? Hath not the potter power
over the clay, of the same lump to
make one vessel unto honour, and
another unto dishonour ? " ^ Now
these passages are sufficient of them-
selves to trouble the multitude, as if
man were not possessed of free-will,
but as if it were God who saves and
destroys whom He will.

8. Let us begin, then, with what is
said about Pharaoh — that he was
hardened by God, that he might not
send away the people ; along with
which will be examined also the state-
ment of the apostle, " Therefore hath
He mercy on whom He will have
mercy, and whom He will He hard-
eneth." '* And certain of those who
hold different opinions misuse these
passages, themselves also almost de-
stroying free-will by introducing ruined
natures incapable of salvation, and
others saved which it is impossible
can be lost ; and Pharaoh, they say,
as being of a mined nature, is there-
fore hardened by God, who has mercy
upon the spiritual, but hardens the
earthly. Let us see now what they
mean. For we shall ask them if Pha-
raoh was of an earthy nature ; and
when they answer, we shall say that he
who is of an earthy nature is alto-
gether disobedient to God : but if
disobedient, what need is there of his
heart being hardened, and that not
once, but frequently? Unless per-
haps, since it was possible for him to
obey (in which case he would certainly
have obeyed, as not being earthy,
when hard pressed by the signs and
wonders), God needs him to be dis-
obedient to a greater degree,^ in order
that He may manifest His mighty
deeds for the salvation of the multi-
tude, and therefore hardens his heart.
This will be our answer to them in
the first place, in order to overturn
their supposition that Pharaoh was of
a ruined nature. And the same reply
must be given to them with respect to
the statement of the apostle. For
whom does God harden ? Those who


* Gal. V. 8. 2 Rom. ix. 20, 21.
jrAeiof direidovcTos. ? Naturalher


Cf. Rora. ix.


5 Obstupefactus. * XP'ji^i- ^e avTou 6 ©eos .


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


309


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


suppose, would have done something else had they not
been hardened. If, indeed, they come to destruction in
consequence of being hardened, they no longer perish
naturally, but in virtue of what befalls them. Then, in
the next place, upon whom does God show mercy? On
those, namely, who are to be saved. And in what respect
do those persons stand in need of a second compassion,
who are to be saved once by their nature, and so come
naturally to blessedness, except that it is shown even from
their case, that, because it was possible for them to perish,
they therefore obtain mercy, that so they may not perish,
but come to salvation, and possess the kingdom of the
good. And let this be our answer to those who devise
and invent the fable ' of good or bad natures, i.e., of
earthly or spiritual souls, in consequence of which, as they
say, each one is either saved or lost.


9. And now we must return an answer also to those
who would have the God of the law to be just only, and
not also good ; and let us ask such in what manner they
consider the heart of Pharaoh to have been hardened by
God — by what acts or by what prospective arrange-
ments.^ For we must observe the conception of a God ^
who in our opinion is both just and good, but according
to them only just. And let them show us how a God
whom they also acknowledge to be just, can with justice
cause the heart of a man to be hardened, that, in conse-
quence of that very hardening, he may sin and be ruined.
And how shall the justice of God be defended, if He
Himself is the cause of the destruction of those whom,
owing to their unbelief (through their being hardened).
He has afterwards condemned by the authority of a
judge ? For why does He blame him, saying, " But since
thou wilt not let My people go, lo, I will smite all the
first-born in Egypt, even thy first-born," 5 and whatever
else was spoken through Moses by God to Pharaoh ? For
it behoves every one who maintains the truth of what is
recorded in Scripture, and who desires to show that the
God of the law and the prophets is just, to render a rea-
son for all these things, and to show how there is in them
nothing at all derogatory to the justice of God, since,
although they deny His goodness, they admit that He is
a just judge, and creator of the world. Different, how-
ever, is the method of our reply to those who assert that
the creator of this world is a malignant being, i.e., a devil.


perish, as if they would obey unless
they were hardened, or manifestly
those who would be saved because
they are not of a ruined nature. And
on whom has He mercy? Is it on
those who are to be saved ? And how
is there need of a second mercy for
those who have been prepared once
for salvation, and who will by all means
become blessed on account of their
nature? Unless perhaps, since they
are capable of incurring destruction,
if they did not receive mercy, they
will obtain mercy, in order that they
may not incur that destruction of
which they are capable, but may be in
the condition of those who are saved.
And this is our answer to such per-
sons.

9. But to those who think they un-
derstand the term " hardened," we
must address the inquiry, What do
they mean by saying that God, by His
working, hardens the heart, and with
what purpose does He do this? For
let them observe the conception ^ of a
God who is in reality just and good ;
but if they will not allow this, let it
be conceded to them for the present
that He is just ; and let them show
how the good and just God, or the
just God only, appears to be just, in
hardening the heart of him who per-
ishes because of his being hardened :
and how the just God becomes the
cause of destruction and disobedience,
when men are chastened by Him on
account of their hardness and disobe-
dience. And why does He find fault
with him, saying, " Thou wilt not let
My people go ; " ^ " Lo, I will smite
all the first-born in Egypt, even thy
first-born ; " ^ and whatever else is
recorded as spoken from God to
Pharaoh through the intervention of
Moses? For he who believes that
the Scriptures are true, and tliat God
is just, must necessarily endeavour,
if he be honest,** to show how God,
in using such expressions, may be dis-
tinctly'^ understood to be just. But
if any one should stand, declaring with
uncovered head that the Creator of
the world \vas inclined to wickedness,'"
we should need other words to answer
them.


' Commentitias fabulas introducunt. ^ Quid faciente vel quid prospiciente. 3 Prospectus et intuitu; Dei. Such is the rendering of
tVfoia by Rufinus. ^ ivvoiav. 5 Ex. ix. 17, cf. xi. 5 and xii. 12. * Cf. Ex. iv. 2^ and ix. 17. 7 Cf. Ex. xii. 12. * ti-yi'uj^oi'ij.
9 Tpai'u)?. 10 anoypatpdiJ.fi'Oi Tis yvn^fl Tg K«j>a\j} iararo jrpbs to TrocJJpbv (ivai TOi' Sriixiovpyov,


3IO


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


lo. But since we acknowledge the God who spoke by-
Moses to be not only just, but also good, let us carefully
inquire how it is in keeping with the character of a just
and good Deity to have hardened the heart of Pharaoh.
And let us see whether, following the example of the
Apostle Paul, we are able to solve the difficulty by help
of some parallel instances : if we can show, e.g., that by
one and the same act God has pity upon one individual,
but hardens another ; not purposing or desiring that he
who is hardened should be so, but because, in the mani-
festation of His goodness and patience, the heart of those
who treat His kindness and forbearance with contempt
and insolence is hardened by the punishment of their
crimes being delayed ; while those, on the other hand,
who make His goodness and patience the occasion of
their repentance and reformation, obtain compassion. To
show more clearly, however, what we mean, let us take
the illustration employed by the Apostle Paul in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, where he says, " For the earth,
which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and
bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
will receive blessing from God ; but that which beareth
thorns and briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing,
whose end is to be burned." ^ Now from those words
of Paul which we have quoted, it is clearly shown that by
one and the same act on the part of God — that, viz.,
by which He sends rain upon the earth — one portion of
the ground, when carefully cultivated, brings forth good
fruits ; while another, neglected and uncared for, pro-
duces thorns and thisUes. And if one, speaking as it
were in the person of the rain,+ were to say, " It is I, the
rain, that have made the good fruits, and it is I that have
caused the thorns and thistles to grow," however hard^
the statement might appear, it would nevertheless be
true ; for unless the rain had fallen, neither fruits, nor
thorns, nor thistles would have sprung up, whereas by
the coming of the rain the earth gave birth to both.
Now, although it is due to the beneficial action of the
rain that the earth has produced herbs of both kinds, it
is not to the rain that the diversity of the herbs is properly
to be ascribed ; but on those will justly rest the blame for
the bad seed, who, although they might have turned up the
ground by frequent ploughing, and have broken the clods
by repeated harrowing, and have extirpated all useless
and noxious weeds, and have cleared and prepared the
fields for the coming showers by all the labour and toil
which cultivation demands, have nevertheless neglected
to do this, and who will accordingly reap briers and
thorns, the most appropriate fruit of their sloth. And
the consequence therefore is, that while the rain falls in
kindness and impartiality ^ equally upon the whole earth,
yet, by one and the same operation of the rain, that soil
which is cultivated yields with a blessing useful fruits to
the diligent and careful cultivators, while that which has
become hardened through the neglect of the husband-
man brings forth only thorns and thistles. Let us there-


lo. But since they say that they
regard Him as a just God, and we as
one who is at the same time good and
just, let us consider how the good
and just God could harden the heart
of Pharaoh. See, then, whether, by
an illustration used by the apostle in
the Episde to the Hebrews, we are
able to prove that by one operation '
God has mercy upon one man while
He hardens another, although not in-
tending to harden ; but, (although)
having a good purpose, hardening
follows as a result of the inherent
principle of wickedness in such per-
sons,^ and so He is said to harden
him who is hardened. " The earth,"
he says, "which drinketh in the rain
that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth
forth herbs meet for them for whom
it is dressed, receiveth blessing from
God ; but that which beareth thorns
and briers is rejected, and is nigh to
cursing, whose end is to be burned." ^
As respects the rain, then, there is
one operation ; and there being one
operation as regards the rain, the
ground which is cultivated produces
fruit, while that which is neglected
and is barren produces thorns. Now,
it might seem profane 5 for Him who
rains to say, " I produced the fruits,
and the thorns that are in the earth ; "
and yet, although profane, it is true.
For, had rain not fallen, there would
have been neither fruits nor thorns ;
but, having fallen at the proper time
and in moderation, both were pro-
duced. The ground, now, which
drank in the rain which often fell
upon it, and yet produced thorns and
briers, is rejected and nigh to cursing.
The blessing, then, of the rain de-
scended even upon the inferior land ;
but it, being neglected and unculti-
vated, yielded thorns and thistles. In
the same way, therefore, the wonderful
works also done by God are, as it
were, the rain ; while the differing
purposes are, as it were, the cultivated
and neglected land, being (yet), like
earth, of one nature.


2 8ia TO T^? icaKi'a? viroKiinivov ToO Trap' eai/ToIs kolkov,
7 Bonitas et aequitas imbrium.


3 Heb. vi. 7, 8.


Ex persona imbrium. S 8uiT<i>r]fiov


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


31


FROM THE LATIN.

fore view those signs and miracles which were done by
God, as the showers furnished by Him from above ; and
the purpose and desires of men, as the cultivated and
uncultivated soil, which is of one and the same nature
indeed, as is every soil compared with another, but not
in one and the same state of cultivation. From which
it follows that every one's will,' if untrained, and fierce,
and barbarous, is either hardened by the miracles and
wonders of God, growing more savage and thorny than
ever, or it becomes more pliant, and yields itself up with
the whole mind to obedience, if it be cleared from vice
and subjected to training.

II. But, to establish the point more clearly, it will not
be superfluous to employ another illustration, as if, e.g.,
one were to say that it is the sun which hardens and
liquefies, although liquefying and hardening are things of
an opposite nature. Now it is not incorrect to say that
the sun, by one and the same power of its heat, melts
wax indeed, but dries up and hardens mud : ^ not that its
power operates one way upon mud, and in another way
upon wax ; but that the qualities of mud and wax are
different, although according to nature they are one thing,"*
both being from the earth. In this way, then, one and
the same working upon the part of God, which was admin-
istered by Moses in signs and wonders, made manifest the
hardness of Pharaoh, which he had conceived in the in-
tensity of his wickedness,^ but exhibited the obedience of
those other Egyptians who were intermingled with the
Israelites, and who are recorded to have quitted Egypt at
the same time with the Hebrews. With respect to the
statement that the heart of Pharaoh was subdued by de-
grees, so that on one occasion he said, " Go not far away ;
ye shall go a three days' journey, but leave your wives,
and your children, and your catde,"^ and as regards any
other statements, according to which he appears to yield
gradually to the signs and wonders, what else is shown,
save that the power of the signs and miracles was making
some impression on him, but not so much as it ought to
have done ? For if the hardening were of such a nature
as many take it to be, he would not indeed have given
way even in a few instances. But I think there is no
absurdity in explaining the tropical or figurative 9 nature
of that language employed in speaking of " hardening,"
according to common usage. For those masters who are
remarkable for kindness to their slaves, are frequently
accustomed to say to the latter, when, through much
patience and indulgence on their part, they have become
insolent and worthless : " It is I that have made you what
you are ; I have spoiled you ; it is my endurance that
has made you good for nothing : I am to blame for your
perverse and wicked habits, because I do not have you
immediately punished for every delinquency according to
your deserts." For we must first attend to the tropical
or figurative meaning of the language, and so come to
see the force of the expression, and not find fault with
the word, whose inner meaning we do not ascertain.


FRO.M THE GREEK.


1 1 . And as if the sun, uttering a
voice, were to say, " I liquefy and dry
up," liquefaction and drying up being
opposite things, he would not speak
falsely as regards the point in ques-
tion ; ^ wax being melted and mud
being dried by the same heat ; so the
same operation, which was performed
through the instrumentality of Moses,
proved the hardness of Pharaoh on
the one hand, the result of his wick-
edness, and the yielding of the mixed
Egyptian multitude who took their
departure with the Hebrews. And
the brief statement ^ that the heart of
Pharaoh was softened, as it were, when
he said, " But ye shall not go far : ye
will go a three days' journey, and leave
your wives,"'' and anything else which
he said, yielding litde by litde before
the signs, proves that the wonders
made some impression even upon him,
but did not accomplish all (that they
might). Yet even this would not have
happened, if that which is supposed
by the many — the hardening of Pha-
raoh's heart — had been produced by
God Himself. And it is not absurd
to soften down such expressions agree-
ably to common usage : '° for good
masters often say to their slaves, when
spoiled by their kindness and forbear-
ance, " I have made you bad, and I
am to blame for offences of such enor-
mity." For we must attend to the
character and force of the phrase, and
not argue sophistically," disregarding
the meaning of the expression. Paul
accordingly, having e.xamined these
points clearly, says to the sinner : " Or
despisest thou the riches of His good-
ness, and forbearance, and long-suffer-
ing ; not knowing that the goodness
of God leadeth thee to repentance?


' Propositum,
conceperat. ^ (cai to kc
sermonis. '° ou/c aroTro


jrapi TO iirroKfiiievov. 3 Limum. * Cum utiqiie secundum naturam unum sit. 5 Malitiae suae intentione
) KaTo. TO /Spaxi/ 6e avayeypd<ti8ai. 1 Cf. Ex. viii. 28, 29. * Cf. Ex. viii. 27-29. 9 Tropum vel figuram
" aTTO o'ut'Tjfletas Tci TotauTa Trapa/Livf '/(rao'^at, *' <jvK.o^txvT^t.v,


312


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


Finally, the Apostle Paul, evidently treating of such, says
to him who remained in his sins : " Despisest thou the
riches of His goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffer-
ing ; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee
to repentance? but, after thy hardness and impenitent
heart, treasures! up unto thyself wrath on the day of
wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God." '
Such are the words of the apostle to him who is in his
sins. Let us apply these very expressions to Pharaoh,
and see if they also are not spoken of him with propriety,
since, according to his hardness and impenitent heart, he
treasured and stored up for himself wrath on the day of
wrath, inasmuch as his hardness could never have been
declared and manifested, unless signs and wonders of such
number and magnificence had been performed.


12, But if the proofs which we have adduced do not
appear full enough, and the similitude of the apostle seem
wanting in applicability,^ let us add the voice of prophetic
authority, and see what the prophets declare regarding
those who at first, indeed, leading a righteous life, have
deserved to receive numerous proofs of the goodness of
God, but afterwards, as being human beings, have fallen
astray, with whom the prophet, making himself also one,
says : " Why, O Lord, hast Thou made us to err from
Thy way? and hardened our heart, that we should not
fear Thy name ? Return, for Thy servants' sake, for the
tribes of Thine inheritance, that we also for a little may
obtain some inheritance from Thy holy hill." s Jeremiah
also employs similar language : " O Lord, Thou hast de-
ceived us, and we were deceived; Thou hast held (us),
and Thou hast prevailed." ? The expression, then, "Why,
O Lord, hast Thou hardened our heart, that we should
not fear Thy name?" used by those who prayed for
mercy, is to be taken in a figurative, moral accepta-
tion,^ as if one were to say, " Why hast Thou spared us
so long, and didst not requite us when we sinned, but
didst abandon us, that so our wickedness might increase,
and our liberty of sinning be extended when punishment
ceased ? " In like manner, unless a horse continually feel
the spur ^ of his rider, and have his mouth abraded by a
bit,'° he becomes hardened. And a boy also, unless con-
stantly disciplined by chastisement, will grow up to be an
insolent youth, and one ready to fall headlong into vice.
God accordingly abandons and neglects those whom He
has judged undeserving of chastisement : " For whom
the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son
whom He receiveth." " From which we are to suppose
that those are to be received into the rank and affection
of sons, who have deserved to be scourged and chastened
by the Lord, in order that they also, through endurance
of trials and tribulations, may be able to say, " WHio shall
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus ?
shall tribulation, or anguish, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword ? " '^ For by all these is each one's resolu-


but, after thy hardness and impenitent
heart, treasurest up unto thyself wrath
against the day of wrath and revela-
tion of the righteous judgment of
God." ' Now, let what the apostle
says to the sinner be addressed to
Pharaoh, and then the announcements
made to him will be understood to
have been made with peculiar fitness,
as to one who, according to his hard-
ness and unrepentant heart, was treas-
uring up to himself wrath ; seeing that
his hardness would not have been
proved nor made manifest unless mira-
cles had been performed, and miracles,
too, of such magnitude and impor-
tance.

12. But since such narratives are
slow to secure assent,^ and are con-
sidered to be forced,-* let us see from
the prophetical declarations also, what
those persons say, who, although they
have experienced the great kindness
of God, have not lived virtuously, but
have afterwards sinned. " ^Vhy, O
Lord, hast Thou made us to err from
Thy ways ? AVhy hast Thou hardened
our heart, so as not to fear Thy name ?
Return for Thy servants' sake, for the
tribes of Thine inheritance, that we
may inherit a small portion of Thy
holy mountain-."^ And in Jeremiah :
"Thou hast deceived me, O Lord,
and I was deceived ; Thou wert
strong, and Thou didst prevail."? For
the expression, " Why hast Thou hard-
ened our heart, so as not to fear Thy
name?" uttered by those who are
begging to receive mercy, is in its
nature as follows : " Why hast Thou
spared us so long, not visiting us be-
cause of our sins, but deserting us,
until our transgressions come to a
height?" Now He leaves the greater
part of men unpunished, both in or-
der that the habits of each one may
be examined, so far as it depends
upon ourselves, and that the virtuous
may be made manifest in consequence
of the test applied ; while the others,
not escaping notice from God — for
He knows all things before they exist
— but from the rational creation and
themselves, may afterwards obtain the
means of cure, seeing they would not
have known the benefit had they not


Rom. ii. 4, 5. ^ Sva-ireiSeU, 3 Et apostolicse similitudinis parum 1

Isa. Ixiii. 17, 18. Here the Septuagint differs from the Masoretlc text. 6 Isa.

Morali utique trope accipiendum 9 Ferratum calcem. 1° Frenis ferratis.


i habere adhuc videtur asser«io.
xiii. 17, 18. 7 Jer. xx. 7.
" Heb. "


xii. 6. '2 Rom. viii. 35.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


313


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


tion manifested and displayed, and the firmness of his
perseverance made known, not so much to God, who
knows all things before they happen, as to the rational
and heavenly virtues,'' who have obtained a part in the
work of procuring human salvation, as being a sort of
assistants antl ministers to God. Those, on the other
hand, who do not yet offer themselves to God with such
constancy and affection, and are not ready to come into
His service, and to prepare their souls for trial, are said
to be abandoned by God, i.e., not to be instructed, inas-
much As they are not prepared for instruction, their train-
ing or care being undoubtedly postponed to a later time.
These certainly do not know what they will obtain from
God, unless they first entertain the desire of being bene-
fited ; and this finally will be the case, if a man come
first to a knowledge of himself, and feel what are his de-
fects, and understand from whom he either ought or can
seek the supply of his deficiencies. For he who does not
know beforehand of his weakness or his sickness, cannot
seek a physician ; or at least, after recovering his health,
that man will not be grateful to his physician who did not
first recognise the dangerous nature of his ailment. And
so, unless a man has first ascertained the defects of his
life, and the evil nature of his sins, and made this known
by confession from his own lips, he cannot be cleansed
or acquitted, lest he should be ignorant that what he pos-
sesses has been bestowed on him by favour, but should
consider as his own property what flows from the divine
liberality, which idea undoubtedly generates arrogance of
mind and pride, and finally becomes the cause of the in-
dividual's ruin. And this, we must believe, was the case
with the devil, who viewed as his own, and not as given
him by God, the primacy ^ which he held at the time when
he was unstained ;^ and thus was fulfilled in him the dec-
laration, that " every one who exalte th himself ^hall be
abased."*? From which it appears to me that the divine
mysteries were concealed from the wise and prudent,
according to the statement of Scripture, that " no flesh
should glory before God," '° and revealed to children — to
those, namely, who, after they have become infants and
little children, i.e., have returned to the humility and sim-
plicity of children, then make progress ; and on arriving
at perfection, remember that they have obtained their
state of happiness, not by their own merits, but by the
grace and compassion of God.

13. It is therefore by the sentence of God that he is
abandoned who deserves to be so, while over some sin-
ners God exercises forbearance ; not, however, without a
definite principle of action." Nay, the very fact that He
is long-suffering conduces to the advantage of those very
persons, since the soul over which He exercises this prov-
idential care is immortal ; and, as being immortal and
everlasting, it is not, although not immediately cared for,
excluded from salvation, which is postponed to a more
convenient time. For perhaps it is expedient for those
who have been more deeply imbued with the poison of


condemned themselves. It is of ad-
vantage to each one, that he perceive
his own peculiar nature ' and the grace
of God. For he who does not per-
ceive his own weakness and the divine
favour, although he receive a benefit,
yet, not having made trial of himself,
nor having condemned himself, will
imagine that the benefit conferred
upon him by the grace of Heaven is
his own doing. And this imagination,
producing also vanity,^ will be the
cause of a downfall : which, we con-
ceive, was the case with the devil, who
attributed to himself the priority which
he possessed when in a state of sin-
lessness.-* " For every one that exalteth
himself shall be abased," and " every
one that humbleth himself shall be
exalted." 5 And observe, that for this
reason divine things have been con-
cealed from the wise and prudent, in
order, as says the apostle, that " no
flesh should glory in the presence of
God ; "*" and they have been revealed
to babes, to those who after childhood
have come to better things, and who
remember that it is not so much from
their own effort, as by the unspeakable
goodness (of God), that they have
reached the greatest possible extent
of blessedness.


13. It is not without reason, then,
that he who is abandoned, is aban-
doned to the divine judgment, and
that God is long-suffering with cer-
tain sinners ; but because it will be
for their advantage, with respect to
the immortality of the soul and the
unending world, '" that they be not
quickly brought '^ into a state of sal-
vation, but be conducted to it more
slowly, after having experienced many


* iStoTirjTo?. 2 Rationabilibus coelestibusque virtutibus. 3 <^u(7iuio-ti'. * a/oitojios. S Cf. Luke xiv.
' Primatus._ ^ Immaculatus. 9 Luke xviii. 14. *" i Cor. i, 29. " Non umen sine cert4 ratione.
^3 avvepy-qOrjuai,


* Cf. I Cor. 1.29.
T(»> CLTTcipoi' aiiiifa.


H


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


wickedness to obtain this salvation at a later period. For
as medical men sometimes, although they could quickly
cover over the scars of wounds, keep back and delay the
cure for the present, in the expectation of a better and
more perfect recovery, knowing that it is more salutary to
retard the treatment in the cases of swellings caused by
wounds, and to allow the malignant humours to flow off
for a while, rather than to hasten a superficial cure, by
shutting up in the veins the poison of a morbid humour,
which, excluded from its customary outlets, will undoubt-
edly creep into the inner parts of the limbs, and pene-
trate to the very vitals of the viscera, producing no longer
mere disease in the body, but causing destruction to life ;
so, in like manner, God also, who knows the secret things
of the heart, and foreknows the future, in much forbear-
ance allows certain events to happen, which, coming from
without upon men, cause to come forth into the light the
passions and vices which are concealed within, that by
their means those may be cleansed and cured who,
through great negligence and carelessness, have admitted
within themselves the roots and seeds of sins, so that,
when driven outwards and brought to the surface, they
may in a certain degree be cast forth and dispersed.'
And thus, although a man may appear to be afflicted with
evils of a serious kind, suffering convulsions in all his
limbs, he may nevertheless, at some future time, obtain
relief and a cessation from his trouble ; and, after endur-
ing his afflictions to satiety, may, after many sufferings, be
restored again to his (proper) condition. For God deals
with souls not merely with a view to the short space of
our present life, included within sixty years '^ or more, but
with reference to a perpetual and never-ending period,
exercising His providential care over souls that are im-
mortal, even as He Himself is eternal and immortal.
For He made the rational nature, which He formed in
His own image and likeness, incorruptible ; and there-
fore the soul, which is immortal, is not excluded by the
shortness of the present life from the divine remedies and
cures.

14. But let us take from the Gospels also the simili-
tudes of those things which we have mentioned, in which
is described a certain rock, having on it a little superficial
earth, on which, when a seed falls, it is said quickly to
spring up ; but when sprung up, it withers as the sun
ascends in the heavens, and dies away, because it did not
cast its root deeply into the ground.? Now this rock
undoubtedly represents the human soul, hardened on
account of its own negligence, and converted into stone
because of its wickedness. For God gave no one a stony
heart by a creative act ; but each individual's heart is said
to become stony through his own wickedness and disobe-
dience. As, therefore, if one were to blame a husband-
man for not casting his seed more quickly upon rocky
ground, because seed cast upon other rocky soil was seen
to spring up speedily, the husbandman would certainly
say in reply : " I sow this soil more slowly, for this reason,


evils. For as physicians, who are able
to cure a man quickly, when they
suspect that a hidden poison exists in
the body, do the reverse of healing,
making this more certain through
their very desire to heal, deeming it
better for a considerable time to re-
tain the patient under inflammation
and sickness, in order that he may re-
cover his health more surely, than to
appear to produce a rapid recovery,
and afterwards to cause a relapse, and
(thus) that hasty cure last only for a
time ; in the same way, God also,
who knows the secret things of the
heart, and foresees future events, in
His long-suffering, permits (certain
events to occur), and by means of
those things which happen from with-
out extracts the secret evil, in order
to cleanse him who through careless-
ness has received the seeds of sin,
that having vomited them forth when
they came to the surface, although he
may have been deeply involved in
evils, he may afterwards obtain heal-
ing after his wickedness, and be re-
newed.^ For God governs souls not
with reference, let me say, to the
fifty 3 years of the present life, but
with reference to an illimitable s age :
for He made the thinking principle
immortal in its nature, and kindred
to Himself; and the rational soul is
not, as in this life, excluded from
cure.


14. Come now, and let us use the
following image "^ from the Gospel.
There is a certain rock, with a little
surface-soil, on which, if seeds fall,
they quickly spring up ; but when
sprung up, as not having root, they
are burned and withered when the
sun has arisen. Now this rock is a
human soul, hardened on account of
its negligence, and converted to stone
because of its wickedness ; for no one
receives from God a heart created of
stone, but it becomes such in con-
sequence of wickedness. If one,
then, were to find fault with the hus-
bandman for not sowing his seed
sooner upon the rocky soil, when he


Digeri. The rendering " dispersed" seems to agree best with the meaning intended to be conveyed.
7r€i'TT)Koi'TatTiar. Rufinus has " j^jra^wte annos." * In the Greek the term is 77£i'TT)Koi'Ta6Tio>'.
eiKoi'i. 7 Cf. Matt. xiii. 5, 6.


^ cLvaaToixeiijiiBrivai,
5 airepavToy aiiava.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


315


FROM THE LATIN.


THE GREEK.


that it may retain the seed which it has received ; for it
suits this ground to be sown somewhat slowly, lest per-
haps the crop, having sprouted too rapidly, and coming
forth from the mere surface of a shallow soil, should be
unable to withstand the rays of the sun." Would not he
who formerly found fault acquiesce in the reasons and
superior knowledge of the husbandman, and approve as
done on rational grounds what formerly appeared to him
as founded on no reason? And in the same way, God,
the thoroughly skilled husbandman of all His creation,
undoubtedly conceals and delays to another time those '
things which we think ought to have obtained health
sooner, in order that not the outside of things, rather
than the inside, may be cured. But if any one now were
to object to us that certain seeds do even fall upon rocky
ground, i.e., on a hard and stony heart, we should answer
that even this does not happen without the arrangement
of Divine Providence ; inasmuch as, but for this, it would
not be known what condemnation was incurred by rash-
ness in hearing and indifference in investigation,^ nor, cer-
tainly, what benefit was derived from being trained in an
orderly manner. And hence it happens that the soul
comes to know its defects, and to cast the blame upon
itself, and, consistently with this, to reserve and submit
itself to training, i.e., in order that it may see that its
faults must first be removed, and that then it must come
to receive the instruction of wisdom. As, therefore, souls
are innumerable, so also are their manners, and purposes,
and movements, and appetencies, and incitements dif-
ferent, the variety of which can by no means be grasped
by the human mind ; and therefore to God alone must
be left the art, and the knowledge, and the power of an
arrangement of this kind, as He alone can know both
the remedies for each individual soul, and measure out
the time of its cure. It is He alone then who, as we
said, recognises the ways of individual men, and deter-
mines by what way He ought to lead Pharaoh, that
through him His name might be named in all the earth,
having previously chastised him by many blows, and
finally drowning him in the sea. By this drowning, how-
ever, it is not to be supposed that God's providence as
regards Pharaoh was terminated ; for we must not ima-
gine, because he was drowned, that therefore he had
forthwith completely s perished : "for in the hand of God
are both we and our words ; all wisdom, also, and knowl-
edge of workmanship,'"' as Scripture declares. But these
points we have discussed according to our ability, treating
of that chapter 7 of Scripture in which it is said that God
hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and agreeably to the state-
ment, "He hath mercy on whom He will have mercy, and
whom He will He hardeneth." 9


15. Let us now look at those passages of Ezekiel
where he says, " I will take away from them their stony
heart, and I will put in them a heart of flesh, that they
may walk in My statutes, and keep Mine ordinances.'"


saw other rocky ground which had
received seed flourishing, the husband-
man would reply, " I shall sow this
ground more slowly, casting in seeds
that will be able to retain their hold,
this slower method being better for
the ground, and more secure than that
which receives the seed in a more rapid
manner, and more upon the surface."
(The person finding fault) would yield
his assent to the husbandman, as one
who spoke with sound reason, and
who acted with skill : so also the great
Husbandman of all nature postpones
that benefit which might be deemed
premature,^ that it may not prove su-
perficial. But it is probable that here
some one may object to us with refer-
ence to this : " Why do some of the
seeds fall upon the earth that has su-
perficial soil, the soul being, as it were,
a rock? " Now we must say, in an-
swer to this, that it was better for this
soul, which desired better things pre-
cipitately,-* and not by a way which
led to them, to obtain its desire, in
order that, condemning itself on this
account, it may, after a long time, en-
dure to receive the husbandry which
is according to nature. For souls are,
as one may say, innumerable ; and
their habits are innumerable, and their
movements, and their purposes, and
their assaults, and their efforts, of
which there is only one admirable
administrator, who knows both the
seasons, and the fitting helps, and the
avenues, and the wa\'s, viz., the God
and Father of all things, who knows
how He conducts even Pharaoh by so
great events, and by drowning in the
sea, with which latter occurrence His
superintendence of Pharaoh does not
cease. For he was not annihilated
when drowned : " For in the hand of
God are both we and our words ; all
wisdom also, and knowledge of work-
manship."^ And such is a moderate
defence with regard to the statements
that " Pharaoh's heart was hardened,"
and that "God hath mercy upon
whom He will have mercy, and whom
He will He hardeneth."

15. Let us look also at the declara-
tion in F^zekiel, which says, " I shall
take away their stony hearts, and will
put in them hearts of flesh, that they


Haec.
Wisd.


'■ ToLXiov. 3 Perscrutationis improbitas.
16. 7 Capitulum. 8 Cf. Wisd. vii. i6.


. 65euo-ao-jj. S Substaiuialiter.


3i6


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


For if God, when He pleases, takes away a heart of stone
and bestows a heart of flesh, that His ordinances may be
observed and His commandments may be obeyed, it will
then appear that it is not in our power to put away wick-
edness. For the taking away of a stony heart seems to
be nothing else than the removal of the wickedness by
which one is hardened, from whomsoever God pleases to
remove it. Nor is the bestowal of a heart of flesh, that
the precepts of God may be observed and His com-
mandments obeyed, any other thing than a man becom-
ing obedient, and no longer resisting the truth, but
performing works of virtue. If, then, God promises to
do this, and if, before He takes away the stony heart, we
are unable to remove it from ourselves, it follows that it
is not in our power, but in God's only, to cast away wick-
edness. And again, if it is not our doing to form within
us a heart of flesh, but the work of God alone, it will not
be in our power to live virtuously, but it will in every-
thing appear to be a work of divine grace. Such are the
assertions of those who wish to prove from the authority
of Holy Scripture that nothing lies in our own power.
Now to these we answer, that these passages are not to
be so understood, but in the following manner. Take the
case of one who was ignorant and untaught, and who,
feeling the disgrace of his ignorance, should, driven either
by an exhortation from some person, or incited by a de-
sire to emulate other wise men, hand himself over to one
by whom he is assured that he will be carefully trained
and competently instructed. If he, then, who had for-
merly hardened himself in ignorance, yield himself, as
we have said, with full purpose of mind to a master, and
promise to obey him in all things, the master, on seeing
clearly the resolute nature of his determination, will ap-
propriately promise to take away all ignorance, and to
implant knowledge within his mind ; not that he under-
takes to do this if the disciple refuse or resist his efforts,
but only on his offering and binding himself to obedience
in all things. So also the Word of God promises to those
who draw near to Him, that He will take away their
stony heart, not indeed from those who do not listen
to His word, but from those who receive the precepts of
His teaching; as in the Gospels we find the sick ap-
proaching the Saviour, asking to receive health, and thus
at last be cured. And in order that the blind might be
healed and regain their sight, their part consisted in
making supplication to the Saviour, and in believing that
their cure could be effected by Him ; while His part, on
the other hand, lay in restoring to them the power of
vision. And in this way also does the Word of God
promise to bestow instruction by taking away the stony
heart, i.e., by the removal of wickedness, that so men
may be able to walk in the divine precepts, and observe
the commandments of the law.


may walk in My statutes and keep My
precepts." ' For if God, when He
wills, takes away the stony hearts, and
implants hearts of flesh, so that His
precepts are obeyed and His com-
mandments are observed, it is not in
our power to put away wickedness.
For the taking away of the stony
hearts is nothing else than the taking
away of the wickedness, according to
which one is hardened, from him
from whom God wills to take it ; and
the implanting of a heart of flesh, so
that a man may walk in the precepts
of God and keep His commandments,
what else is it than to become some-
what yielding and unresistent to the
truth, and to be capable of practising
virtues? And if God promises to do
this, and if, before He takes away the
stony hearts, we do not lay them aside,
it is manifest that it does not depend
upon ourselves to put away wicked-
ness ; and if it is not we who do any-
thing towards the production within
us of the heart of flesh, but if it is
God's doing, it will not be our own
act to live agreeably to virtue, but al-
together (the result of) divine grace.
Such will be the statements of him
who, from the mere words (of Scrip-
ture), annihilates free-will.^ But we
shall answer, saying, that we ought to
understand these passages thus : That
as a man, e.g., who happened to be
ignorant and uneducated, on perceiv-
ing his own defects, either in conse-
quence of an exhortation from his
teacher, or in some other way, should
spontaneously give himself up to him
whom he considers able to introduce ^
him to education and virtue ; and, on
his yielding himself up, his instructor
promises that he will take away his
ignorance, and implant instruction,
not as if it contributed nothing to his
training, and to the avoiding of igno-
rance, that he brought himself to be
healed, but because the instructor
promised to improve him who desired
improvement ; so, in the same way,
the Word of God promises to take
away wickedness, which it calls a
stony heart, from those who come to
it, not if they are unwilling, but (only)
if they submit themselves to the Phy-
sician of the sick, as in the Gospels


aiTO Tuiv tjuKiiiv pT)Tu)»' TO €<j>' ')M'>' avaLpCiv.


3 x^'P'*'y""V'i<''"


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


17


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


16. There is next brought before us that declaration
uttered by the Saviour in the Gospel : " That seeing they
may see, and not perceive ; and hearing they may hear,
and not understand ; lest they should happen to be con-
verted, and their sins be forgiven them." ' On which our
opponent will remark : " If those who shall hear more
distinctly are by all means to be corrected and converted,
and converted in such a manner as to be worthy of re-
ceiving the remission of sins, and if it be not in their own
power to hear the word distinctly, but if it depend on
the Instructor to teach more openly and distinctly, while
he declares that he does not proclaim to them the word
with clearness, lest they should perhaps hear and under-
stand, and be converted, and be saved, it will follow,
certainly, that their salvation is not dependent upon
themselves. And if this be so, then we have no free-will
either as regards salvation or destruction." Now were it
not for the words that are added, " Lest perhaps they
should be converted, and their sins be forgiven them,"
we might be more inclined to return the answer, that
the Saviour was unwilling that those individuals whom He
foresaw would not become good, should understand the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, and that therefore
He spoke to them in parables ; but as that addition fol-
lows, " Lest perhaps they should be converted, and their
sins be forgiven them," the explanation is rendered more
difficult. And, in the first place, we have to notice what
defence this passage furnishes against those heretics who
are accustomed to hunt out of the Old Testament any
expressions which seem, according to their view, to predi-
cate severity and cruelty of God the Creator, as when
He is described as being affected with the feeling of
vengeance or punishment, or by any of those emotions,
however named, from which they deny the existence of
goodness in the Creator ; for they do not judge of the
Gospels with the same mind and feelings, and do not
observe whether any such statements are found in them
as they condemn and censure in the Old Testament. For
manifestly, in the passage referred to, the Saviour is
shown, as they themselves admit, not to speak distinctly,
for this very reason, that men may not be converted, and


the sick are found coming to the Sav-
iour, and asking to obtain healing,
and so are j:ured. And, let me say,
the recovery of sight by the blind is,
so far as their request goes, the act
of those who believe that they are
capable of being healed ; but as re-
spects the restoration of sight, it is
the work of our Saviour. Thus, then,
does the Word of God promise to im-
plant knowledge in those who come
to it, by taking away the stony and
hard heart, which is wickedness, in
order that one may walk in the divine
commandments, and keep the divine
injunctions.

16. There was after this the passage
from the Gospel, where the Saviour
said, that for this reason did He speak
to those without in parables, that "see-
ing they may not see, and hearing
they may not understand ; lest they
should be converted, and their sins
be forgiven them." ' Now, our oppo-
nent will say, " If some persons are
assuredly converted on hearing words
of greater clearness, so that they be-
come worthy of the remission of sins,
and if it does not depend upon them-
selves to hear these words of greater
clearness, but upon him who teaches,
and he for this reason does not an-
nounce them to them more distinctly,
lest they should see and understand,
it is not within the power of such to
be saved ; and if so, we are not pos-
sessed of free-will as regards salvation
and destruction." Effectual, indeed,
would be the reply to such arguments,
were it not for the addition, " Lest
they should be converted, and their
sins be forgiven them," — namely,
that the Saviour did not wish those
who were not to become good and
virtuous to understand the more mys-
tical (parts of His teaching), and for
this reason spake to them in parables ;
but now, on account of the words,
" Lest they should be converted, and
their sins be forgiven them," the de-
fence is more difficult. In the first
place, then, we must notice the pas-
sage in its bearing on the heretics,
who hunt out those portions from the
Old Testament where is exhibited, as
they themselves daringly assert, the
cruelty ^ of the Creator of the world 3


3i8


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


when converted, receive the remission of sins. Now, if
the words be understood according to the letter merely,
nothing less, certainly, w^ll be contained in them than in
those passages which they find fault with in the Old Testa-
ment. And if they are of opinion that any expressions
occurring in such a connection in the New Testament
stand in need of explanation, it will necessarily follow
that those also occurring in the Old Testament, which are
the subject of censure, may be freed from aspersion by
an explanation of a similar kind, so that by such means
the passages found in both Testaments may be shown to
proceed from one and the same God. But let us return,
as we best may, to the question proposed.


17. We said formerly, when discussing the case of
Pharaoh, that sometimes it does not lead to good results
for a man to be cured too quickly, especially if the dis-
ease, being shut up within the inner parts of the body,
rage with greater fierceness. Whence God, who is ac-
quainted with secret things, and knows all things before
they happen, in His great goodness delays the cure of
such, and postpones their recovery to a remoter period,
and, so to speak, cures them by not curing them, lest a
too favourable state of health ■♦ should render them incur-
able. It is therefore possible that, in the case of those
to whom, as being " without," the words of our Lord and
Saviour were addressed. He, seeing from His scrutiny of
the hearts and reins that they were not yet able to receive
teaching of a clearer type, veiled by the covering of lan-
guage the meaning of the profounder mysteries, lest per-
haps, being rapidly converted and healed, i.e., having
quickly obtained the remission of their sins, they should
again easily slide back into the same disease which they


in His purpose of avenging and pun-
ishing the wicked,' or by whatever
other name they wish to designate
such a quality, so speaking only that
they may say that goodness does not
exist in the Creator ; and who do
not deal with the New Testament in a
similar manner, nor in a spirit of can-
dour,^ but pass by places similar to
those which they consider censurable
in the Old Testament. For mani-
festly, and according to the Gospel, is
the Saviour shown, as they assert, by
His former words, not to speak dis-
tinctly for this reason, that men might
not be converted, and, being con-
verted, might become deserving of
the remission of sins : which state-
ment of itself is nothing inferior ^ to
those passages from the Old Testa-
ment which are objected to. And if
they seek to defend the Gospel, we
must ask them whether they are not
acting in a blameworthy manner in
dealing differently with the same
questions ; and, while not stumbling
against the New Testament, but seek-
ing to defend it, they nevertheless
bring a charge against the Old re-
garding similar points, whereas they
ought to offer a defence in the same
way of the passages from the New.
And therefore we shall force them,
on account of the resemblances, to
regard all as the writings of one God.
Come, then, and let us, to the best of
our ability, furnish an answer to the
question submitted to us.

1 7. We asserted also, when inves-
tigating the subject of Pharaoh, that
sometimes a rapid cure is not for the
advantage of those who are healed,
if, after being seized by troublesome
diseases, they should easily get rid of
those by which they had been entan-
gled. For, despising the evil as one
that is easy of cure, and not being on
their guard a second time against fall-
ing into it, they will be involved in
it (again) . Wherefore, in the case of
such persons, the everlasting God, the
Knower of secrets, who knows all
things before they exist, in conform-
ity with His goodness, delays sending
them more rapid assistance, and, so to
speak, in helping them does not help,
the latter course being to their advan-


i) OjavyTKci) koI oi-TairoSoTKcr) tuic xetpdrui' Trpoaipecris,


3 ovSevbs (\a.TTOv.


Prospera sanitas.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


319


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


had found could be healed without any difficulty. For
if this be the case, no one can doubt that the punishment
is doubled, and th^ amount of wickedness increased ;
since not only are the sins which had appeared to be for-
given repeated, but the court ' of virtue also is desecrated
when trodden by deceitful and polluted beings,^ filled
within with hidden wickedness. And what remedy can
there ever be for those who, after eating the impure and
filthy food of wickedness, have tasted the pleasantness
of virtue, and received its sweetness into their mouths,
and yet have again betaken themselves to the deadly and
poisonous provision of sin? And who doubts that it is
better for delay and a temporary abandonment to occur,
in order that if, at some future time, they should happen
to be satiated with wickedness, and the filth with which
they are now delighted should become loathsome, the
word of God may at last be appropriately made clear to
them, and that which is holy be not given to the dogs,
nor pearls be cast before swine, which will trample them
under foot, and turn, moreover, and rend and assault
those who have proclaimed to them the word of God ?
These, then, are they who are said to be " without," un-
doubtedly by way of contrast with those who are said to
be " within," and to hear the word of God with greater
clearness. And yet those who are " without " do hear
the word, although it is covered by parables, and over-
shadowed by proverbs. There are others, also, besides
those who are without, who are called Tyrians, and who
do not hear at all, respecting whom the Saviour knew
that they would have repented long ago, sitting in sack-
cloth and ashes, if the miracles performed among others
had been done amongst them, and yet these do not hear
those things which are heard even by those who are
" without : " and I believe, for this reason, that the rank of
such in wickedness was far lower and worse than that
of those who are said to be "without," i.e., who are
not far from those who are within, and who have de-
served to hear the word, although in parables ; and be-
cause, perhaps, their cure was delayed to that time when
it will be more tolerable for them on the day of judg-
ment, than for those before whom those miracles which
are recorded were performed, that so at last, being then
reheved from the weight of their sins, they may enter
with more ease and power of endurance upon the way of
safety. And this is a point which I wish impressed upon
those who peruse these pages, that with respect to topics
of such difficulty and obscurity we use our utmost endeav-
our, not so much to ascertain clearly the solutions of the
questions (for every one will do this as the Spirit gives
him utterance), as to maintain the rule of faith in the
most unmistakeable manner,^ by striving to show that the
providence of God, which equitably administers all things,
governs also immortal souls on the justest principles, (con-
ferring rewards) according to the merits and motives
of each individual ; the present economy of things ^ not
being confined within the life of this world, but the pre-
exisdng state of merit always furnishing the ground for


tage. It is probable, then, that those
" without," of whom we are speaking,
having been foreseen by the Saviour,
according to our supposition, as not
(likely) to prove steady in their con-
version,3 if they should hear more
clearly the words that were spoken,
were (so) treated by the Saviour as
not to hear distinctly the deeper
(things of His teaching) ,•♦ lest, after
a rapid conversion, and after being
healed by obtaining remission of sins,
they should despise the wounds of
their wickedness, as being slight and
easy of healing, and should again
speedily relapse into them. And per-
haps also, suffering punishment for
their former transgressions against
virtue, which they had committed when
they had forsaken her, they had not
yet filled up the (full) time ; in order
that, being abandoned by the divine
superintendence, and being filled 5 to a
greater degree by their own evils which
they had sown, tliey may afterwards
be called to a more stable repentance ;
so as not to be quickly entangled again
in those evils in which they had for-
merly been involved when they treated
with insolence the requirements of
virtue, and devoted themselves to
worse things. Those, then, who are
said to be " without " (manifestly by
comparison with those " within "), not
being very far from those " within,"
while those "within" hear clearly, do
themselves hear indistinctly, because
they are addressed in parables ; but
nevertheless they do hear. Others,
again, of those "without," who are
called Tyrians, although it was fore-
known that they would have repented
long ago, sitting in sackcloth and
ashes, had the Saviour come near
their borders, do not hear even those
words which are heard by those "with-
out " (being, as is probable, very far
inferior in merit to those "without"^),
in order that at another season, after
it has been more tolerable for them
than for those who did not receive
the word (among whom he mentioned
also the ^^Tians), they may, on hear-
ing the word at a more api^ropriate
time, obtain a more lasting repent-
ance. But observe whether, besides
our desire to investigate (the truth),


Aula. 2 Mentes. 3 iuipaixivovi; i


^ riiyv fiaQvTepojv. 5 en

pieiatis regulam teneamus.


tor eu(f>onT»''f I'Tnc.
Dispensatio humana.


320


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


the State that is to follow,' and thus by an eternal and
immutable law of equity, and by the controlling influ-
ence of Divine Providence, the immortal soul is brought
to the summit of perfection. If one, however, were to
object to our statement, that the word of preaching was
purposely put aside by certain men of wicked and worth-
less character, and (were to inquire) why the word was
preached to those over whom the Tyrians, who were cer-
tainly despised, are preferred in comparison (by which
proceeding, certainly, their wickedness was increased,
and their condemnation rendered more severe, that they
should hear the word who were not to believe it), they
must be answered in the following manner : God, who is
the Creator of the minds of all men, foreseeing com-
plaints against His providence, especially on the part of
those who say, " How could we believe when we neither
beheld those things which others saw, nor heard those
words which were preached to others? in so far is the
blame removed from us, since they to whom the word
was announced, and the signs manifested, made no delay
whatever, but became believers, overpowered by the very
force of the miracles ; " wishing to destroy the grounds
for complaints of this kind, and to show that it was no
concealment of Divine Providence, but the determination
of the human mind which was the cause of their ruin,
bestowed the grace of His benefits even upon the un-
worthy and the unbelieving, that every mouth might
indeed be shut, and that the mind of man might know
that all the deficiency was on its own part, and none on
that of God ; and that it may, at the same time, be under-
stood and recognised that he receives a heavier sentence
of condemnation who has despised the divine benefits
conferred upon him than he who has not deserved to
obtain or hear them, and that it is a peculiarity of divine
compassion, and a mark of the extreme justice of its
administration, that it sometimes conceals from certain
individuals the opportunity of either seeing or hearing
the mysteries of divine power, lest, after beholding the
power of the miracles, and recognising and hearing the
mysteries of its wisdom, they should, on treating them
with contempt and indifference, be punished with greater
severity for their impiety.


1 8. Let us now look to the expression, ''It is not of
him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God
that showeth mercy." ^ For our opponents assert, that if
it does not depend upon him that willeth, nor on him that
runneth, but on God that showeth mercy, that a man be
saved, our salvation is not in our own power. For our
nature i^s such as to admit of our either being saved or not,
or else our salvation rests solely on the will of Him who,
if He wills it, shows mercy, and confers salvation. Now
let us inquire, in the first place, of such persons, whether


we do not rather strive to maintain
an attitude of piety in everything re-
garding God affd His Christ,^ seeing
we endeavour by every means to prove
that, in matters so great and so pecul-
iar regarding the varied providence
of God, He takes an oversight of the
immortal soul. If, indeed, one were
to inquire regarding those things that
are objected to, why those who saw
wonders and who heard divine words
are not benefited, while the Tyrians
would have repented if such had been
performed and spoken amongst them ;
and should ask, and say. Why did the
Saviour proclaim such to these per-
sons, to their own hurt, that their sin
might be reckoned to them as heavi-
er ? we must say, in answer to such an
one, that He who understands the dis-
positions ^ of all those who find fault
with His providence — (alleging) that
it is owing to it that they have not be-
lieved, because it did not permit them
to see what it enabled others to behold,
and did not arrange for them to hear
those words by which others, on hear-
ing them, were benefited — wishing to
prove that their defence is not founded
on reason. He grants those advantages
which those who blame His admin-
istration asked ; in order that, after
obtaining them, they may notwith-
standing be convicted of the greatest
impiety in not having even then yielded
themselves to be benefited, and may
cease from such audacity ; and having
been made free in respect to this very
point, may learn that God occasion-
ally, in conferring benefits upon cer-
tain persons, delays and procrastinates,
not conferring the favour of seeing
and hearing those things which, when
seen and heard, would render the sin
of those who did not believe, after
acts so great and peculiar, heavier and
more serious.

1 8. Let us look next at the passage :
" So, then, it is not of him that willeth,
nor of him that runneth, but of God
that showeth mercy." '^ For they who
find fault say : If " it is not of him
that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
but of God that showeth mercy," sal-
vation does not depend upon our-
selves, but upon the arrangement 5
made by Him who has formed^ us


' Futuri status causam prjestat semper
lyMVi^o/xida Trjpelv irepi. ©eou, etc. 3 Si,a8e


l fir) naWov i]IJ.ft^ Tpb5 Ta> e^€Ta(TTi,KiZ
<aTa(rK€vrj's, 6 KaraiTKevdaavTOi.


TO tvae^es ndv


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


321


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


to desire blessings be a good or evil act ; and whether to
hasten after good as a final aim - be worthy of praise.
If they were to answer that such a procedure was deserv-
ing of censure, they would evidently be mad ; for all holy
men both desire blessings and run after them, and cer-
tainly are not blameworthy. How, then, is it that he who
is not saved, if he be of an evil nature, desires blessings,
and runs after them, but does not find them ? For they
say that a bad tree does not bring forth good fruits, where-
as it is a good fruit to desire blessings. And how is the
fruit of a bad tree good? And if they assert that to
desire blessings, and to run after them, is an act of indif-
ference,4 i.e., neither good nor bad, we shall reply, that if
it be an indifferent act to desire blessings, and to run after
them, then the opposite of that will also be an indifferent
act, viz., to desire evils, and to run after them ; whereas
it is certain that it is not an indifferent act to desire evils,
and to run after them, but one that is manifestly wicked.
It is established, then, that to desire and follow after
blessings is not an indifferent, but a virtuous proceeding.

Having now repelled these objections by the answer
which we have given, let us hasten on to the discussion
of the sul)ject itself, in which it is said, " It is not of him
that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that
showeth mercy." ^ In the book of Psalms — in the Songs
of Degrees, which are ascribed to Solomon — the follow-
ing statement occurs : " Except the Lord build the house,
they labour in vain that build it ; except the Lord keep
the city, the watchman waketh but in vain." 9 By which
words he does not indeed indicate that we should cease
from building or watching over the safe keeping of that
city which is within us ; but what he points out is this,
that whatever is built without God, and whatever is
guarded without him, is built in vain, and guarded to no
purpose. For in all things that are well built and well
protected, the Lord is held to be the cause either of the
building or of its protection. As if, e.g., we were to be-
hold some magnificent structure and mass of splendid
building reared with beauteous architectural skill, would
we not justly and deservedly say that such was built not
by human power, but by divine help and might? And
yet from such a statement it will not be meant that the
labour and industry of human effort were inactive, and
effected nothing at all. Or again, if we were to see some
city surrounded by a severe blockade of the enemy, in
which threatening engines were brought against the walls,
and the place hard pressed by a vallum, and weapons,
and fire, and all the instruments of war, by which destruc-
tion is prepared, would we not rightly and deservedly say,
if the enemy were repelled and put to flight, that the de-
liverance had been wrought for the liberated city by God ?
And yet we would not mean, by so speaking, that either
the vigilance of the sentinels, or the alertness of the young
men," or the protection of the guards, had been wanting.
And the apostle also must be understood in a similar
manner, because the human will alone is not sufficient to
obtain salvation ; nor is any mortal running able to win


such as we are, or on the purpose ' of
Him who showeth mercy when he
pleases. Now we must ask these per-
sons the following questions : Whether
to desire what is good is virtuous or
vicious ; and whether the desire to
run in order to reach the goal in the
pursuit of what is good be worthy of
praise or censure ? And if they shall
say that it is worthy of censure, they
will return an absurd answer ; ^ since
the saints desire and run, and manifestly
in so acting do nothing that is blame-
worthy. But if they shall say that it is
virtuous to desire what is good, and to
run after what is good, we shall ask them
how a perishing nature desires better
things ; 5 for it is like an evil tree pro-
ducing good fruit, since it is a virtuous
act to desire better things. They will
give (perhaps) a third answer, that to
desire and run after what is good is
one of those things that are indiffer-
ent,^ and neither beautiful 7 nor wicked.
Now to this we must say, that if to
desire and to run after what is good be
a thing of indifference, then the oppo-
site also is a thing of indifference, viz.,
to desire what is evil, and to run after
it. But it is not a thing of indiffer-
ence to desire what is evil, and to run
after it. And therefore also, to desire
what is good, and to run after it, is not
a thing of indifference. Such, then, is
the defence which I think we can offer
to the statement, that " it is not of him
that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
but of God that showeth mercy." ^
Solomon says in the book of Psalms
(for the Song of Degrees '° is his, from
which we shall quote the words) :
" Unless the Lord build the house,
they labour in vain that build it ; ex-
cept the Lord keep the city, the
watchman waketh in vain : " 9 not dis-
suading us from building, nor teaching
us not to keep watch in order to guard
the city in our soul, but showing that
what is built without God, and does
not receive a guard from Him, is built
in vain and watched to no purpose, be-
cause God might reasonably be enti-
tled the Lord of the building ; and the
Governor of all things, the Ruler of
the guard of the city. As, then, if we
were to say that such a building is not
the work of the builder, but of God,


Trpoaipeo-eu)?. 2 Ad finem boni. 3 rrapd T-qv evapyeiav. * Medium est velle bona. S ra KpciTTOva. ° ritv ixtcwv etrri.

aaTeiov. 8 Rom. \x. i6. 9 Ps. cxxvii. I. '° i^ori tcoi/ ava^ 0.8 fj.iui', " Procinctum juvenum.


322


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


the heavenly (rewards), and to obtain the prize of our
high calling ' of God in Christ Jesus, unless this very good
will of ours, and ready purpose, and whatever that dili-
gence within us may be, be aided or furnished with divine
help. And therefore most logically^ did the apostle say,
that " it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that run-
neth, but of God that showeth mercy ; " in the same
manner as if we were to say of agriculture what is actu-
ally written : " I planted, ApoUos watered ; but God gave
the increase. So then neither is he that planteth any-
thing, neither he that watereth ; but God that giveth the
increase.""* As, therefore, when a field has brought good
and rich crops to perfect maturity, no one would piously
and logically assert that the husbandman had made those
fruits, but would acknowledge that they had been pro-
duced by God ; so also is our own perfection brought
about, not indeed by our remaining inactive and idle,5
(but by some activity on our part) : and yet the consum-
mation of it will not be ascribed to us, but to God, who
is the first and chief cause of the work. So, when a ship
has overcome the dangers of the sea, although the result
be accomplished by great labour on the part of the sailors,
and by the aid of all the art of navigation, and by the
zeal and carefulness of the pilot, and by the favouring in-
fluence of the breezes, and the careful observation of the
signs of the stars, no one in his sound senses would ascribe
the safety of the vessel, when, after being tossed by the
waves, and wearied by the billows, it has at last reached
the harbour in safety, to anything else than to the mercy
of God. Not even the sailors or pilot venture to say,
" I have saved the ship," but they refer all to the mercy
of God ; not that they feel that they have contributed
no skill or labour to save the ship, but because they know
that while they contributed the labour, the safety of the
vessel was ensured by God. So also in the race of our
life we ourselves must expend labour, and bring diligence
and zeal to bear ; but it is from God that salvation is to
be hoped for as the fruit of our labour. Otherwise, if God
demand none of our labour, His commandments will
appear to be superfluous. In vain, also, does Paul blame
some for having fallen from the truth, and praise others for
abiding in the faith ; and to no purpose does he deliver
certain precepts and institutions to the Churches : in vain,
also, do we ourselves either desire or run after what is
good. But it is certain that these things are not done in
vain ; and it is certain that neither do the apostles give
instructions in vain, nor the Lord enact laws without a
reason. It follows, therefore, that we declare it to be in
vain, rather, for the heretics to speak evil of these good
declarations.


and that it was not owing to the suc-
cessful effort of the watcher, but of
the God who is over all, that such a
city suffered no injury from its ene-
mies, we should not be wrong,3 it being
understood that something also had
been done by human means, but the
benefit being gratefully referred to God
who brought it to pass ; so, seeing
that the (mere) human desire is not
sufficient to attain the end, and that
the running of those who are, as it
were, athletes, does not enable them
to gain the prize of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus — for these
things are accomplished with the assist-
ance of God — it is well said that " it
is not of him that willeth, nor of him
that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy." As if also it were said with
regard to husbandry what also is ac-
tually recorded : " I planted, ApoUos
watered ; and God gave the increase.
So then neither is he that planteth any-
thing, neither he that watereth ; but
God that giveth the increase." ■♦ Now
we could not piously assert that the
production of full crops was the work
of the husbandman, or of him that
watered, but the work of God. So
also our own perfection is brought
about, not as if we ourselves did noth-
ing ; ^ for it is not completed ^ by
us, but God produces the greater part
of it. And that this assertion may be
more clearly believed, we shall take
an illustration from the art of naviga-
tion. For in comparison with the
effect of the winds,** and the mildness
of the air,9 and the light of the stars,
all co-operating in the preservation of
the crew, what proportion '° could the
art of navigation be said to bear in
the bringing of the ship into harbour?
— since even the sailors themselves,
from piety, do not venture to assert
often that they had saved the ship, but
refer all to God ; not as if they had
done nothing, but because what had
been done by Providence was infinite-
ly " greater than what had been effect-
ed by their art. And in the matter of
our salvation, what is done by God is
infinitely greater than what is done by
ourselves : and therefore, I think, is it


I Supernse vocationis. = Valde consequenter. 3 ov< av TTTaioi.iJ.ev. * i Cor. iii. 6, 7. 5 " Nostra perfectio non quidem
nobis cessantibus et otiosis efficitur." There is an ellipsis of some such words as, " but by activity on our part." ^

6 I) rifieripa T6A<:iu>(ri9 ou^' lUijiSei' i]fi.uiv irpa^di/Tuiv yiveTai. ^ OTrapn^eTai. 8 jrvorjv, 9 ivKpacriav. '° j.pidix6v,

II eis vnepfioK-qv iroWaTrKdaiov,


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


323


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


19. After this there followed this point, that " to will
and to do are of God." ^ Our opponents maintain that
if to will be of God, and if to do be of Him, or if, whether
we act or desire well or ill, it be of God, then in that
case we are not possessed of free-will. Now to this we
have to answer, that the words of the apostle do not say
that to will evil is of God, or that to will good is of Him ;
nor that to do good or evil is of God ; but his statement
is a general one, that to will and to do are of God. For
as we have from God this very quality, that we are men,'*
that we breathe, that we move ; so also we have from
God (the faculty) by which we will, as if we were to say
that our power of motion is from God,^ or that the per-
forming of these duties by the individual members, and
their movements, are from God. From which, certainly,
I do not understand this, that because the hand moves,
e.g., to punish unjustly, or to commit an act of theft, the
act is of God, but only that the power of motion ^ is from
God ; while it is our duty to turn those movements, the
power of executing which we have from God, either to
purposes of good or evil. And so what the apostle says
is, that we receive indeed the power of volition, but that
we misuse the will either to good or evil desires. In a
similar way, also, we must judge of results.


said that " it is not of him that will-
eth, nor of him that nmneth, but of
God that showeth mercy." For if in
the manner which they imagine we
must explain the statement,' that " it
is not of him that willeth, nor of him
that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy," the commandments are super-
fluous ; and it is in vain that Paul him-
self blames some for having fallen away,
and approves of others as having re-
mained upright, and enacts laws for
the Churches : it is in vain also that
we give ourselves up to desire better
things, and in vain also (to attempt)
to run. But it is not in vain that Paul
gives such advice, censuring some
and approving of others ; nor in vain
that we give ourselves up to the desire
of better things, and to the chase after
things that are pre-eminent. They
have accordingly not well explained
the meaning of the passage.^

19. Besides these, there is the pas-
sage, " Both to will and to do are of
God." 3 And some assert that, if to
will be of God, and to do be of God,
and if, whether we will evil or do evil,
these (movements) come to us from
God, then, if so, we are not possessed
of free-will. But again, on the other
hand, when we will better things, and
do things that are more excellent, 5
seeing that willing and doing are from
God, it is not we who have done the
more excellent things, but we only
appeared (to perform them), while it
was God that bestowed them ; 7 so
that even in this respect we do not
possess free-will. Now to this we
have to answer, that the language of
the apostle does not assert that to will
evil is of God, or to will good is of
Him (and similarly with respect to
doing better and worse) ; but that to
will in a general 9 way, and to run in
a general way, (are from Him). For
as we have from God (the property)
of being living things and human
beings, so also have we that of willing
generally, and, so to speak, of motion
in general. And as, possessing (the
property) of life and of motion, and
of moving, e.g., these members, the
hands or the feet, we could not righdy
say '° that we had from God this


' eKKaix^di'en'. 2 f'|eiArjff)a(Ti To. Kara Toi' Ton-oi'. 3 Q(_ Phil.

* Sicut dicamus, quod movemur, ex Deo est. ' 17/iieis iJ-ev eoofan
9 TO KaddAou OiAnv. 1° evAoYw?.


. 13. * Hoc ipsum, quod homines sumus. 5 to Jia<f>€povTo.

V, 6 &i Oeb? rai/Ta etiujp^craTo. * Hoc ipsum, quod movetur.


324


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


20. But with respect to the declaration of the apostle,
" Therefore hath He mercy on whom He will have mercy,
and whom He will He hardeneth. Thou wilt say then
unto me, Why doth He yet find fault ? For who hath
resisted His will ? Nay but, O man, who art thou that
repliest against God ? Shall the thing formed say to him
that formed it. Why hast thou made me thus ? Hath not
the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make
one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?" '^
Some one will perhaps say, that as the potter out of the
same lump makes some vessels to honour, and others to
dishonour, so God creates some men for perdition, and
others for salvation ; and that it is not therefore in our
own power either to be saved or to perish ; by which
reasoning we appear not to be possessed of free-will. We
must answer those who are of this opinion with the ques-
tion, Whether it is possible for the apostle to contradict
himself? And if this cannot be imagined of an apostle,
how shall he appear, according to them, to be just in
blaming those who committed fornication in Corinth, or
those who sinned, and did not repent of their unchastity,
and fornication, and uncleanness, which they had com-
mitted? How, also, does he greatly praise those who
acted rightly, like the house of Onesiphorus, saying, "The
Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus ; for he oft
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain : but,
when he had come to Rome, he sought me out very dili-
gently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him that
he may find mercy of the Lord in that day." s Now it is
not consistent with apostolic gravity to blame him who
is worthy of blame, i.e., who has sinned, and greatly to
praise him who is deserving of praise for his good works ;
and again, as if it were in no one's power to do any good
or evil, to say that it was the Creator's doing that every
one should act virtuously or wickedly, seeing He makes
one vessel to honour, and another to dishonour. And
how can he add that statement, " We must all stand
before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every one of us
may receive in his body, according to what he hath done,
whether it be good or bad ? " *" For what reward of good
will be conferred on him who could not commit evil,
being formed by the Creator to that very end? or what
punishment will deservedly be inflicted on him who was
unable to do good in consequence of the creative act of


species of motion,' whereby we moved
to strike, or destroy, or take away
another's goods, but that we had re-
ceived from Him simply the generic^
power of motion, which we employed
to better or worse purposes ; so we
have obtained from God (the power)
of acting, in respect of our being
living things, and (the power) to will
from the Creator,^ while we employ
the power of will, as well as that of
action, for the noblest objects, or the
opposite.

20. Still the declaration of the
apostle will appear to drag us to the
conclusion that we are not possessed
of freedom of will, in which, object-
ing against himself, he says, "There-
fore hath He mercy on whom He
will have mercy, and whom He will
He hardeneth. Thou wilt say then
unto me, Why doth He yet find fg.ult?
For who hath resisted His will? Nay
but, O man, who art thou that repliest
against God ? Shall the thing formed
say to him that formed it, Why hast
thou made me thus? Hath not the
potter power over the clay, of the same
lump to make one vessel unto honour,
and another unto dishonour? "^ For
it will be said : If the potter of the
same lump make some vessels to hon-
our and others to dishonour, and God
thus form some men for salvation and
others for ruin, then salvation or ruin
does not depend upon ourselves, nor
are we possessed of free-will. Now
we must ask him who deals so with
these passages, whether it is possible
to conceive of the apostle as contra-
dicting himself 1 presume, however,
that no one will venture to say so. If,
then, the apostle does not utter con-
tradictions, how can he, according to
him who so understands him, reason-
ably find fault, censuring the individual
at Corinth who had committed forni-
cation, or those who had fallen away,
and had not repented of the licen-
tiousness and impurity of which they
had been guilty? And how pan he
bless those whom he praises as having
done well, as he does the house of
Onesiphorus in these words: "The
Lord give mercy to the house of On-
esiphorus ; for he oft refreshed me,
and was not ashamed of my chain :


TO fj.kv yeviKOv, to Kivetcrdai. 3 Sr)ix.iovpyov


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


325


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


his Maker?' Then, again, how is not this opposed to
that other declaration elsewhere, that " in a great house
there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of
wood and of earth, and some to honour, and some to
dishonour. If a man therefore purge himself from these,
he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and meet for
the Master's use, prepared unto every good work." ■< He,
accordingly, who purges himself, is made a vessel unto
honour, while he who has disdained to cleanse himself
from his impurity is made a vessel unto dishonour. From
such declarations, in my opinion, the. cause of our actions
can in no degree be referred to the Creator. For God
the Creator makes a certain vessel unto honour, and other
vessels to dishonour ; but that vessel which has cleansed
itself from all impurity He makes a vessel unto honour,
while that which has stained itself with the filth of vice
He makes a vessel unto dishonour. The conclusion from
which, accordingly, is this, that the cause of each one's
actions is a pre-existing one ; and then every one, accord-
ing to his deserts, is made by God either a vessel unto
honour or dishonour. Therefore every individual vessel
has furnished to its Creator out of itself the causes and
occasions of its being formed by Him to be either a
vessel unto honour or one unto dishonour. And if the
assertion appear correct, as it certainly is, and in harmony
with all piety, that it is due to previous causes that every
vessel be prepared by God either to honour or to dishon-
our, it does not appear absurd that, in discussing remoter
causes in the same order, and in the same method, we
should come to the same conclusion respecting the nature
of souls, and (believe) that this was the reason why Jacob
was beloved before he was born into this world, and Esau
hated, while he still was contamed in the womb of his
mother.


but, when he was in Rome, he sought
me out very diligently, and found me.
The Lord grant to him that he may
find mercy of the Lord in that day."^
It is not consistent for the same
apostle 3 to blame the sinner as worthy
of censure, and to praise him who had
done well as deserving of approval ;
and again, on the other hand, to say,
as if nothing depended on ourselves,
that the cause was in the Creator 5 why
the one vessel was formed to honour,
and the other to dishonour. And how
is this statement correct : ^ " For we
must all appear before the judgment-
seat of Christ ; that every one may
receive the things done in his body,
according to that he hath done,
whether it be good or bad," 7 since
they who have done evil have ad-
vanced to this pitch of wickedness^
because they were created vessels unto
dishonour, while they that have lived
virtuously have done good because
they were created from the beginning
for this purpose, and became vessels
unto honour? And again, how does
not the statement made elsewhere
conflict with the view which these
persons draw from the words which
we have quoted (that it is the fault
of the Creator that one vessel is in
honour and another in dishonour),
viz., " that in a great house there are
not only vessels of gold and silver,
but also of wood and of earth ; and
some to honour, and some to dishon-
our. If a man therefore purge him-
self, he shall be a vessel unto honour,
sanctified, and meet for the Master's
use, and prepared unto every good
work ; " '* for if he who purges himself
becomes a vessel unto honour, and
he who allows himself to remain un-
purged^ becomes a vessel unto dis-
honour, then, so far as these words
are concerned, the Creator is not at
all to blame. For the Creator makes
vessels of honour and vessels of dis-
honour, not from the beginning ac-
cording to His foreknowledge,'" since
lie does not condemn or justify be-
forehand " according to it; but (He
makes) those into vessels of honour
who purged themselves, and those
into vessels of dishonour who allowed


_ 2 2 Tim.


■ I' aiiTov 6j) an6<rTo\6v e(7Ti. * 2 Tim. ii. 20, 21.

' eVi toOto n-pofeut. 9 an-ept/coSapToi' eavTOi' nepiiSu.


,26


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATIN.


21. Nay, that very declaration, that from the same
lump a vessel is formed both to honour and to dishonour,
will not push us hard ; for we assert that the nature of all
rational souls is the same, as one lump of clay is described
as being under the treatment of the potter. Seeing, then,
the nature of rational creatures is one, God, according
to the previous grounds of merit,^ created and formed out
of it, as the potter out of the one lump, some persons to
honour and others to dishonour. Now, as regards the
language of the apostle, which he utters as if in a tone of
censure, " Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest
against God?" he means, I think, to point out that such
a censure does not refer to any believer who lives rightly
and justly, and who has confidence in God, i.e., to such
an one as Moses was, of whom Scripture says that " Moses
spake, and God answered him by a voice ; " 5 and as God
answered Moses, so also does every saint answer God.
But he who is an unbeliever, and loses confidence in
answering before God owing to the unworthiness of his
life and conversation, and who, in relation to these mat-
ters, does not seek to learn and make progress, but to
oppose and resist, and who, to speak more plainly, is
such an one as to be able to say those words which the
apostle indicates, when he says, " Why, then, does He yet
find fault? for who will resist His will? " — to such an one
may the censure of the apostle rightly be directed, " Nay
but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God?"
This censure accordingly applies not to believers and
saints, but to unbelievers and wicked men.

Now, to those who introduce souls of different natures,^
and who turn this declaration of the apostle to the support
of their own opinion, we have to reply as follows : If even
they are agreed as to what the apc^tle says, that out of
the one lump are formed both those who are made to
honour and those who are made to dishonour, whom they
term of a nature that is to be saved and destroyed, there
will then be no longer souls of different natures, but one
nature for all. And if they admit that one and the same
potter may undoubtedly denote one Creator, there will not


FROM THE GREEK.

themselves to remain unpurged : so
that it results from older causes '
(which operated) in the formation of
the vessels unto honour and dishon-
our, that one was created for the for-
mer condition, and another for the
latter. But if we once admit that
there were certain older causes (at
work) in the forming of a vessel unto
honour, and of one unto dishonour,
what absurdity is there in going back
to the subject of the soul, and (in
supposing) that a more ancient cause
for Jacob being loved and for Esau
being hated existed with respect to
Jacob before his assumption of a body,
and with regard to Esau before he was
conceived in the womb of Rebecca?

2 1. And at the same time, it is
clearly shown that, as far as regards
the underlying nature,^ as there is one
(piece of) clay which is under the
hands of the potter, from which piece
vessels are formed unto honour and
dishonour ; so the one nature of every
soul being in the hands of God, and,
so to speak, there being (only) one
lump of reasonable beings,-* certain
causes of more ancient date led to
some being created vessels unto hon-
our, and others vessels unto dishonour.
But if the language of the apostle con-
vey a censure when he says, " Nay
but, O man, who art thou that re-
pliest against God?" it teaches us
that he who has confidence before
God, and is faithful, and has lived
virtuously, would not hear the words,
"Who art thou that repliest against
God ? " Such an one, e. g., as
Moses was, " For Moses spake, and
God answered him with a voice ;"^
and as God answers Moses, so does
a saint also answer God. But he
who does not possess this confidence,
manifestly, either because he has lost
it, or because he investigates these
matters not from a love of knowledge,
but from a desire to find fault,^ and
who therefore says, "Why does He
yet find fault? for who hath resisted
His will?" would merit the language
of censure, which says, " Nay but, O
man, who art thou that repliest against
God?"

Now to those who introduce dif-
ferent natures, and who make use


rrpecrfivTepuii' a
vnocrTaaeuiv.


Cf. Ex. xix. ig.


3 Secundum prgecedentes meritorum causas.
7 Diversas animarum naturas. ^ Kara <#)iA


kv'o'S <j>vpaiJ.a.TOi Ttav


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


327


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


be different creators either of those who are saved, or of
those who perish. Now, truly, let them choose whether
they will have a good Creator to be intended who creates
bad and ruined men, or one who is not good, who creates
good men and those who are prepared to honour. For
the necessity of returning an answer will extort from them
one of these two alternatives. But according to our dec-
laration, whereby we say that it is owing to preceding
causes that God makes vessels either to honour or to dis-
honour, the approval of God's justice is in no respect
limited. For it is possible that this vessel, which owing
to previous causes was made in this world to honour, may,
if it behave negligently, be converted in another world,
according to the deserts of its conduct, into a vessel unto
dishonour : as again, if any one, owing to preceding
causes, was formed by his Creator in this life a vessel
unto dishonour, and shall mend his ways and cleanse
himself from all filth and vice, he may, in the new world,
be made a vessel to honour, sanctified and useful, and
prepared unto every good work. Finally, those who were
formed by God in this world to be Israelites, and who
have lived a life unworthy of the nobility of their race,
and have fallen away from the grandeur of their descent,
will, in the world to come, in a certain degree ^ be con-
verted, on account of their unbelief, from vessels of hon-
our into vessels of dishonour ; while, on the other hand,
many who in this life were reckoned among Egyptian or
Idumean vessels, having adopted the faith and practice
of Israelites, when they shall have done the works of
Israelites, and shall have entered the Church of the Lord,
will exist as vessels of honour in the revelation of the sons
of God. From which it is more agreeable to the rule of
piety to believe that every rational being, according to his
purpose and manner of life, is converted, sometimes from
bad to good, and falls away sometimes from good to bad :
that some abide in good, and others advance to a better
condition, and always ascend to higher things, until they
reach the highest grade of all ; while others, again, re-
main in evil, or, if the wickedness within them begin to
spread itself further, they descend to a worse condition,
and sink into the lowest depth of wickedness. Whence
also we must suppose that it is possible there may be
some who began at first indeed with small offences, but
who have poured out wickedness to such a degree, and
attained such proficiency in evil, that in the measure of
their wickedness they are equal even to the opposing
powers : and again, if, by means of many severe adminis-
trations of punishment, they are able at some future time
to recover their senses, and gradually attempt to find
healing for their wountls, they may, on ceasing from their
wickedness, be restored to a state of goodness. Whence
we are of opinion that, seeing the soul, as we have fre-
quently said, is immortal and eternal, it is possible that,
in the many and endless periods of duration in the im-
measurable and different worlds, it may descend from the
highest good to the lowest evil, or be restored from
the lowest evil to the highest good.


of the declaration of the apostle (to
support their view), the following
must be our answer. If they main-
tain • that those who perish and those
who are saved are formed of one
lump, and that the Creator of those
who are saved is the Creator also of
them who are lost, and if He is good
who creates not only spiritual but also
earthy (natures) (for this follows from
their view), it is nevertheless possible
that he who, in consequence of cer-
tain former acts of righteousness,^ had
now been made a vessel of honour,
but who had not (afterwards) acted
in a similar manner, nor done things
befitting a vessel of honour, was con-
verted in another world into a vessel
of dishonour ; as, on the other hand,
it is possible that he who, owing to
causes more ancient than the present
life, was here a vessel of dishonour,
may after reformation become in the
new creation " a vessel of honour,
sanctified and meet for the Master's
use, prepared unto every good work."
And perhaps those who are now Is-
raelites, not having lived worthily of
their descent, will be deprived of their
rank, being changed, as it were, from
vessels of honour into those of dis-
honour ; and many of the present
Egyptians and Idumeans who came
near to Israel, when they shall have
borne fruit to a larger extent, shall
enter into the Church of the Lord,
being no longer accounted Egyptians
and Idumeans, but becoming Israel-
ites : so that, according to this view,
it is owing to their (varying) purposes
that some advance from a worse to
a better condition, and others fall from
better to worse ; while others, again,
are preserved in a virtuous course,
or ascend from good to better ; and
others, on the contrary, remain in a
course of evil, or from bad become
worse, as their wickedness flows on.


«K npOT€puJV TiVltil' KaTOpOtOfXaTU


3 QuoJammodo.


328


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


FROM THE LATI^


FROM THE GREEK.


22. But since the words of the apostle, in what he says
regarding vessels of honour or dishonour, that " if a man
therefore purge himself, he will be a vessel unto honour,
sanctified and meet for the Master's service, and prepared
unto every good work," appear to place nothing in the
power of God, but all in ourselves ; while in those in
which he declares that " the potter hath power over the
clay, to make of the same lump one vessel to honour,
another to dishonour," he seems to refer the whole to
God, — it is not to be understood that those statements
are contradictory, but the two meanings are to be reduced
to agreement, and one signification must be drawn from
both, viz., that we are not to suppose either that those
things which are in our own power can be done without
the help of God, or that those which are in God's hand
can be brought to completion without the intervention of
our acts, and desires, and intention ; because we have it
not in our own power so to will or do anything, as not
to know that this very faculty, by which we are able to
will or to do, was bestowed on us by God, according
td the distinction which we indicated above. Or again,
when God forms vessels, some to honour and others to
dishonour, we are to suppose that He does not regard
either our wills, or our purposes, or our deserts, to be the
causes of the honour or dishonour, as if they were a sort of
matter from which He may form the vessel of each one
of us either to honour or to dishonour ; whereas the very
movement of the soul itself, or the i>urpose of the under-
standing, may of itself suggest to him, who is not unaware
of his heart and the thoughts of his mind, whether his
vessel ought to be formed to honour or to dishonour.
But let these points suffice, which we have discussed as
we best could, regarding the questions connected with the
freedom of the will.^


2 2. But since the apostle in one
place does not pretend that the be-
coming of a vessel unto honour or dis-
honour depends upon God, but refers
back the whole to ourselves, saying,
" If, then, a man purge himself, he
will be a vessel unto honour, sanctified,
meet for the Master's use, and pre-
pared unto every good work ; " and
elsewhere does not even pretend that
it is dependent upon ourselves, but
appears to attribute the whole to God,
saying, " The potter hath power over
the clay, of the same lump to make
one vessel unto honour and another
to dishonour ; " and as his statements
are not contradictory, we must recon-
cile them, and extract one complete
statement from both. Neither does
our own power,' apart from the knowl-
edge^ of God, compel us to make
progress ; nor does the knowledge of
God (do so), unless we ourselves also
contribute something to the good re-
sult ; nor does our own power, apart
from the knowledge of God, and the
use of the power that worthily belongs
to us,3 make a man become (a vessel)
unto honour or dishonour ; nor does
the will of God alone -t form a man to
honour or to dishonour, unless He
hold our will to be a kind of matter
that admits of variation, 5 and that in-
clines to a better or worse course of
conduct. And these observations are
sufficient to have been made by us on
the subject of free-will.


' TO e(f>' Tjixh'. 2 ^TriaTyiixT): probably i

liberi nostri arbitrii, quod peculiare nobis el
6 [Elucidation II.]


I the sense of Trpdyrioo-i?. 3 Trj? /

meriti nostri est" (Redepenning).


4 OUT€ ToO CTTt Tui Httii {XOVOi'


ill'. " Nec sine usu
\jKr\v Tt^'a 6ta(/)opas.


CHAP. 11. ON THE OPPOSING POWERS.

I. We have now to notice, agreeably to the
statements of Scripture, how the opposing powers,
or the devil himself, contends with the human
race, inciting and instigating men to sin. And
in the first place, in the book of Genesis,' the
serpent is described as having seduced Eve ; re-
garding whom, in the work entitled The Ascen-
sion of Moses ^ (a little treatise, of which the
Aposde Jude makes mention in his Epistle), the
archangel Michael, when disputing with the devil


' Gen. iii.

2 -phis apocryphal work, entitled in Hebrew ntJ''D m'£33, and
in Greek 'AvaAr)i|/i9, or 'A;'a/3acri; Mcuucreu)?, is mentioned by several
ancient writers; e.g., by Athanasius, in his Syuo/>sts Sacrce Scrip-
tnrce ; Nicephorus Constantinopolitanus in his Sttckoinetri'a, ap-
pended to the Chronicon of Eusebius (where he says the ' .\v6^Kr\'\it.<;
contained 1400 verses), in the Acts of the Council of Nice, etc., etc.
(Ruseus).


regarding the body of Moses, says that the ser-
pent, being inspired by the devil, was the cause
of Adam and Eve's transgression. This also is
made a subject of inquiry by some, viz., who the
angel was that, speaking from heaven to Abraham,
said, " Now I know that thou fearest God, and on
my account hast not spared thy beloved son, whom
thou lovedst."3 For he is manifestly described
as an angel who said that he knew then that
Abraham feared God, and had not spared his
beloved son, as the Scripture declares, although
he did not say that it was on account of God that
Abraham had done this, but on his, that is, the
speaker's account. We must also ascertain who


3 Gen. xxii. 12. The reading in the text is according to the
Septuagint and Vulgate, with the exception of the words "quern
dilexisti," which are an insertion.


Chap. II.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


329


that is of whom it is stated in the book of Exodus
that he wished to slay Moses, because he was
taking his departure for Egypt ; ' and afterwards,
also, who he is that is called the destroying- angel,
as well as he who in the book of Leviticus is
called Apopompseus, i.e., Averter, regarding
whom Scripture says, " One lot for the Lord, and
one lot for Apopomp^eus, i.e., the Averter." 3 In
the first book of Kings, also, an evil spirit is said
to strangle + Saul ; and in the third book, Micaiah
the prophet says, " I saw the Lord of Israel
sitting on His throne, and all the host of heaven
standing by Him, on His right hand and on His
left. And the Lord said, Who will deceive
Achab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall
at Ramoth-gilead? And one said on this man-
ner, and another said on that manner. And
there came forth a spirit, and stood before the
Lc%D, and said, I will deceive him. And the
Lord said to him. Wherewith? And he said,
I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in
the mouth of all his prophets. And He said.
Thou shalt deceive him, and prevail also : go
forth, and do so quickly. And now therefore
the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of
all thy prophets : the Lord hath spoken evil
concerning thee." 5 Now by this last quotation
it is clearly shown that a certain spirit, from his
own (free) will and choice, elected to deceive
(Achab), and to work a lie, in order that the
Lord might mislead the king to his death, for he
deserved to suffer. In the first book of Chroni-
cles also it is said, " The devil, Satan, stood up
against Israel, and provoked David to number
the people." ^ In the Psalms, moreover, an evil
angel is said to harass ^ certain persons. In the
book of Ecclesiastes, too, Solomon says, " If the
spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not
thy place ; for soundness will restrain many
transgressions."^ In Zechariah^ we read that
the devil stood on the right hand of Joshua, and
resisted him. Isaiah says that the sword of the
Lord arises against the dragon, the crooked '°
serpent." And what shall I say of Ezekiel, who
in his second vision prophesies most unmistake-


' Cf. Ex. iv. 24-26.

2 Ex. xii. 23, exterminator. Percussor, Vulgate; oAoSpeuio^,
Sept.

3 Lev. xvi. 8. 'A7rojro/j.7faros is the reading of the Sept., " Caper
emissarius" of the Vulgate, 7INTJ,' of the Masoretic text. Cf. Furst
and Gesenius s.v. Rufinus translates Apopompaeus by " transmissor."

* I Sam. xviii. lo, eflbcare. Septuagint has i-rrtai: Vulgate,
" invasit; " the Masoretic text Tl/Jfri, fell on.


5 I Kings xxii. 19-23.
* I Chron. xxi. i.
' Atterere.

8 Ecoles. X. 4," For yielding pacifieth great offences." The words
in the text are, " Quoniam sanitas compescet multa peccata." The
Vulgate has, " Curatio faciet cessare peccata maxima." The Septua-
gint reads, 'lajiia KaroTrauaei a/xaprias /neyaAos: while the Masoretic
text has Ni3")0 (curatio).

9 Zech. iii. I.
'° PerversuMi.
" Isa. xxvii. i.


ably to the prince of Tyre regarding an opposing
power, and who says also that the dragon dwells
in the rivers of Egypt ? '^ Nay, with what else
are the contents of the whole work which is
written regarding Job occupied, save with the
(doings) of the devil, who asks that power may
be given him over all that Job possesses, and
over his sons, and even over his person? And
yet the devil is defeated through the patience
of Job. In that book the Lord has by His
answers imparted much information regarding
the power of that dragon which opposes us.
Such, meanwhile, are the statements made in
the Old Testament, so far as we can at present
recall them, on the subject of hostile powers
being either named in Scripture, or being said
to oppose the human race, and to be afterwards
subjected to punishment.

Let us now look also to the New Testament,
where Satan approaches the Saviour, and tempts
Him : wherein also it is stated that evil spirits
and unclean demons, which had taken possession
of very many, were expelled by the Saviour from
the bodies of the sufferers, who are said also to
be made free by Him. Even Judas, too, when
the devil had already put it in his heart to be-
tray Christ, afterwards received Satan wholly into
him ; for it is written, that after the sop " Satan
entered into him." '^ And the Apostle Paul
teaches us that we ought not to give place to the
devil; but "put on," he says, "the armour of
God, that ye may be able to resist the wiles
of the devil : " "• pointing out that the saints have
to " wrest/e not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, against powers, against the
rulers of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness in high places." '5 Nay, he
says that the Saviour even was crucified by the
princes of this world, who shall come to nought,'^
whose wisdom also, he says, he does not speak.
By all this, therefore, holy Scripture teaches us
that there are certain invisible enemies that fight
against us, and against whom it commands us to
arm ourselves. Whence, also, the more simple
among the believers in the Lord Christ are of
opinion, that all the sins which men have com-
mitted are caused by the persistent efforts of
these opposing powers exerted upon the minds
of sinners, because in that invisible struggle these
powers are found to be superior (to man). For
if, for example, there were no devil, no single
human being "7 would go astray.

2. We, however, who see the reason (of the
thing) more clearly, do not hold this opinion,
taking into account those (sins) which mani-


[2 S(J.


12 Ezek. xxvii
'5 Cf. John xi
!■« Eph. vi. 13.
'5 Eph. vi. 12.

16 Cf. I Cor. ii. 6.

17 Nemo hominum omnino.


330


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


festly originate as a necessary consequence of
our bodily constitution.' Must we indeed sup-
pose that the devil is the cause of our feeling
hunger or thirst ? Nobody, I think, will venture
to maintain that. If, then, he is not the cause
of our feeling hunger and thirst, wherein lies the
difference when each individual has attained
the age of puberty, and that period has called
forth the incentives of the natural heat? It will
undoubtedly follow, that as the devil is not the
cause of our feeling hunger and thirst, so neither
is he the cause of that appetency which naturally
arises at the time of maturity, viz., the desire of
sexual intercourse. Now it is certain that this
cause is not always so set in motion by the devil
that we should be obliged to suppose that bodies
would not possess a desire for intercourse of
that kind if the devil did not exist. Let us con-
sider, in the next place, if, as we have already
shown, food is desired by human beings, not
from a suggestion of the devil, but by a kind of
natural instinct, whether, if there were no devil,
it were possible for human experience to exhibit
such restraint in partaking of food as never to
exceed the proper limits ; i.e., that no one would
either take otherwise than the case required, or
more than reason would allow ; and so it would
result that men, observing due measure and
moderation in the matter of eating, would never
go wrong. I do not think, indeed, that so great
moderation could be observed by men (even if
there were no instigation by the devil inciting
thereto), as that no individual, in partaking of
food, would go beyond due limits and restraint,
until he had learned to do so from long usage
and experience. What, then, is the state of the
case ? In the matter of eating and drinking it
was possible for us to go wrong, even without
any incitement from the devil, if we should hap-
pen to be either less temperate or less careful
(than we ought) ; and are we to suppose, then,
in our appetite for sexual intercourse, or in the
restraint of our natural desires, our condition is
not something similar?^ I am of opinion, in-
deed, that the same course of reasoning must be
understood to apply to other natural movements,
as those of covetousness, or of anger, or of sor-
row, or of all those generally which through the
vice of intemperance exceed the natural bounds
of moderation. There are therefore manifest
reasons for holding the opinion, that as in good
things the human will 3 is of itself weak to ac-
complish any good (for it is by divine help that
it is brought to perfection in everything) ; so
also, in things of an opposite nature we receive
certain initial elements, and, as it were, seeds of
sins, from those things which we use agreeably


' Ex corporal! necessitate descendunt.

2 Quod non simile aliquid pateremur?

3 Propositum.


to nature ; ^ but when we have indulged them
beyond what is proper, and have not resisted the
first movements to intemperance, then the hostile
power, seizing the occasion of this first transgres-
sion, incites and presses us hard in every way,
seeking to extend our sins over a wider field,
and furnishing us human beings with occasions
and beginnings of sins, which these hostile powers
spread far and wide, and, if possible, beyond all
limits. Thus, when men at first for a little desire
money, covetousness begins to grow as the pas-
sion increases, and finally the fall into avarice
takes place. And after this, when blindness of
mind has succeeded passion, and the hostile
powers, by their suggestions, hurry on the mind,
money is now no longer desired, but stolen, and
acquired by force, or even by shedding human
blood. Finally, a confirmatory evidence of the
fact that vices of such enormity proceed from
demons, may be easily seen in this, that those
individuals who are oppressed either by immod-
erate love, or incontrollable anger, or excessive
sorrow, do not suffer less than those who are
bodily vexed by devils. For it is recorded in
certain histories, that some have fallen into mad-
ness from a state of love, others from a state of
anger, not a few from a state of sorrow, and
even from one of excessive joy ; which results,
I think, from this, that those opposing powers,
i.e., those demons, having gained a lodgment in
their minds which has been already laid open
to them by intemperance, have taken complete
possession of their sensitive nature,^ especially
when no feeling of the glory of virtue has aroused
them to resistance.

3. That there are certain sins, however, which
do not proceed from the opposing powers, but
take their beginnings from the natural move-
ments of the body, is manifestly declared by the
Apostle Paul in the passage : " The flesh lusteth
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh :
and these are contrary the one to the other ; so
that ye cannot do the things that ye would." ^
If, then, the flesh lust against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh, we have occasionally to
wrestle against flesh and blood, i.e., as being
men, and walking according to the flesh, and not
capable of being tempted by greater than human
temptations ; since it is said of us, " There hath
no temptation taken you, but such as is common
to man : but God is faithful, who will not suffer
you to be tempted above that ye are able." 7
For as the presidents of the public games do
not allow the competitors to enter the lists in-
discriminately or fortuitously, but after a careful
examination, pairing in a most impartial consid-


•* Quae in usii naturaliter habentur.

5 Sensum eorum penitus possederint.

6 Gal. V. 17.

7 I Cor. X. 13.


Chap. II.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


331


eration either of size or age, this individual with
that — boys, e.g., with boys, men with men, who
are nearly related to each other either in age or
strength ; so also must we understand the pro-
cedure of divine providence, which arranges on
most impartial principles all who descend into
the straggles of this human life, according to
the nature of each individual's power, which is
known only to Him who alone beholds the hearts
of men : so that one individual fights against
one temptation of the flesh,' another against a
second ; one is exposed to its influence for so
long a period of time, another only for so long ;
one is tempted by the flesh to this or that indul-
gence, another to one of a different kind ; one
has to resist this or that hostile power, another
has to combat two or three at the same time ;
or at one time this hostile influence, at another
that ; at some particular date having to resist one
enemy, and at another a difi"erent one ; being,
after the performance of certain acts, exposed to
one set of enemies, after others to a second.
And observe whether some such state of things
be not indicated by the language of the apostle :
" God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
tempted above what ye are able," ^ i.e., each one
is tempted in proportion to the amount of his
strength or power of resistance.^ Now, although
we ha\'e said that it is by the just judgment of
God that every one is tempted according to the
amount of his strength, we are not therefore to
suppose that he who is tempted ought by all
means to prove victorious in the struggle ; in
like manner as he who contends in the lists,
although paired with his adversary on a just prin-
ciple of arrangement, will nevertheless not neces-
sarily prove conqueror. But unless the powers
of the combatants are equal, the prize of the
victor will not be justly won ; nor will blame
justly attach to the vanquished, because He al-
lows us indeed to be tempted, but not " beyond
what we are able : " for it is in proportion to our
strength that we are tempted ; and it is not writ-
ten that, in temptation. He will make also a way
to escape so as that we should bear it, but a
way to escape so as that we should be able to
bear it.^ But it depends upon ourselves to use
either with energy or feebleness this power which
He has given us. For there is no doubt that
under every temptation we have a power of en-
durance, if we employ properly the strength that
is granted us. But it is not the same thing to
possess the power of conquering and to be victo-
rious, as the apostle himself has shown in very
cautious language, saying, " God will make a way


3 Pro virtutis suse quantitate, vel possibilitate.
< Nee tamen scriptum est, quia faciet in tentatione
stinendi, sed exitum ut sustinere possimus.


to escape, that you may be able to bear it," s not
that you will bear it. For many do not sustain
temptation, but are overcome by it. Now God
enables us not to sustain (temptation), (other-
wise there would appear to be no struggle), but
to have the power of sustaining it.^ But this
power which is given us to enable us to conquer
may be used, according to our faculty of free-
will, either in a diligent manner, and then we
prove victorious, or in a slothful manner, and
then we are defeated. For if such a power were
wholly given us as that we must by all means
prove victorious, and never be defeated, what
further reason for a struggle could remain to him
who cannot be overcome? Or what merit is
there in a victory, where the power of successful
resistance ^ is taken away ? But if the possibility
of conquering be equally conferred on us all, and
if it be in our own power how to use this possi-
bility, i.e., either diligently or slothfully, then will
the vanquished be justly censured, and the victor
be deservedly lauded. Now from these points
which we have discussed to the best of our
power, it is, I think, clearly evident that there
are certain transgressions which we by no means
commit under the pressure of malignant powers ;
while there are others, again, to which we are
incited by instigation on their part to excessive
and immoderate indulgence. Whence it follows
that we have to inquire how those opposing
powers produce these incitements within us.

4. With respect to the thoughts which pro-
ceed from our heart, or the recollection of things
which we have done, or the contemplation of
any things or causes whatever, we find that they
sometimes proceed from ourselves, and some-
times are originated by the opposing powers ;
not seldom also are they suggested by God, or
by the holy angels. Now such a statement will
perhaps appear incredible,^ unless it be con-
firmed by the testimony of holy Scripture. That,
then, thoughts arise within ourselves, David tes-
tifies in the Psalms, saying, " The thought of a
man will make confession to Thee, and the rest
of the thought shall observe to Thee a festival
day." 9 That this, however, is also brought
about by the opposing powers, is shown by Sol-
omon in the book of Ecclesiastes in the follow-
ing manner : " If the spirit of the ruler rise up
against thee, leave not thy place ; for soundness
restrains great offences." '° The Aposde Paul
also will bear testimony to the same point in the
words : " Casting down imaginations, and every
high thing that exalted itself against the knowl-


5 I Cor. X. 13.

^ Ut sustinere possimus.

7 Repugnandi vincendique.

8 Kabulosum.

9 Ps. Ixxvi. 10. Such is the reading of the Vulgate and of the
Septuagint. The authorized version follows the Masoretic text.

•o Eccles. X. 4; cf. note 8, p. 329.


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


edge of Christ." ' That it is an effect due to
God, nevertheless,- is declared by David, when
he says in the Psalms, " Blessed is the man
whose help is in Thee, O Lord, Thy ascents
(are) in his heart." ^ And the apostle says that
" God put it into the heart of Titus." ^ That
certain thoughts are suggested to men's hearts
either by good or evil angels, is shown both by
the angel that accompanied Tobias,-* and by the
language of the prophet, where he says, " And
the angel who spoke in me answered." s The
book of the Shepherd '^ declares the same, say-
ing that each individual is attended by two an-
gels ; that whenever good thoughts arise in our
hearts, they are suggested by the good angel ;
but when of a contrary kind, they are the insti-
gation of the evil angel. The same is declared
by Barnabas in his Epistle,^ where he says there
are two ways, one of light and one of darkness,
over which he asserts that certain angels are
placed, — the angels of God over the way of
light, the angels of Satan over the way of dark-
ness. We are not, however, to imagine that any
other result follows from what is suggested to
our heart, whether good or bad, save a (mental)
commotion only, and an incitement instigating
us either to good or evil. For it is quite within
our reach, when a malignant power has begun
to incite us to evil, to cast away from us the
wicked suggestions, and to resist the vile induce-
ments, and to do nothing that is at all deserving
of blame. Arid, on the other hand, it is pos-
sible, when a divine power calls us to better
things, not to obey the call ; our freedom of will
being preserved to us in either case. We said,
indeed, in the foregoing pages, that certain rec-
ollections of good or evil actions were suggested
to us either by the act of divine providence or
by the opposing powers, as is shown in the book
of Esther, when Artaxerxes had not remembered
the services of that just man Mordecai, but,
when wearied out with his nightly vigils, had it
put into his mind by God to require that the
annals of his great deeds should be read to
him ; whereon, being reminded of the benefits
received from Mordecai, he ordered his enemy
Haman to be hanged, but splendid honours to
be conferred on him, and impunity from the
threatened danger to be granted to the whole of


1 2 Cor. X. 5.

2 Ps. Ixxxiv. 5. The words in the text are: Beatus vir, cujus est
susceptio apud te, Domine, adscensus in corde ejus. The Vulgate
reads: Beatus vir, cujus est auxiUum abs te: ascensiones in corde
suo disposuit. The Septuagint the same. The Masoretic text has
J^Wpp ("festival march or procession:" Furst). Probably the
Septuagint and Vulgate had riw^D before them, the similarity be-
tween Samech and Ayin accounting for the error in transcription.

3 2 Cor. viii. 16.

* [See book of Tobit, chaps, v. vi. S.]

5 Zech. i. 14. The Vulgate, Septuagint, and Masoretic text all
have " in me," although the Authorized Version reads " with me."

6 Shepherd of Hermas, Command, vi. 2. See vol. ii. p. 24.

7 Epistle of Barnabas. See vol. i. pp. 148, 149.


the holy nation. On the other hand, however,
we must suppose that it was through the hostile
influence of the devil that the suggestion was
introduced into the minds of the high priests
and the scribes which they made to Pilate, when
they came and said, " Sir, we remember that
that deceiver said, while he was yet alive. After
three days I will rise again." ^ The design of
Judas, also, respecting the betrayal of our Lord
and Saviour, did not originate in the wickedness
of his mind alone. For Scripture testifies that
the " devil had already put it into his heart to
betray Him." 9 And therefore Solomon rightly
commanded, saying, " Keep thy heart with all
dihgence." '° And the Apostle Paul warns us :
" Therefore we ought to give the more earnest
heed to the things which we have heard, lest
perhaps we should let them slip." " And when
he says, " Neither give place to the devil," '^ he
shows by that injunction that it is through cer-
tain acts, or a kind of mental slothfulness, that
room is made for the devil, so that, if he once
enter our heart, he will either gain possession of
us, or at least will pollute the soul, if he has not
obtained the entire mastery over it, by casting
on us his fiery darts ; and by these we are some-
times deeply wounded, and sometimes only set
on fire. Seldom indeed, and only in a few in-
stances, are these fiery darts quenched, so as not
to find a place where they may wound, i.e., when
one is covered by the strong and mighty shield
of faith. The declaration, indeed, in the Epistle
to the Ephesians, " We wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
places," '3 must be so understood as if "we"
meant, " I Paul, and you Ephesians, and aU who
have not to wrestle against flesh and blood : "
for such have to struggle against principalities
and powers, against the rulers of the darkness
of this world, not like the Corinthians, whose
struggle was as yet against flesh and blood, and
who had been overtaken by no temptation but
such as is common to man.

5. We are not, however, to suppose that each
individual has to contend against all these (ad-
versaries). For it is impossible for any man,
although he were a saint, to carry on a contest
against all of them at the same time. If that
indeed were by any means to be the case, as it
is certainly impossible it should be so, human
nature could not possibly bear it without under-
going entire destruction. '•♦ But as, for example,


8 Matt, xxvii. 63.

9 John xiii. 2.
'° Prov. iv. 23.
" Heb. ii. I.
'- Eph. iv. 27.
" Eph. vi. 12.

!■* Sine maxima subversione sui.


Chap. II.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


333


if fifty soldiers were to say that they were about
to engage with fifty others, they would not be
understood to mean that one of them had to
contend against the whole fifty, but each one
would rightly say that " our batde was against
fifty," all against all ; so also this is to be un-
derstood as the apostle's meaning, that all the
athletes and soldiers of Christ have to wresUe
and struggle against all the adversaries enu-
merated,— the struggle having, indeed, to be
maintained against all, but by single individuals
either with individual powers, or at least in such
manner as shall be determined by God, who is
the just president of the struggle. For I am of
opinion that there is a certain limit to the powers
of human nature, although there may be a Paul,
of whom it is said, " He is a chosen vessel unto
Me ; " ' or a Peter, against whom the gates of
hell do not prevail ; or a Moses, the friend of
God : yet not one of them could sustain, with-
out destruction to himself,^ the whole simulta-
neous assault of these opposing powers, unless
indeed the might of Him alone were to work in
him, who said, " Be of good cheer, I have over-
come the world." 3 And therefore Paul exclaims
with confidence, " I can do all things through
Christ, who strengtheneth me ; "'^ and again, "I
laboured more abundantly than they all ; yet not
I, but the grace of God which was with me." 5
On account, then, of this power, which certainly
is not of human origin, operating and speaking
in him, Paul could say, " For I am persuaded
that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor prin-
cipalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor power,
nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord."^ For I do not think that human
nature can alone of itself maintain a contest
with angels, and with the powers of the height
and of the abyss,'' and with any other creature ;
but when it feels the presence of the Lord dwell-
ing within it, confidence in the divine help will
lead it to say, " The Lord is my light, and my
salvation ; whom shall I fear ? The Lord is the
protector of my life ; of whom shall I be afraid ?
When the enemies draw near to me, to eat my
flesh, my enemies who trouble me, they stumbled
and fell. Though an host encamp against me, my
heart shall not fear ; though war should rise against
me, in Him shall I be confident."^ From which
I infer that a man perhaps would never be able of
himself to vanquish an opposing power, unless


1 Acts ix. 15.

2 Sine aliqua pemicie sui.

3 John XVI. 33.
•♦ Phil iv. 13.

5 I Cor. XV. 10.

*> Rom. viii. 38, 33. The word "virtus," iuVant?, occurring in
the text, is not found in the text, recept. Tischendorf reads AvcajAtis
in loco (edit. 7). So also Codex Sinaiticus.

7 Excelsa et profunda.

^ Ps. xxvii. 1-3.


'he had the benefit of divine assistance. Hence,
also, the angel is said to have wrestled with
Jacob. Here, however, I understand the writer
to mean, that it was not the same thing for the
angel to have wrestled with Jacob, and to have
wrestled against him ; but the angel that wrestles
with him is he who was present with him in order
to secure his safety, who, after knowing also his
moral progress, gave him in addition the name
of Israel, i.e., he is with him in the struggle, and
assists him in the contest ; seeing there was un-
doubtedly another angel against whom he con-
tended, and against whom he had to carry on a
contest. Finally, Paul has not said that we
wrestle zvith princes, or zaith powers, but against
principalities and powers. And hence, although
Jacob wrestled, it was unquestionably against
some one of those powers which, Paul declares,
resist and contend with the human race, and
especially with the saints. And therefore at last
the Scripture says of him that "he wrestled with
the angel, and had power with God," so that the
struggle is supported by help of the angel, but
the prize of success conducts the conqueror to
God.

6. Nor are we, indeed, to suppose, that strug-
gles of this kind are carried on by the exercise
of bodily strength, and of the arts of the wres-
tling school j 9 but spirit contends with spirit,
according to the declaration of Paul, that our
struggle is against principalities, and powers, and
the rulers of the darkness of this world. Nay,
the following is to be understood as the nature
of the struggles ; when, e.g., losses and dangers
befall us, or calumnies and false accusations are
brought against us, it not being the object of
the hostile powers that we should suffer these
(trials) only, but that by means of them we
should be driven either to excess of anger or
sorrow, or to the last pitch of despair ; or at
least, which is a greater sin, should be forced,
when fatigued and overcome by any annoyances,
to make complaints against God, as one who
does not administer human life justly and equi-
tably ; the consequence of which is, that our
faith may be weakened, or our hopes disap-
pointed, or we may be compelled to give up the
truth of our opinions, or be led to entertain irre-
ligious sentiments regarding God. For some
such things are written regarding Job, after the
devil had requested God that power should be
given him over his goods. By which also we
are taught, that it is not by any accidental
attacks that we are assailed, whenever we are
visited with any such loss of property, nor that
it is owing to chance when one of us is taken
prisoner, or when the dwellings in which those
who are dear to us are crushed to death, fall in


9 Pala:stricx artis exercitiis.


34


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


ruins ; for, with respect to all these occurrences,
every believer ought to say, " Thou couldst have
no power at all against Me, except it were given
thee from above."' For observe that the house
of Job did not fall upon his sons until the devil
had first received power against them ; nor
would the horsemen have made an irruption in
three bands,^ to carry away his camels or his
oxen, and other cattle, unless they had been
instigated by that spirit to whom they had de-
livered themselves up as the servants of his will.
Nor would that fire, as it seemed to be, or thun-
derbolt, as it has been considered, have fallen
upon the sheep of the patriarch, until the devil
had said to God, " Hast Thou not made a hedge
about all that is without and within his house,
and around all the rest of his property? But
now put forth Thy hand, and touch all that he
hath, (and see) if he do not renounce Thee to
Thy face." 3

7. The result of all the foregoing remarks is
to show, that all the occurrences in the world
which are considered to be of an intermediate
kind, whether they be mournful or otherwise,
are brought about, not indeed by God, and yet
not without Him ; while He not only does not
prevent those wicked and opposing powers that
are desirous to bring about these things (from
accomplishing their purpose), but even permits
them to do so, although only on certain occa-
sions and to certain individuals, as is said with
respect to Job himself, that for a certain time
he was made to fall under the power of others,
and to have his house plundered by unjust per-
sons. And therefore holy Scripture teaches us
to receive all that happens as sent by God,
knowing that without Him no event occurs.
For how can we doubt that such is the case, viz.,
that nothing comes to man without (the will of)
God, when our Lord and Saviour declares, "Are
not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one
of them shall not- fall on the ground without
your Father who is in heaven." '^ But the neces-
sity of the case has drawn us away in a length-
ened digression on the subject of the struggle
waged by the hostile powers against men, and
of those sadder events which happen to human
life, i.e., its temptations — according to the dec-
laration of Job, " Is not the whole life of man
upon the earth a temptation? " 5 — in order that
the manner of their occurrence, and the spirit in
which we should regard them, might be clearly


' John xix. II.

2 Tribiis ordinibus.

3 Cf. Job i. 10, II. "Nisi in faciem benedixerit tibi." The He-
brew verb Tr\ji has the double signification of " blessing " and
"cursing." Cf. Davidson's Commeutary on yo6,p.'j. Septuag.
eiJAo7>)(Tei.

* Matt. X. 29.

S Cf. Job vii. I. The Septuagint reads, norepov ovx'i ireipaTripiov,
etc.; the Vulgate, " militia, " the Masoretic text has {<32f . Cf Da-
vidson's Commentary o?i Job, in loc.


shown. Let us notice next, how men fall away
into the sin of false knowledge, or with what
object the opposing powers are wont to stir up
conflict with us regarding such things.

CHAP. III. ON THREEFOLD WISDOM.

I. The holy apostle, wishing to teach us some
great and hidden truth respecting science and
wisdom, says, in the first Epistle to the Corin-
thians : " We speak wisdom among them that are
perfect ; yet not the wisdom of this world, nor
of the princes of the world, that come to nought :
but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery,
even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained
before the world unto our glory : which none of
the princes of the world knew : for had they
known it, they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory." ^ In this passage, wishing to
describe the different kinds of wisdom, he points
out that there is a wisdom of this world, and a
wisdom of the princes of this world, and another
wisdom of God. But when he uses the expres-
sion "wisdom of the princes of this world," I
do not think that he means a wisdom common to
all the princes of this world, but one rather that
is peculiar to certain individuals among them.
And again, when he says, " We speak the wis-
dom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
wisdom, which God ordained before the world
unto our glory," ^ we must inquire whether his
meaning be, that this is the same wisdom of God
which was hidden from other times and genera-
tions, and was not made known to the sons of
men, as it has now been revealed to His holy
apostles and prophets, and which was also that
wisdom of God before the advent of the Saviour,
by means of which Solomon obtained his wis-
dom, and in reference to which the language of
the Saviour Himself declared, that what He
taught was greater than Solomon, in these words,
"Behold, a greater than Solomon is here,"^ —
words which show, that those who were instructed
by the Saviour were instructed in something
higher than the knowledge of Solomon. For if
one were to assert that the Saviour did indeed
Himself possess greater knowledge, but did not
communicate more to others than Solomon did,
how will that agree with the statement which fol-
lows : " The queen of the south shall rise up in
the judgment, and condemn the men of this
generation, because she came from the ends of
the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon ; and,
behold, a greater than Solomon is here?"**
There is therefore a wisdom of this world, and
also probably a wisdom belonging to each indi-
vidual prince of this world. But with respect to


* I Cor. ii. 6-8.

7 1 Cor. ii. 7.

8 Matt. xii. 42.


Chap. III.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


335


the wisdom of God alone, we perceive that this
is indicated, that it operated to a less degree in
ancient and former times, and was (afterwards)
more fully revealed and manifested through
Christ. We shall inquire, however, regarding
the wisdom of God in the proper place.

2. But now, since we are treating of the man-
ner in which the opposing powers stir up those
contests, by means of which false knowledge is
introduced into the minds of men, and human
souls led astray, while they imagine that they
have discovered wisdom, I think it necessary to
name and distinguish the wisdom of this world,
and of the princes of this world, that by so
doing we may discover who are the fathers of
this wisdom, nay, even of these kinds of wis-
dom.' I am of opinion, therefore, as I have
stated above, that there is another wisdom of this
world besides those (different kinds of) wis-
dom 2 which belong to the princes of this world,
by which wisdom those things seem to be under-
stood and comprehended which belong to this
world. This wisdom, however, possesses in it-
self no fitness for forming any opinion either
respecting divine things,^ or the plan of the
world's government, or any other subjects of
importance, or regarding the training for a good
or happy life ; but is such as deals wholly with .
the art of poetry, e.g., or that of grammar, i
or rhetoric, or geometry, or music, with which ;
also, perhaps, medicine should be classed. In
all these subjects we are to suppose that the wis-
dom of this world is included. The wisdom of
the princes of this world, on the other hand, we '
understand to be such as the secret and occult
philosophy, as they call it, of the Egyptians, and
the astrology of the Chaldeans and Indians, who
make profession of the knowledge of high things,''
and also that manifold variety of opinion which
prevails among the Greeks regarding divine
things. Accordingly, in the holy Scriptures we
find that there are princes over individual na-
tions ; as in Daniel 5 we read that there was a
prince of the kingdom of Persia, and another
prince of the kingdom of Graecia, who are
clearly shown, by the nature of the passage, to
be not human beings, but certain powers. In the
prophecies of Ezekiel,*^ also, the prince of Tyre
is unmistakeably shown to be a kind of spiritual
power. When these, then, and others of the
same kind, possessing each his own wisdom, and
building up his own opinions and sentiments,
beheld our Lord and Saviour professing and de-
claring that He had for this purpose come into
the world, that all the opinions of science, falsely


so called, might be destroyed, not knowing what
was concealed within Him, they forthwith laid a
snare for Him : for " the kings of the earth set
themselves, and the rulers assembled together,
against the Lord and His Christ." ^ But their
snares being discovered, and the plans which
they had attempted to carry out being made
manifest when they crucified the Lord of glory,
therefore the apostle says, " We speak wisdom
among them that are perfect, but not the wis-
dom of this world, nor of the princes of this
world, who are brought to nought, which none
of the princes of this world knew : for had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord
of glory." ^

3. We must, indeed, endeavour to ascertain
whether that wisdom 9 of the princes of this
world, with which they endeavour to imbue men,
is introduced into their minds by the opposing
powers, with the purpose of ensnaring and injur-
ing them, or only for the purpose of deceiving
them, i.e., not with the object of doing any hurt
to man ; but, as these princes of this world
esteem such opinions to be true, they desire to
impart to others what they themselves beheve to
be the truth : and this- is the view which I am
inclined to adopt. For as, to take an illustra-
tion, certain Greek authors, or the leaders of

i some heretical sect, after having imbibed an

I error in doctrine instead of the truth, and having
come to the conclusion in their own minds that
such is the truth, proceed, in the next place, to
endeavour to persuade others of the correctness

' of their opinions ; so, in like manner, are we to
suppose is the procedure of the princes of this
world, in which to certain spiritual powers has
been assigned the rule over certain nations, and
who are termed on that account the princes of
this world. There are besides, in addition to
these princes, certain special energies '° of this
world, i.e., spiritual powers, which bring about
certain effects, which they have themselves, in

I virtue of their freedom of will, chosen to pro-
duce, and to these belong those princes who
practise the wisdom of this world : there being,
for example, a peculiar energy and power, which
is the inspirer of poetry ; another, of geometry ;
and so a separate power, to remind us of each
of the arts and professions of this kind. Lastly,
many Greek writers have been of opinion that
the art of poetry cannot exist without madness ; "
whence also it is several times related in their
histories, that those whom they call poets '- were
suddenly filled with a kind of spirit of madness.
And what are we to say also of those whom they


1 Sapientiarum harum.

2 Sapientias illas.

3 De divinitate.

* De scienlia excels! polliccntium.
5 Cf. Dan. X.
'^ Cf. Ezek. xxvi.


^ P.S. ii. 2.

8 I Cor. ii. 6-8.

9 Istx sapientis.
'° Energix.

" Insania.
" Vates.


33^


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


call diviners/ from whom, by the working of
those demons who have the mastery over them,
answers are given in carefully constructed verses ?
Those persons, too, whom they term Magi or
Malevolent,^ frequently, by invoking demons over
boys of tender years, have made them repeat
poetical compositions which were the admiration
and amazement of all. Now these effects we are
to suppose are brought about in the following
manner : As holy and immaculate souls, after
devoting themselves to God with all affection
and purity, and after preserving themselves free
from all contagion of evil spirits,^ and after being
purified by lengthened abstinence, and imbued
with holy and religious training, assume by this
means a portion of divinity, and earn the grace
of prophecy, and other divine gifts ; so also are
we to suppose that those who place themselves
in the way of the opposing powers, i.e., who
purposely admire and adopt their manner of life
and habits,-* receive their inspiration, and become
partakers of their wisdom and doctrine. And
the result of this is, that they are filled with the
working of those spirits to whose service they
have subjected themselves.

4. With respect to thbse, indeed, who teach
differently regarding Christ from what the rule
of Scripture allows, it is no idle task to ascertain '
whether it is from a treacherous purpose that
these opposing powers, in their struggles to pre-
vent a behef in Christ, have devised certain fab-
ulous and impious doctrines ; or whether, on
hearing the word of Christ, and not being able
to cast it forth from the secrecy of their con-
science, nor yet to retain it pure and holy, they
have, by means of vessels that were convenient
to their use, 5 and, so to speak, through their
prophets, introduced various errors contrary to
the rule of Christian truth. Now we are to sup-
pose rather that apostate and refugee powers,^
which have departed from God out of the very
wickedness of their mind and will,'' or from
envy of those for whom there is prepared (on
their becoming acquainted with the truth) an
ascent to the same rank, whence they themselves
had fallen, did, in order to prevent any progress
of that kind, invent these errors and delusions of
false doctrine. It is then clearly established, by
many proofs, that while the soul of man exists
in this body, it may admit different energies, i.e.,
operations, from a diversity of good and evil
spirits. Now, of wicked spirits there is a twofold
mode of operadon : i.e., when they either take
complete and entire possession of the mind,*^ so


' Divinos.

2 Magi vel malefici.

3 Daemonum.

* Id est, industria vita, vel studio amico illis et accepto.
S Per vasa opportiina sibi.

f> ApostatsE et refugae virtutes.
7 Propositi.

* Penitus ex integro.


as to allow their captives "> the power neither of
understanding nor feeling ; as, for instance, is
the case with those commonly called possessed, '°
whom we see to be deprived of reason, and in-
sane (such as those were who are related in the
Gospel to have been cured by the Saviour) ; or
when by their wicked suggestions they deprave
a sentient and intelligent soul with thoughts of
various kinds, persuading it to evil, of which
Judas is an illustration, who was induced at the
suggestion of the devil to commit the crime of
treason, according to the declaration of Scrip-
ture, that " the devil had already put it into the
heart of Judas Iscariot to betray him." "

But a man receives the energy, i.e., the work-
ing, of a good spirit, when he is stirred and
incited to good, and is inspired to heavenly or
divine things ; as the holy angels and God Him-
self wrought in the prophets, arousing and ex-
horting them by their holy suggestions to a better
course of life, yet so, indeed, that it remained
within the will and judgment of the individual,
either to be willing or unwilling to follow the
call to divine and heavenly things. And from
this manifest distinction, it is seen how the soul
is moved by the presence of a better spirit, i.e.,
if it encounter no perturbation or alienation of
mind whatever from the impending inspiration,
nor lose the free control of its will ; as, for in-
stance, is the case with all, whether prophets or
apostles, who ministered to the divine responses
without any perturbation of mind.'^ Now, that
by the suggestions of a good spirit the memory
of man is aroused to the recollection of better
things, we have already shown by previous in-
stances, when we mentioned the cases of Mor-
decai and Artaxerxes.

5. This too, I think, should next be inquired
into, viz., what are the reasons why a human soul
is acted on at one time by good (spirits), and at
another by bad : the grounds of which I suspect to
be older than the bodily birth of the individual,
as John (the Baptist) showed by his leaping and
exulting in his mother's womb, when the voice
of the salutation of Mary reached the ears of his
mother Elisabeth ; and as Jeremiah the prophet
declares, who was known to God before he was
formed in his mother's womb, and before he was
born was sanctified by Him, and while yet a boy
received the grace of prophecy.'^ And again, on
the other hand, it is shown beyond a doubt, that
some have been possessed by hostile spirits from
the very beginning of their lives : i.e., some were
born with an evil spirit ; and others, according


9 Eos quos obsederint.

1° Energumenos.

I' John xix. 2.

'- [See Oehler's Old Tesiaiiieut Theology, § 207, " Psychological
Definition of the Prophetic State in Ancient Times," pp. 468,
469. S.]

" Jer. i. 5. 6.


Chap. IV.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


ZZ7


to credible histories, have practised divination '
from childhood. Others have been under the
influence of the demon called Python, i.e., the
ventriloquial spirit, from the commencement of
their existence. To all which instances, those
who maintain that everything in the world is
under the administration of Divine Providence
(as is also our own belief), can, as it appears to
me, give no other answer, so as to show that no
shadow of injustice rests upon the divine gov-
ernment, than by holding that there were certain
causes of prior existence, in consequence of
which the souls, before their birth in the body,
contracted a certain amount of guilt in their
sensitive nature, or in their movements, on ac-
count of which they have been judged worthy
by Divine Providence of being placed in this
condition. For a soul is always in possession of
free-will, as well when it is in the body as when
it is without it ; and freedom of will is always
directed either to good or evil. Nor can any
rational and sentient being, i.e., a mind or soul,
exist without some movement either good or
bad. And it is probable that these movements
furnish grounds for merit even before they do
anything in this world ; so that on account of
these merits or grounds they are, immediately on
their birth, and even before it, so to speak, as-
sorted by Divine Providence for the endurance
either of good or evil.

Let such, then, be our views respecting those
events which appear to befall men, either im-
mediately after birth, or even before they enter
upon the light. But as regards the suggestions
which are made to the soul, i.e, to the faculty of
human thought, by different spirits, and which
arouse men to good actions or the contrary, even
in such a case we must suppose that there some-
times existed certain causes anterior to bodily
birth. For occasionally the mind, when watch-
ful, and casting away from it what is evil, calls
to itself the aid of the good ; or if it be, on the
contrary, negligent and slothful, it makes room
through insufficient caution for these spirits,
which, lying in wait secredy like robbers, con-
trive to rush into the minds of men when they
see a lodgment made for them by sloth ; as the
Apostle Peter says, " that our adversary the devil
goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he
may devour." ^ On which account our heart
must be kept with all carefulness both by day
and night, and no place be given to the devil ;
but every effort must be used that the ministers
of God — those spirits, viz., who were sent to
minister to them who are called to be heirs of
salvation 3 — may find a place within us, and be
dehghted to enter into the guest-chamber •♦ of


' Divinasse.

2 I Pet. V. 8.

3 Heb. i. 14.
* Hospilium.


our soul, and dwelling within us may guide us
by their counsels ; if, indeed, they shall find the
habitation of our heart adorned by the practice
of virtue and holiness. But let that be sufficient
which we have said, as we best could, regarding
those powers which are hostile to the human
race.

CHAP. IV. ON HUMAN TEMPTATIONS.

I, And now the subject of human temptations
must not, in my opinion, be passed over in si-
lence, which take their rise sometimes from flesh
and blood, or from the wisdom of flesh and
blood, which is said to be hostile to God. And
whether the statement be true which certain
allege, viz., that each individual has as it were
two souls, we shall determine after we have ex-
plained the nature of those temptations, which
are said to be more powerful than any of human
origin, i.e., which we sustain from principalities
and powers, and from the rulers of the darkness
of this world, and from spiritual wickedness in
high places, or to which we are subjected from
wicked spirits and unclean demons. Now, in
the investigation of this subject, we must, I
think, inquire according to a logical method
whether there be in us human beings, who
are composed of soul and body and vital
spirit, some other element, possessing an in-
citement of its own, and evoking a movement
towards evil. For a question of this kind is wont
to be discussed by some in this way : whether,,
viz., as two souls are said to co-exist within, us,
the one is more divine and heavenly and. the
other inferior ; or whether, from the very fact
that we inhere in bodily structures which accord-
ing to their own proper nature are dead, and
altogether devoid of life (seeing it is from us,
i.e., from our souls, that the material body de-
rives its life, it being contrary and hostile to the
spirit) , we are drawn on and enticed to the prac-
tice of those evils which are agreeable to the
body ; or whether, thirdly (which was the opin-
ion of some of the Greek philosophers), although
our soul is one in substance, it nevertheless con-
sists of several elements, and one portion of it is
called rational and another irrational, and that
which is termed the irrational part is again sep-
arated into two affections — those of covetous-
ness and passion. These three opinions, then,
regarding the soul, which we have stated above,
we have found to be entertained by some, but
that one of them, which we have mentioned as
being adopted by certain Grecian philosophers,
viz., that the soul is tripartite, I do not observe
to be greatly confirmed by the authority of holy
Scripture ; while with respect to the remaining
two there is found a considerable number of
passages in the holy Scriptures which seem ca-
pable of application to them.


33^


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


2. Now, of these opinions, let us first discuss
that which is maintained by some, that there is
in us a good and heavenly soul, and another
earthly and inferior ; and that the better soul is
implanted within us from heaven, such as was
that which, while Jacob was still in the womb,
gave him the prize of victory in supplanting his
brother Esau, and which in the case of Jeremiah
was sanctified from his birth, and in that of John
was filled by the Holy Spirit from the womb.
Now, that which they term the inferior soul is
produced, they allege, along with the body itself
out of the seed of the body, whence they say it
cannot live or subsist beyond the body, on which
account also they say it is frequently termed
flesh. For the expression, "The flesh lusteth
against the Spirit," ' they take to be applicable
not to the flesh, but to this soul, which is prop-
erly the soul of the flesh. From these words,
moreover, they endeavour notwithstanding to
make good the declaration in Leviticus : " The
life <of all flesh is the blood thereof."^ For, from
the circumstance that it is the diffusion of the
blood throughout the whole flesh which produces
life in the flesh, they assert that this soul, which
is said to be the life of all flesh, is contained in
the blood. This statement, moreover, that the
flesh struggles against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh ; and the further statement, that
" the life of all flesh is the blood thereof," is,
according to these writers, simply calling the
wisdom of the flesh by another name, because it
is a kind of material spirit, which is not subject
to the law of God, nor can be so, because it has
earthly wishes and bodily desires. And it is with
respect to this that they think the apostle uttered
the words : " I see another law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind, and bring-
ing me into captivity to the law of sin which is
in my members." ^ And if one were to object
to them that these words were spoken of the
nature of the body, which indeed, agreeably to
the peculiarity of its nature, is dead, but is said
to have sensibility, or wisdom,-* which is hostile
to God, or which struggles against the spirit ; or
if one were to say that, in a certain degree, the
flesh itself was possessed of a voice, which should
cry out against the endurance of hunger, or thirst,
or cold, or of any discomfort arising either from
abundance or poverty, — they would endeavour
to weaken and impair the force of such (argu-
ments), by showing that there were many other
mental perturbations 5 which derive their origin
in no respect from the flesh, and yet against
which the spirit struggles, such as ambition, ava-
rice, emulation, envy, pride, and others like these ;


1 Gal. V. 17.

2 Lev. xvii. 14.

3 Rom. vii. 23.

* Sensum vel sapientiam.
5 Passiones animae.


and seeing that with these the human mind or
spirit wages a kind of contest, they lay down as
the cause of all these evils, nothing else than
this corporal soul, as it were, of which we have
spoken above, and which is generated from the
seed by a process of traducianism. They are
accustomed also to adduce, in support of their
assertion, the declaration of the apostle, " Now
the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
idolatry, poisonings,^ hatred, contentions, emu-
lations, wrath, quarrelling, dissensions, heresies,
sects, envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and the
like ; " 7 asserting that all these do not derive
their origin from the habits or pleasures of the
flesh, so that all such movements are to be
regarded as inherent in that substance which has
not a soul, i.e., the flesh. The declaration, more-
over, " For ye see your calling, brethren, how
that not many wise men among you according
to the flesh are called,"** would seem to require
to be understood as if there were one kind of
wisdom, carnal and material, and another ac-
cording to the spirit, the former of which cannot
indeed be called wisdom, unless there be a soul
of the flesh, which is wise in respect of what is
called carnal wisdom. And in addition to these
passages they adduce the following : " Since the
flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, so that we cannot do the things
that we would." 9 What are these things now
respecting which he says, " that we cannot do
the things that we would?" It is certain, they
reply, that the spirit cannot be intended ; for
the will of the spirit suffers no hindrance. But
neither can the flesh be meant, because if it has
not a soul of its own, neither can it assuredly
possess a will. It remains, then, that the will of
this soul be intended which is capable of having
a will of its own, and which certainly is opposed
to the will of the spirit. And if this be the case,
it is established that the will of the soul is some-
thing intermediate between the flesh and the
spirit, undoubtedly obeying and serving that one
of the two which it has elected to obey. And if
it yield itself up to the pleasures of the flesh, it
renders men carnal ; but when it unites itself
with the spirit, it produces men of the Spirit, and
who on that account are termed spiritual. And
this seems to be the meaning of the apostle in
the words, " But ye are not in the flesh, but in
the Spirit." '°

We have accordingly to ascertain what is this
very will (intermediate) between flesh and spirit,
besides that will which is said to belong to the
flesh or the spirit. For it is held as certain, that


* Veneficia. <\'apixaKeCa,
7 Gal, V. 19-21.
' I Cor. i, 26.
9 Gal. V. 17.
'° Rom. viii. 9.


'Witchcraft" (Auth. Version).


Chap. IV.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


339


everything which is said to be a work of the
spirit is (a product of) the will of the spirit, and
everything that is called a work of the flesh
(proceeds from) the will of the flesh. What else
then, besides these, is that will of the soul which
receives a separate name,' and which will, the
apostle being opposed to our executing, says :
"Ye cannot do the things that ye would?" By
this it would seem to be intended, that it ought
to adhere to neither of these two, i.e., to neither
flesh nor spirit. But some one will say, that as
it is better for the soul to execute its own will
than that of the flesh ; so, on the other hand, it
is better to do the will of the spirit than its own
will. How, then, does the apostle say, " that ye
cannot do the things that ye would?" Because
in that contest which is waged between flesh and
spirit, the spirit is by no means certain of victory,
it being manifest that in very many individuals
the flesh has the mastery.

3. But since the subject of discussion on which
we have entered is one of great profundity, which
it is necessary to consider in all its bearings,^ let
us see whether some such point as this may not
be determined : that as it is better for the soul
to follow the spirit when the latter has overcome
the flesh, so also, if it seem to be a worse course
for the former to follow the flesh in its struggles
against the spirit, when the latter would recall
the soul to its influence, it may nevertheless ap-
pear a more advantageous procedure for the soul
to be under the mastery of the flesh than to re-
main under the power of its own will. For, since
it is said to be neither hot nor cold, but to con-
tinue in a sort of tepid condition, it will find
conversion a slow and somewhat difficult under-
taking. If indeed it clung to the flesh, then,
satiated at length, and filled with those very evils
which it suffers from the vices of the flesh, and
wearied as it were by the heavy burdens of lux-
ury and lust, it may sometimes be converted with
greater ease and rapidity from the filthiness of
matter to a desire for heavenly things, and (to
a taste for) spiritual graces. And the apostle
must be supposed to have said, that " the Spirit
contends against the flesh, and the flesh against
the Spirit, so that we cannot do the things that
we would " (those things, undoubtedly, which
are designated as being beyond the will of the
spirit, and the will of the flesh), meaning (as if
we were to express it in other words) that it is


' The text here is very obscure, and has given some trouble to
comrneiitators. The words are: "Quae ergo ista est pr.xter haec
voluntas animae quae extrinsecus nominatur," etc- Redepenning un-
derstands " extrinsecus " as meaning " seorsim," " insuper," and
refers to a note of Origen upon the Epistle to the Romans (torn. i. p.
466): " Et idcirco cjrtriitseciis earn (animam, corporis et spiritus
nientione factS, Rom. i. 3, 4) apostolus non nominat, sed carnem tan-
turn vel spirilum," etc. Schnitzer supposes that in the Greek the
words were, Tijs efw xaAou^teVrj?, where >f<d is to be taken in the sense
of ^uTiu, so that the expression would mean " anima inferior."

- In qua necesse est ex singulis quibusque partibus quae possunt
moveri discutere.


better for a man to be either in a state of virtue
or in one of wickedness, than in neither of these ;
but that the soul, before its conversion to the
spirit, and its union with it,3 appears during its
adherence to the body, and its meditation of-
carnal things, to be neither in a good condition
nor in a manifestly bad one, but resembles, so
to speak, an animal. It is better, however, for
it, if possible, to be rendered spiritual through
adherence to the spirit ; but if that cannot be
done, it is more expedient for it to follow even
the wickedness of the flesh, than, placed under
the influence of its own will, to retain the posi-
tion of an irrational animal.

These points we have now discussed, in our
desire to consider each individual opinion, at
greater length than we intended, that those views
might not be supposed to have escaped our no-
tice which are generally brought forward by those
who inquire whether there is within us any other
soul than this heavenly and rational one, which
is naturally opposed to the latter, and is called
either the flesh, 'or the wisdom of the flesh, or
the soul of the flesh.

4. Let us now see what answer is usually re-
turned to these statements by those who main-
tain that there is in us one movement, and one
life, proceeding from one and the same soul,
both the salvation and the destruction of which
are ascribed to itself as a result of its own actions.
And, in the first place, let us notice of what na-
ture those commotions'* of the soul are which we
suffer, when we feel ourselves inwardly drawn in
different directions ; when there arises a kind of
contest of thoughts in our hearts, and certain
probabilities are suggested us, agreeably to which
we lean now to this side, now to that, and by
which we are sometimes convicted of error, and
sometimes approve of our acts. 5 It is nothing
remarkable, however, to say of wicked spirits, that
they have a varying and conflicting judgment,
and one out of harmony with itself, since such is
found to be the case in all men, whenever, in
deliberating upon an uncertain event, council
is taken, and men consider and consult what is
to be chosen as the better and more useful
course. It is not therefore surprising that, if two
probabilities meet, and suggest opposite views,
they should drag the mind in contrary directions.
For example, if a man be led by reflection to
believe and to fear God, it cannot then be said
that the flesh contends against the Spirit ; but,
amidst the uncertainty of what may be true and
advantageous, the mind is drawn in opposite
directions. So, also, when it is supposed that
the flesh provokes to the indulgence of lust, but


3 Priusquam — unum eflRciatur cum eo.
* Passiones.

5 Quibus nunc quidera arguimur, nunc vero nosmct ipsos amplcc-
timur.


340


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


better counsels oppose allurements of that kind,
we are not to suppose that it is one life which is
resisting another, but that it is the tendency of
the nature of the body, which is eager to empty
out and cleanse the places filled with seminal
moisture ; as, in like manner, it is not to be
supposed that it is any opposing power, or the
life of another soul, which excites within us the
appetite of thirst, and impels us to drink, or
which causes us to feel hunger, and drives us to
satisfy it. But as it is by the natural movements
of the body that food and drink are either de-
sired or rejected,' so also the natural seed, col-
lected together in course of time in the various
vessels, has an eager desire to be expelled and
thrown away, and is so far from never being re-
moved, save by the impulse of some exciting
cause, that it is even sometimes spontaneously
emitted. When, therefore, it is said that " the
flesh struggles against the Spirit," these persons
understand the expression to mean that habit
or necessity, or the delights of the flesh, arouse
a man, and withdraw him from divine and spirit-
ual things. For, owing to the necessity of the
body being drawn away, we are not allowed to
have leisure for divine things, which are to be
eternally advantageous. So again, the soul, de-
voting itself to divine and spiritual pursuits, and
being united to the spirit, is said to fight against
the flesh, by not permitting it to be relaxed by
indulgence, and to become unsteady through the
influence of those pleasures for which it feels a
natural delight. In this way, also, they claim to
understand the words, " The wisdom of the flesh
is hostile to God,"^ not that the flesh really has
a soul, or a wisdom of its own. But as we are
accustomed to say, by an abuse ^ of language,
that the earth is thirsty, and wishes to drink in
water, this use of the word " wishes " is not
proijer, but catachrestic, — as if we were to say
again, that this house wants to be rebuilt,-* and
many other similar expressions ; so also is the wis-
dom of the flesh to be understood, or the expres-
sion, that " the flesh lusteth against the Spirit."
They generally connect with these the expres-
sion, " The voice of thy brother's blood crieth
unto Me from the ground." s For what cries un-
to the Lord is not properly the blood which was
shed ; but the blood is said improperly to cry
out, vengeance being demanded upon him who
had shed it. The declaration also of the apos-
tle, " I see another law in my members, warring
against the law of my mind,"^ they so under-
stand as if he had said, That he who wishes to
devote himself to the word of God is, on account


' Evacuantur.

2 Cf. Rom. viii. 2.

3 Abusive = improperly used.
* Recomponi vult.

s Gen. iv. 10.
6 Rom. vii. 23.


of his bodily necessities and habits, which like a
sort of law are ingrained in the body, distracted,
and divided, and impeded, lest, by devoting
himself vigorously to the study of wisdom, he
should be enabled to behold the divine mysteries.
5 . With respect, however, to the following be-
ing ranked among the works of the flesh, viz.,
heresies, and envyings, and contentions, or other
(vices), they so understand the passage, that the
mind, being rendered grosser in feeling, from its
yielding itself to the passions of the body, and
being oppressed by the mass of its vices, and
having no refined or spiritual feelings, is said to
be made flesh, and derives its name from that in
which it exhibits more vigour and force of will. 7
They also make this further inquiry, " Who will
be found, or who will be said to be, the creator
of this evil sense, called the sense of the flesh? "
Because they defend the opinion that there is
no other creator of soul and flesh than God.
And if we were to assert that the good God cre-
ated anything in His own creation that was hos-
tile to Himself, it would appear to be a manifest
absurdity. If, then, it is written, that " carnal
wisdom is enmity against God,"** and if this be
declared to be a result of creation, God Himself
will appear to have formed a nature hostile to
Himself, which cannot be subject to Him nor
to His law, as if it were (supposed to be) an ani-
mal of which such qualities are predicated. And
if this view be admitted, in what respect will it
appear to differ from that of those who maintain
that souls of different natures are created, which,
according to their natures,^ are destined either
to be lost or saved ? But this is an opinion of
the heretics alone, who, not being able to main-
tain the justice of God on grounds of piety, com-
pose impious inventions of this kind. And now
we have brought forward to the best of our abil-
ity, in the person of each of the parties, what
might be advanced by way of argument regard-
ing the several views, and let the reader choose
out of them for himself that which he thinks
ought to be preferred.

CHAP. V. — THAT THE WORLD TOOK ITS BEGIN-
NING IN TIME.

I. And now, since there is one of the articles
of the Church '° which is held principally in con-
sequence of our belief in the truth of our sacred
history, viz., that this world was created and took
its beginning at a certain dme, and, in conform-
ity to the cycle of time " decreed to all things,
is to be destroyed on account of its corruption,
there seems no absurdity in re-discussing a few


7 Plus studii vel propositi.
5 Rom. viii. 7.
9 Naturaliter.

1° De ecclesiasticis definitionibus unum.
" Consummationem sseculi.


Chap. V.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


341


points connected with this subject. And so far,
indeed, as the credibility of Scripture is con-
cerned, the declarations on such a matter seem
easy of proof Even the heretics, although
widely opposed on many other things, yet on
this appear to be at one, yielding to the author-
ity of Scripture.

Concerning, then, the creation of the world,
what portion of Scripture can give us more in-
formation regarding it, than the account which
Moses has transmitted respecting its origin?
And although it comprehends matters of pro-
founder significance than the mere historical
narrative appears to indicate, and contains very
many things that are to be spiritually understood,
and employs the letter, as a kind of veil, in treat-
ing of profound and mystical subjects ; never-
theless the language of the narrator shows that
all visible things were created at a certain time.
But with regard to the consummation of the
world, Jacob is the first who gives any informa-
tion, in addressing his children in the words :
" Gather yourselves together unto me, ye sons
of Jacob, that I may tell you what shall be in
the last days," or " after the last days." ' If,
then, there be " last days," or a period " suc-
ceeding the last days," the days which had a
beginning must necessarily come to an end.
David, too, declares : " The heavens shall perish,
but Thou shalt endure ; yea, all of them shall
wax old as doth a garment : as a vesture shalt
Thou change them, and they shall be changed :
but Thou art the same, and Thy years shall have
no end." ^ Our Lord and Saviour, indeed, in
the words, " He who made them at the begin-
ning, made them male and female," ^ Himself
bears witness that the world was created ; and
again, when He says, " Heaven and earth shall
pass away, but My word shall not pass away," *
He points out that they are perishable, and must
come to an end. The apostle, moreover, in de-
claring that " the creature was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of Him who
hath subjected the same in hope, because the
creature itself also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty
of the children of God," s manifestly announces
the end of the world ; as he does also when he
again says, "The fashion of this world passeth
away."^' Now, by the expression which he em-
ploys, " that the creature was made subject to
vanity," he shows that there was a beginning
to this world : for if the creature were made sub-
ject to vanity on account of some hope, it was


■ Gen. xlix. i. The Vulgate has, " In diebus novissimis; " the
Sept. 'Ett' ecrxarwi' tuv rjixipuiy." the Masoretic text, /TTDKB.
^ Ps. cii. 26, 27.
3 Matt. xix. 4.
■« Matt. xxiv. 35.
5 Rom. viii. 20, 21.
^ I Cor. vii. 31.


certainly made subject from a cause ; and seeing
it was from a cause, it must necessarily have had
a beginning : for, without some beginning, the
creature could not be subject to vanity, nor could
that (creature) hope to be freed from the bond-
age of corruption, which had not begun to serve.
But any one who chooses to search at his leisure,
will find numerous other passages in holy Scrip-
ture in which the world is both said to have a
beginning and to hope for an end.

2. Now, if there be any one who would here
oppose either the authority or credibility of our
Scriptures,^ we would ask of him whether he
asserts that God can, or cannot, comprehend all
things? To assert that He cannot, would mani-
festly be an act of impiety. If then he answer,
as he must, that God comprehends all things, it
follows from the very fact of their being capable
of comprehension, that they are understood to
have a beginning and an end, seeing that which
is altogether without any beginning cannot be at
all comprehended. For however far understand-
ing may extend, so far is the faculty of compre-
hending inimitably withdrawn and removed
when there is held to be no beginning.

3. But this is the objection which they gener-
ally raise : they say, " If the world had its begin-
ning in time, what was God doing before the
world began? For it is at once impious and
absurd to say that the nature of God is inactive
and immoveable, or to suppose that goodness at
one time did not do good, and omnipotence at
one time did not exercise its power." Such is
the objection which they are accustomed to r:ake
to our statement that this world had its beginning
at a certain time, and that, agreeably to our be-
lief in Scripture, we can calculate the years of
its past duration. To these propositions I con-
sider that none of the heretics can easily return
an answer that will be in conformity with the
nature of their opinions. But we can give a
logical answer in accordance with the standard
of religion,'^ when we say that not then for the
first time did God begin to work when He made
this visible world ; but as, after its de'^truction,
there will be another world, so also we believe
that others existed before the present caime into
being. And both of these positions willjbe con-
firmed by the authority of holy Scriptuil|e. For
that there will be another world after (this, is
taught by Isaiah, who says, "There Ivill be
new heavens, and a new earth, which U shall
make to abide in my sight, saith the Lokn
and that before this world others also existed is
shown by Ecclesiastes, in the words : " Wthat is
that which hath been ? Even that whicli shall
be. And what is that which has been crehted


' Auctoritate Scripturae nostrae, vel fidei.

8 Regulam pietatis.

9 Cf. Isa. Ixvi. 22.


342


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


Even this which is to be created : and there is
nothing altogether new under the sun. Who
shall speak and declare, Lo, this is new? It
hath already been in the ages which have been
before us." ' By these testimonies it is estab-
ished both that there were ages ^ before our own,
and that there will be others after it. It is not,
however, to be supposed that several worlds ex-
isted at once, but that, after the end of this
present world, others will take their beginning ;
respecting which it is unnecessary to repeat each
particular statement, seeing we have already done
so in the preceding pages.

4. This point, indeed, is not to be idly passed
by, that the holy Scriptures have called the crea-
tion of the world by a new and peculiar name,
terming it KaraftoXy], which has been very im-
properly translated into Latin by " constitutio ; "
for in Greek KarajSoX-rj signifies rather " dejicere,"
i.e., to cast downwards, — a word which has been,
as we have already remarked, improperly trans-
lated into Latin by the phrase " constitutio mun-
di," as in the Gospel according to John, where
the Saviour says, " And there will be tribulation
in those days, such as was not since the begin-
ning of the world ;" ^ in which passage /cara/ioAr;
is rendered by beginning {constitutio), which
is to be understood as above explained. The
apostle also, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, has
employed the same language, saying, " Who hath
chosen us before the foundation of the world ; " ■*
and this foundation he calls Kura/Soky], to be
understood in the same sense as before. It
seeix-.s worth-while, then, to inquire what is meant
by this new term ; and I am, indeed, of opinion 5
i


' Cf. Eccles. I. 9, 10. The text is in conformity with the Septuag. :
Ti TO yeyovos ; I A.vt'o to yevqaoiJ.ei'oi'. Kal Tt to ireTroirj/^eVo;' ;
Auto to TTOtTj^wo/xevoi'. Kal ov/c caTt irav TTp6<T(J>aT0v vtt'o toi'
ri\iov. °Os KaKJrja-eL kol epei . 'I6e toOto Kaivov ecrnv, i^Srj yeyoi'ei'
iv Toi; aiojo-t ■jol<; yei'Ofiei'Ocs anb e/jL-rpoa-Oey rjfiwi'.

2 Saecula.

3 Matt, xxijf. 21.
■* Eph. i. 4./

5 The following is Jerome's version of this passage (.Epistle to
Avttits) : " Apivine habitation, and a true rest above {apitii siiperos) ,
I think is to bd understood, where rational creatures dwell, and where,
before their descent to a lower position, and removal from invisible to
visible (worlds), and fall to earth, and need of gross bodies, they
enjoyed a former blessedness. Whence God the Creator made for
them bodies suitable to their humble position, and created this visible
world, and sdnt into the world ministers for the .salvation and correc-
tion of thosel who had fallen: of whom some were to obtain certain
localities, an|d be subject to the necessities of the world; others were
to discharge iwith care and attention the duties enjoined upon them at
all times, anfa which were known to God, the Arranger (of all things).
And of these, the sun, moon, and stars, which are called ' creature'
by the apostle, received the more elevated places of the world. Which
' creature ' |was made subject to vanity, in that it was clothed with
gross bodifis, and was open to view; and yet was subject to vanity,
not voluniarily, but because of the will of Him who subjected the
same in hdpe." And again: " While others, whom we believe to be
angels, at (different places and times, which the Arranger alone knows,
serve the government of the world." And a little further on: " Which
order of Things is regulated by the providential government of the
whole wovld; some powers falling down from a loftier position, others
gradually sinking to earth: some falling voluntarily, others being cast
down aglainst their will: some undertaking, of their own accord, the
service jbf stretching out the hand to those who fall; others being
compelled to persevere for so long a time in the duty which they have
undertaken." And again: "Whence it follows that, on account of
the various movements, various worlds also are created; and after
this wrkrld which we now inhabit, there will be another greatly dis-
similar j. But no other being save God alone, the Creator of all things,


that, as the end and consummation of the saints
will be in those (ages) which are not seen, and
are eternal, we must conclude (as frequently
pointed out in the preceding pages), from a con-
templation of that very end, that rational crea-
tures had also a similar beginning. And if they
had a beginning such as the end for which they
hope, they existed undoubtedly from the very be-
ginning in those (ages) which are not seen, and
are eternal.^ And if this is so, then there has
been a descent from a higher to a lower condi-
tion, on the part not only of those souls who
have deserved the change by the variety of their
movements, but also on that of those who, in
order to serve the whole world, were brought
down from those higher and invisible spheres to
these lower and visible ones, although against
their will — " Because the creature was subjected
to vanity, not willingly, but because of Him who
subjected the same in hope ; " 7 so that both
sun, and moon, and stars, and angels might dis-
charge their duty to the world, and to those souls
which, on account of their excessive mental de-
fects, stood in need of bodies of a grosser and
more solid nature ; and for the sake of those for
whom this arrangement was necessary, this visi-
ble world was also called into being. From this
it follows, that by the use of the word KaTafSokri,
a descent from a higher to a lower condition,
shared by all in common, would seem to be
pointed out. The hope indeed of freedom is
entertained by the whole of creation — of being
liberated from the corruption of slavery — when
the sons of God, who either fell away or were
scattered abroad,^ shall be gathered together into
one, or when they shall have fulfilled their other
duties in this world, which are known to God
alone, the Disposer of all things. We are, in-
deed, to suppose that the world was created of
such quality and capacity as to contain not only
all those souls which it was determined should
be trained in this world, but also all those powers
which were prepared to attend, and serve, and
assist them. For it is established by many
declarations that all rational creatures are of one
nature : on which ground alone could the justice
of God in all His dealings with them be de-


can arrange the deserts (of all), both to the time to come and to that
which preceded, suitably to the differing lapses and advances (of indi-
viduals) , and to the rewards of virtues or the punishment of vices,
both in the present and in the future, and in all (times), and to con-
duct them all again to one end: for He knows the causes why He
allows some to enjoy their own will, and to fall from a higher rank to
the lowest condition; and why He begins to visit others, and bring
them back gradually, as if by giving them His hand, to their pristine
state, and placing them in a lofty position" (Ruseus).

6 [According to Hagenbach {History of Doctrines, vol. i. p.
167), " Origen formally adopts the idea of original sin, by asserting
that the human soul does not come into the world in a state of inno-
cence, because it has already sinned in a former state. ._ . . And yet,
subsequent times, especially after Jerome, have seen in Origen the
precursor of Pelagius. Jerome calls the opinion that man can be
without sin, Ori^enis rainusculus." S.j

7 Cf Rom. viii. 20, 21.

8 Dispersi.


Chap. V.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


A3


fended, seeing every one has the reason in himself,
why he has been placed in this or that rank in life.

5. This arrangement of things, then, which
God afterwards appointed (for He had, from
the very origin of the world, clearly perceived the j
reasons and causes affecting those who, either
owing to mental deficiencies, deserved to enter
into bodies, or those who were carried away by
their desire for visible things, and those also who,
either willingly or unwillingly, were compelled,
(by Him who subjected the same in hope), to
perform certain services to such as had fallen
into that condition), not being understood by
some, who failed to perceive that it was owing
to preceding causes, originating in free-will, that
this variety of arrangement had been instituted
by God, they have concluded that all things in
this world are directed either by fortuitous move-
ments or by a necessary fate, and that nothing is
within the power of our own will. And, there-
fore, also they were unable to show that the
providence of God was beyond the reach of
censure.

6. But as we have said that all the souls who
lived in this world stood in need of many minis-
ters, or rulers, or assistants ; so, in the last times,
when the end of the world is already imminent
and near, and the whole human race is verging
upon the last destruction, and when not only
those who were governed by others have been
reduced to weakness, but those also to whom
had been committed the cares of government,
it was no longer such help nor such defenders
that were needed, but the help of the Author
and Creator Himself was required to restore to
the one the discipline of obedience, which had
been corrupted and profaned, and to the other
the discipline of rule. And hence the only-
begotten Son of God, who was the Word and
the Wisdom of the Father, when He was in the
possession of that glory with the Father, which
He had before the world was, divested Himself'
of it, and, taking the form of a servant, was
made obedient unto death, that He might teach
obedience to those who could not otherwise than
by obedience obtain salvation. He restored also
the laws of rule and government^ which had
been corrupted, by subduing all enemies under
His feet, that by this means (for it was neces-
sary that He should reign until He had put all
enemies under His feet, and destroyed the last
enemy — death) He might teach rulers them-
selves moderation in their government. As He
had come, then, to restore the discipline, not
only of government, but of obedience, as we
have said, accomplishing in Himself first what
He desired to be accomplished by others. He


Exinanivil semet ipsum.
Regendi regnandique.


became obedient to the Father, not only to the
death of the cross, but also, in the end of the
world, embracing in Himself all whom He sub-
jects to the Father, and who by Him come to
salvation, He Himself, along with them, and in
them, is said also to be subject to the Father ;
all things subsisting in Him, and He Himself
being the Head of all things, and in Him being
the salvation and the fulness of those who ob-
tain salvation. And this consequently is what
the apostle says of Him : " And when all things
shall be subjected to Him, then shall the Son
also Himself be subject to Him that put all
things under Him, that God may be all in all."

7. I know not, indeed, how the heretics, not
understanding the meaning of the apostle in
these words, consider the term^ "subjection"
degrading as applied to the Son ; for if the pro-
priety of the title be called in question, it may
easily be ascertained from making a contrary
supposition. Because if it be not good to be in
subjection, it follows that the opposite will be
good, viz., not to be in subjection. Now the
language of the apostle, according to their view,
appears to indicate by these words, " And when
all things shall be subdued unto Him, then shall
the Son also Himself be subject unto Him that
put all things under Him,"* that He, who is not
now in subjection to the Father, will become
subject to Him when the Father shall have first
subdued all things unto Him. But I am aston-
ished how it can be conceived to be the mean-
ing, that He who, while all things are not yet
subdued to Him, is not Himself in subjection,
should — at a time when all things have been
subdued to Him, and when He has become
King of all men, and holds sway over all things
— be supposed then to be made subject, seeing
He was not formerly in subjection ; for such do
not understand that the subjection of Christ to
the Father indicates that our happiness has at-
tained to perfection, and that the work under-
taken by Him has been brought to a victorious
termination, seeing He has not only purified the
power of supreme government over the whole
of creation, but presents to the Father the prin-
ciples of the obedience and subjection of the
human race in a corrected and improved condi-
tion.5 If, then, that subjection be held to be
good and salutary by which the Son is said to be
subject to the Father, it is an extremely rational
and logical inference to deduce that the sub-
jection also of enemies, which is said to be
made to the Son of God, should be understood
as being also salutary and useful ; as if, when the


3 [Elucidation II.]

* I Cor. XV. 28.

S Cum non solum regendi ac regnandi summam, quam In universam
emendaverit creaturam, yerum etiam obedienta; et subjectione cor-
recta reparataque humani generis Patri ofTcrat in&tituta.


344


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


Son is said to be subject to the Father, the per-
fect restoration of the whole of creation is sig-
nified, so also, when enemies are said to be
subjected to the Son of God, the salvation of
the conquered and the restoration of the lost is
in that understood to consist.

8. This subjection, however, will be accom-
plished in certain ways, and after certain train-
ing, and at certain times ; for it is not to be
imagined that the subjection is to be brought
about by the pressure of necessity (lest the
whole world should then appear to be subdued
to God by force), but by word, reason, and doc-
trine ; by a call to a better course of things, by
the best systems of training, by the employment
also of suitable and appropriate threatenings,
which will justly impend over those who despise
any care or attention to their salvation and use-
fulness. In a word, we men also, in training
either our slaves or children, restrain them by
threats and fear while they are, by reason of their
tender age, incapable of using their reason ; but
when they have begun to understand what is
good, and useful, and honourable, the fear of the
lash being over, they acquiesce through the sua-
sion of words and reason in all that is good.
But how, consistently with the preservation of
freedom of will in all rational creatures, each
one ought to be regulated, i.e., who they are
whom the word of God finds and trains, as if
they were already prepared and capable of it ;
who they are whom it puts off to a later time ;
who these are from whom it is altogether con-
cealed, and who are so situated as to be far from
hearing it; who those, again, are who despise
the word of God when made known and preached
to them, and who are driven by a kind of cor-
rection and chastisement to salvation, and whose
conversion is in a certain degree demanded and
extorted ; who those are to whom certain oppor-
tunities of salvation are afforded, so that some-
times, their faith being proved by an answer
alone," they have unquestionably obtained salva-
tion ; ^ — from what causes or on what occasions
these results take place, or what the divine wis-
dom sees within them, or what movements of
their will leads God so to arrange all these things,
is known to Him alone, and to His only-begotten
Son, through whom all things were created and
restored, and to the Holy Spirit, through whom
all things are sanctified, who proceedeth from the
Father,^ to whom be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.


t By a profession of faith in baptism.

2 Indubitatam ceperit salutem.

3 It was not until the third Synod of Toledo, a.d. 589, that the
■"Filioque" clause was added to the Creed of Constantinople, — this

difference forming, as is well known, one of the dogmatic grounds for
the disunion between the Western and Eastern Churches down to the
present day, the latter Church denying that the Spirit proceedeth
from the Father and the Son. [See Elucidation III.]


CHAP. VI. — ON THE END OF THE WORLD.

I. Now, respecting the end of the world and
the consummation of all things, we have stated
in the preceding pages, to the best of our ability,
so far as the authority of holy Scripture enabled
us, what we deem sufficient for purposes of
instruction ; and we shall here only add a few
admonitory remarks, since the order of investi-
gation has brought us back to the subject. The
highest good, then, after the attainment of which
the whole of rational nature is seeking, which is
also called the end of all blessings,-* is defined by
many philosophers as follows : The highest good,
they say, is to become as like to God as possible.
But this definition I regard not so much as a dis-
covery of theirs, as a view derived from holy
Scripture. For this is pointed out by Moses,
before all other philosophers, when he describes
the first creation of man in these words : " And
God said. Let Us make man in Our own image,
and after Our likeness ; " s and then he adds the
words : " So God created man in His own image :
in the image of God created He him ; male and
female created He them, and He blessed them." ^
Now the expression, " In the image 7 of God
created He him," without any mention of the
word " likeness," ^ conveys no other meaning than
this, that man received the dignity of God's im-
age at his first creation ; but that the perfection
of his likeness has been reserved for the con-
summation, — namely, that he might acquire it
for himself by the exercise of his own diligence
in the imitation of God, the possibility of attain-
ing to perfection being granted him at the be-
ginning through the dignity of the divine image,
and the perfect realization of the divine likeness
being reached in the end by the fulfilment of the
(necessary) works. Now, that such is the case,
the Apostle John points out more clearly and
unmistakeably, when he makes this declaration :
" Little children, we do not yet know what we
shall be ; but if a revelation be made to us from
the Saviour, ye will say, without any doubt, we
shall be like Him." 9 By which expression he
points out with the utmost certainty, that not
only was the end of all things to be hoped for,
which he says was still unknown to him, but also
the likeness to God, which will be conferred in
proportion to the completeness of our deserts.
The Lord Himself, in the Gospel, not only de-
clares that these same results are future, but that
they are to be brought about by His own inter-
cession. He Himself deigning to obtain them
from the Father for His disciples, saying, " Father,
I will that where I am, these also may be with


■* Fmis omnium:

5 Gen. i. 26.

6 Gen. i. 27, 28.
1 Imago.

8 Simiiitudo.

9 Cf. I John iii. 2.


bonorum " understood.


Chap. VI.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


345


Me ; and as Thou and I are one, they also may
be one in Us." ' In which the divine likeness
itself already appears to advance, if we may so i
express ourselves, and from being merely similar, i
to become the same,^ because undoubtedly in !
the consummation or end God is " all and in all." |
And with reference to this, it is made a question '
by some ^ whether the nature of bodily matter, \
although cleansed and purified, and rendered
altogether spiritual, does not seem either to offer
an obstruction towards attaining the dignity of
the (divine) likeness, or to the property of unity,'*
because neither can a corporeal nature appear
capable of any resemblance to a divine nature,
which is certainly incorporeal ; nor can it be
truly and deservedly designated one with it, es-
pecially since we are taught by the truths of our
religion that that which alone is one, viz., the
Son with the Father, must be referred to a pe-
culiarity of the (divine) nature.

2. Since, then, it is promised that in the end
God will be all and in all, we are not, as is fitting,
to suppose that animals, either sheep or other
cattle, come to that end, lest it should be implied
that God dwelt even in animals, whether sheep
or other cattle ; and so, too, with pieces of wood
or stones, lest it should be said that God is in
these also. So, again, nothing that is wicked
must be supposed to attain to that end, lest,
while God is said to be in all things. He may
also be said to be in a vessel of wickedness. For
if we now assert that God is everywhere and in
all things, on the ground that nothing can be
empty of God, we nevertheless do not say that


' Cf. John xvii. 24; cf. 21.

2 Ex simili unum fieri.

3 Jerome, in his Epistle to Avitus, No. 94, has the passage
thus: " Since, as we have already frequenily observed, the beginning
is generated again from the end, it is a question whether then also
there will be bodies, or whether existence will be maintained at some
time without them when they shall have been annihilated, and thus
the life of incorporeal beings must be believed to be incorporeal, as
we know is the case with God And there is no doubt that if all the
bodies which are termed visible by the apostle, belong to that sensible
world, the life of incorporeal beings will be incorporeal." And a little
after : " That expression, also, used by the apostle, ' The whole crea-
tion will be freed from the bondage of corruption into the glorious lib-
erty of the children of God' (Rom. viii. 21), we so understand, that
we say it was the first creation of rational and incorporeal beings
which is not subject to corruption, because it was not clothed with
bodies; for wherever bodies are, corruption immediately follows.
But afterwards it will be freed from the bondage of corruption, when
they shall have received the glory of the sons of God, and God shall
be all in all." And in the same place: " That we must believe the
end of all things to be incorporeal, the language of the Saviour Him-
self leads us to think, when He says, ' .4s I and Thou are one, so
m.iy they also be one in Us ' (John xvii. 21). For we ought to know
what God is, and what the Saviour will be in the end, and how the
likeness of the Father and the Son has been promised to the saints;
for as they are one in Him, so they also are one in them. For we
must adopt the view, either that the God of all things is clothed with
a body, and as we are enveloped with flesh, so He also witli some
material covering, that the likeness of the life of God may be in the
end produced also in the saints; or if this hypothesis is unbecoming,
especially in the judgment of those who desire, even in the smallest
degree, to feel the majesty of God, and to look upon the glory of His
uncreated and all-surpassing nature, we are forced to adopt the other
alternative, and despair either of attaining any likeness to God, if we
are to inhabit for ever the same bodies, or if"^ the blessedness of the
same life with God is promised to us, we must live in the same state
as that in which God lives." All these points have been omitted by
Rufinus as erroneous, and statements of a different kind here and
there inserted instead (Rua;us).

* Ad unitatis proprietatem.


He is now "all things" in those in whom He is.
And hence we must look more carefully as to
what that is which denotes the perfection of
blessedness and the end of things, which is not
only said to be God in all things, but also " all
in all." Let us then inquire what all those things
are which God is to become in all.

3. I am of opinion that the expression, by
which God is said to be " all in all," means that
He is "all" in each individual person. Now
He will be "all" in each individual in this
way : when all which any rational understand-
ing, cleansed from the dregs of every sort of
vice, and with every cloud of wickedness com-
pletely swept away, can either feel, or under-
stand, or think, will be wholly God ; and when
it will no longer behold or retain anything else
than God, but when God will be the measure
and standard of all its movements ; and thus
God will be "all," for there will no longer be
any distinction of good and evil, seeing evil no-
where exists ; for God is all things, and to Him
no evil is near : nor will there be any longer a
desire to eat from the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, on the part of him who is always
in the possession of good, and to whom God is
all. So then, when the end has been restored to
the beginning, and the termination of things
compared with their commencement, that con-
dition of things will be re-established in which
rational nature was placed, when it had no need
to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil ; so that when all feeling of wickedness has
been removed, and the individual has been puri-
fied and cleansed. He who alone is the one good
God becomes to him " all," and that not in the
case of a few individuals, or of a considerable
number, but He Himself is " all in all." And
when death shall no longer anywhere exist, nor
the sting of death, nor any evil at all, then verily
God will be "all in all." But some are of
opinion that that perfection and blessedness of
rational creatures, or natures, can only remain in
that same condition of which we have spoken
above, i.e., that all things should possess God,
and God should be to them all things, if they
are in no degree prevented by their union with
a bodily nature. Otherwise they think that the
glory of the highest blessedness is impeded by
the intermixture of any material substance. s But


5 " Here the honesty of Rufinus in his translation seems very
suspicious; for Origen's well-known opinion regarding the sins and
lapses of blessed spirits he here attributes to others. Nay, even the
opinion which he introduces Origcn as ascribing to others, he ex-
hibits him as refuting a little further on, sec 6, in these words: ' -And
in this condition (of blessedness) we are to believe that, by the will
of the Creator, it will abide for ever without any change,' etc. I sus-
pect, therefore, that all this is due to Rufinus himself, and that he has
inserted it, instead of what is found in the beginning of the chapter,
sec. I, and which in Jerome's Epistle to Avitus stands as follows:
' Nor is there any doubt that, after certain intervals of time, matter
will again exist, and bodies be formed, and a diversity be established
in the world, on account of the vaiying wills of rational creatures,
who, alter (enjoying) perfect blessedness down to the end of all


346


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[rooK III.


this subject we have discussed at greater length,
as may be seen in the preceding pages.

4. And now, as we find the apostle making
mention of a spiritual body, let us inquire, to the
best of our" ability, what idea we are to form of
such a thing. So far, then, as our understanding
can grasp it, we consider a spiritual body to be
of such a nature as ought to be inhabited not
only by all holy and perfect souls, but also by all
those creatures which will be liberated from the
slavery of corruption. Respecting the body also,
the apostle has said, " We have a house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens," ' i.e.,
in the mansions of the blessed. And from this
statement we may form a conjecture, how pure,
how refined, and how glorious are the qualities
of that body, if we compare it with those which,
although they are celestial bodies, and of most
brilliant splendour, were nevertheless made with
hands, and are visible to our sight. But of that
body it is said, that it is a house not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens. Since, then,
those things " which are seen are temporal, but
those things which are not seen are eternal," -
all those bodies which we see either on earth or
in heaven, and which are capable of being seen,
and have been made with hands, but are not
eternal, are far excelled in glory by that which is
not visible, nor made with hands, but is eternal.
From which comparison it may be conceived
^ how great are the comeliness, and splendour,
and brilliancy of a spiritual body ; and how true
it is, that " eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor
hath it entered into the heart of man to con-
ceive, what God hath prepared for them that
love Him." 3 We ought not, however, to doubt
that the nature of this present body of ours may,
by the will of God, who made it what it is, be
raised to those qualities of refinement, and puri-
ty, and splendour (which characterize the body
referred to), according as the condition of
things requires, and the deserts of our rational
nature shall demand. Finally, when the world re-
quired variety and diversity, matter yielded itself
with all docility throughout the diverse appear-


things, have gradually fallen away to a lower condition, and received
into them so much wickedness, that they are converted into an oppo-
site condition, by their unwillingness to retain their original state,
and to preserve their blessedness uncorrupted. Nor is this point to
be suppressed, that many rational creatures retain their first condi-
tion {principiuin) even to the second and third and fourth worlds,
and allow no room for any change within them; while others, again,
will lose so little of their pristine state, that they will appear to have
lost almost nothing, and some are to be precipitated with great de-
struction into the lowest pit. And God, the disposer of all things,
when creating His worlds, knows how to treat each individual agree-
ably to his merits, and He is acquainted with the occasions and causes
by which the government (gubcrnaculn) of the world is sustained
and commenced; so that he who surpassed all others in wickedness,
and brought himself completely down to the earth, is made in another
world, which is afterwards to be formed, a devil, the beginning of the
creation of the Lord (Job xl. i^), to be mocked by the angels who
have lost the virtue of their original condition ' {^exordii virtntem) ."
— Ru.TUS.

• 2 Cor. V. I.

2 2 Cor. iy. 18.

3 I Cor. ii. 9; cf. Isa. Ixiv. 4.


ances and species of things to the Creator, as to
its Lord and Maker, that He might educe from
it the various forms of celestial and terrestrial
beings. But when things have begun to hasten
to that consummation that all may be one, as
tlie Father is one with the Son, it may be under-
stood as a rational inference, that where all are
one, there will no longer be any diversity.

5. The last enemy, moreover, who is called
death, is said on this account to be destroyed,
that there may not be anything left of a mourn-
ful kind when death does not exist, nor anything
that is adverse when there is no enemy. The
destruction of the last enemy, indeed, is to be
understood, not as if its substance, which was
formed by God, is to perish, but because its mind
and hostile will, which came not from God, but
from itself, are to be destroyed. Its destruction,
therefore, will not be its non-existence, but its
ceasing to be an enemy, and (to be) death. For
nothing is impossible to the Omnipotent, nor is
anything incapable of restoradon 4 to its Creator :
for He made all things that they might exist, and
those things which were made for existence can-
not cease to be. 5 For this reason also will they
admit of change and variety, so as to be placed,
according to their merits, either in a better or
worse position ; but no destruction of substance
can befall those things which were created by
God for the purpose of permanent existence.^
For those things which agreeably to the common
opinion are believed to perish, the nature either
of our faith or of the truth will not permit us to
suppose to be destroyed. Finally, our flesh is
supposed by ignorant men and unbelievers to be
destroyed after death, in such a degree that it
retains no relic at all of its former substance.
We, howe\er, who believe in its resurrection,
understand that a change only has been pro-
duced by death, but that its substance certainly
remains ; and that by the will of its Creator, and
at the time appointed, it will be restored to life ;
and that a second time a change will take place
in it, so that what at first was flesh (formed) out
of earthly soil, and was afterwards dissolved by
death, and again reduced to dust and ashes
(" For dust thou art," ? it is said, "and to dust
shalt thou return"), will be again raised from
the earth, and shall after this, according to the
merits of the indwelling soul, advance to the glory
of a spiritual body.

6. Into this condition, then, we are to suppose
that all this bodily substance of ours will be


■t Insanabile.

5 [" Origen went so far, that, contrary to the general opinion, he
allowed Satan the glimmer of a hope of future grace. ... He is
here speaking of the last enemy, death ; but it is evident, from the
context, that he identifies death with the devil," etc (Hagenbach's
Hislory of Doctrines, vol. i. p. 145-147. See also, supra, book i.
vi. -x. p. 261.) S.]

D tJt essent et permanerent.

7 Gen. iii. 19.


Chap. VI.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


347


brought, when all things shall be re-established
in a state of unity, and when God shall be all in
all. And this result must be understood as being
brought about, not suddenly, but slowly and
gradually, seeing that the process of amentlment
and correction will take place imperceptibly in
the individual instances during the lapse of
countless and unmeasured ages, some outstrip-
ping others, and tending by a swifter course
towards perfection,' while others again follow
close at hand, and some again a long way be-
hind ; and thus, through the numerous and un-
counted orders of progressive beings who are
being reconciled to God from a state of enmity,
the last enemy is finally reached, who is called
death, so that he also may be destroyed, and
no longer be an enemy. When, therefore, all
rational souls shall have been restored to a con-
dition of this kind, then the nature of this body
of ours will undergo a change into the glory of a
spiritual body. For as we see it not to be the
case with rational natures, that some of them
have lived in a condition of degradation owing
to their sins, while others have been called to a
state of happiness on account of their merits ;
but as we see those same souls who had formerly
been sinful, assisted, after their conversion and
reconciliation to God, to a state of happiness ;
so also are we to consider, with respect to the
nature of the body, that the one whith we now
make use of in a state of meanness, and corrup-
tion, and weakness, is not a different body from
that which we shall possess in incorruption, and
in power, and in glory ; but that the same body,
when it has cast away the infirmities in which it is
now entangled, shall be transmuted into a condi-
tion of glory, being rendered spiritual, so that what
was a vessel of dishonour may, when cleansed,
become a vessel unto honour, and an abode of
blessedness. And in this condition, also, we are
to believe, that by the will of the Creator, it will
abide for ever without any change, as is con-
firmed by the declaration of the apostle, when
he says, "We have a house, not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens." For the faith of
the Church ^ does not admit the view of certain
(Grecian philosophers, that there is besides the
body, composed of four elements, another fifth
body, which is different in all its parts, and di-
verse from this our present body ; since neither
out of sacred Scripture can any produce the
slightest suspicion of evidence for such an opin-
ion, nor can any rational inference from things
allow the reception of it, especially when the
holy apostle manifestly declares, that it is not new
bodies which are given to those who rise from
the dead, but that they receive those identical


ones which they had possessed when living,
I transformed from an inferior into a better condi-
tion. For his words are : " It is sown an animal
j body, it will rise a spiritual body : it is sown in
corruption, it will arise in incorruption : it is
^ sown in weakness, it will arise in power : it is
I sown in dishonour, it will arise in glory." 3 As,
therefore, there is a kind of advance in man, so
that from being first an animal being, and not
understanding what belongs to the Spirit of God,
he reaches by means of instruction the stage of
being made a spiritual being, and of judging all
things, while he himself is judged by no one ; so
also, with respect to the state of the body, we
are to hold that this very body which now, on
j account of its service to the soul, is styled an
animal body, will, by means of a certain prog-
ress, when the soul, united to God, shall have
been made one spirit with Him (the body even
then ministering, as it were, to the spirit), attain
to a spiritual condition and quality, especially
since, as we have often pointed out, bodily na-
ture was so formed by the Creator, as to pass
easily into whatever condition he should wish, or
the nature of the case demand.

7. The whole of this reasoning, then, amounts
to this : that God created two general natures,
— a visible, i.e., a corporeal nature ; and an in-
visible nature, which is incorporeal. Now these
two natures admit of two different permutations.
That invisible and rational nature changes in
mind and purpose, because it is endowed with
freedom of^ will,^ and is on this account found
sometimes to be engaged in the practice of good,
and sometimes in that of the opposite. But this
corporeal nature admits of a change in substance ;
whence also God, the arranger of all things, has
the service of this matter at His command in
the moulding, or fabrication, or re-touching of
whatever He wishes, so that corporeal nature
may be transmuted, and transformed into any
forms or species whatever, according as the de-
serts of things may demand ; which the prophet
evidently has in view when he says, " It is God
who makes and transforms all things." s

8. And now the point for investigation is,
whether, when God shall be all in all, the whole
of bodily nature will, in the consummatio:i of all
things, consist of one species, and the sole qual-
ity of body be that which shall shine in the in-
describable glory which is to be regarded as the
future possession of the spiritual body. For if
we rightly understand the matter, this is the
statement of Moses in the beginning of his book,
when he says, " In the beginning God created
the heavens and the earth." ^ For this is the


Ad summa.
[Elucidalion IV.]


3 I Cor. XV. 28.
■* [Elucidation V.]
S Cf. Ps. cii. 25, 26.
' Gen. i. I.


348


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book III.


beginning of all creation : to this beginning the
end and consummation of all things must be re-
called, i.e., in order that that heaven and that
earth may be the habitation and resting-place of
the pious ; so that all the holy ones, and the
meek, may first obtain an inheritance in that
land, since this is the teaching of the law, and
of the prophets, and of the Gospel. In which
land I believe there exist the true and living
forms of that worship which Moses handed down
under the shadow of the law ; of which it is said,
that " they serve unto the example and shadow
of heavenly things " ' — those, viz., who were in
subjection in the law. To Moses himself also
was the injunction given, " Look that thou make
them after the form and pattern which were
showed thee on the mount." ^ From which it
appears to me, that as on this earth the law was
a sort of schoolmaster to those who by it were
to be conducted to Christ, in order that, being
instructed and trained by it, they might more
easily, after the training of the law, receive the
more perfect principles of Christ ; so also an-
other earth, which receives into it all the saints,
may first imbue and mould them by the institu-
tions of the true and everlasting law, that they
may more easily gain possession of those perfect
institutions of heaven, to which nothing can be
added ; in which there will be, of a truth, that
Gospel which is called everlasting, and that Testa-
ment, ever new, which shall never grow old.


Heb. viii. 5.
Ex. XXV. 40.


9. In this way, accordingly, we are to suppose
that at the consummation and restoration of all
things, those who make a gradual advance, and
who ascend (in the scale of improvement) , will
arrive in due measure and order at that land,
and at that training which is contained in it,
where they may be prepared for those better
institutions to which no addition can be made.
For, after His agents and servants, the Lord
Christ, who is King of all, will Himself assume
the kingdom ; i.e., after instruction in the holy
virtues. He will Himself instruct those who are
capable of receiving Him in respect of His be-
ing wisdom, reigning in them until He has sub-
jected them to the Father, who has subdued all
things to Himself, i.e., that when they shall have
been made capable of receiving God, God may
be to them all in all. Then accordingly, as a
necessary consequence, bodily nature will obtain
that highest condition ^ to which nothing more
can be added. Having discussed, up to this
point, the quality of bodily nature, or of spiritual
body, we leave it to the choice of the reader to
determine what he shall consider best. And
here we may bring the third book to a conclusion.


3 Jerome {Epistle to Aviius, No. 94) says that Origen, " after a
most lengthened discussion, in which he asserts that all bodily nature
is to be changed into attenuated and spiritual bodies, and that all sub-
stance is to be converted into one body of perfect purity, and more
brilliant than any splendour {mimdissiiniun ei omni splcndore
purius) , and Such as the human mind cannot now conceive," adds
at the last, " And God will be ' all in all,' so that the whole of bodily
nature may be reduced into that substance which is better than all
others, into the divine, viz., than which none is better." From which,
since it seems to follow that God possesses a body, although of ex-
treme tenuity {licet teniiissiiiiut)!), Rufinus has either suppressed
this view, or altered the meaning of Origen's words (Ruseus).


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.

BOOK IV.


TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN OF

RUFINUS.

CHAP. I. THAT THE SCRIPTURES ARE DIVINELY IN-
SPIRED.

I. But as it is not sufficient, in the discussion of
matters of such importance, to entrust the decision
to the human senses and to the human understand-
ing, and to pronounce on things invisible as if they
were seen by us,' we must, in order to estabhsh the
positions which we have laid down, adduce the tes-
timony of Holy Scripture. And that this testimony
may produce a sure and unhesitating belief, either
with regard to what we have still to advance, or to
what has been already stated, it seems necessary to
show, in the first place, that the Scriptures them-
selves are divine, i.e., were inspired by the Spirit of
God. We shall therefore with all possible brevity
draw forth from the Holy Scriptures themselves,
such evidence on this point as may produce upon us
a suitable impression, (making our quotations) from
Moses, the first legislator of the Hebrew nation,
and from the words of Jesus Christ, the Author and
Chief of the Christian religious system.^ For al-
though there have been numerous legislators among
the Greeks and Barbarians, and also countless teach-
ers and philosophers who professed to declare the
truth, we do not remember any legislator who was
able to produce in the minds of foreign nations an
affection and a zeal (for him) such as led them
either voluntarily to adopt his laws, or to defend
them with all the efforts of their mind. No one,
then, has been able to introduce and make known
what seemed to himself the truth, among, I do not
say many foreign nations, but even amongst the indi-
viduals of one single nation, in such a manner that a
knowledge and belief of the same should extend to
all. And yet there can be no doubt that it was the
wish of the legislators that their laws should be ob-
served by all men, if possible ; and of the teachers,
that what appeared to themselves to be truth, should
become known to all. But knowing that they could


TRANSLATION FROM THE
GREEK.

CHAP. I. — ON THE INSPIRATION OF HOLY
SCRIPTURE, AND HOW THE SAME IS TO BE
READ AND UNDERSTOOD, AND WHAT IS THE
REASON OF THE UNCERTAINTY IN IT ; AND
OF THE IMPOSSIBILITY OR IRRATIONALITY OF
CERTAIN THINGS IN IT, TAKEN ACCORDING
TO THE LETTER.

(The translation from the Greek is designedly
literal, that the difference between the original
and the paraphrase of Rufinus may be more
clearly seen.)

I. Since, in our investigation of matters
of such importance, not satisfied with the
common opinions, and with the clear evi-
dence of visible things,^ we take in addition,
for the proof of our statements, testimonies
from what are believed by us to be divine
writings, viz., from that which is called the
Old Testament, and that which is styled
the New, and endeavour by reason to con-
firm our faith ; and as we have not yet
spoken of the Scriptures as divine, come
and let us, as if by way of an epitome,
treat of a few points respecting them, lay-
ing down those reasons which lead us to
regard them as divine writings. And be-
fore making use of the words of the writ-
ings themselves, and of the things which
are exhibited in them, we must make
the following statement regarding Moses
and Jesus Christ, — the lawgiver of the
Hebrews, and the Introducer of the sav-
ing doctrines according to Christianity.
For, although there have been very many
legislators among the Greeks and Barbari-
ans, and teachers who announced opinions
which professed to be tlie truth, we have
heard of no legislator who was able to
imbue other nations with a zeal for the


Visibiliter de invisibilibus pronunciare. * rp ivapytiif 7iov ^KtiroixivMV,


3 Principis Christianorum religionis et dogmati
349


350


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


by no means succeed in producing any such mighty
power within them as would lead foreign nations to
obey their laws, or have regard to their statements,
they did not venture even to essay the attempt, lest
the failure of the undertaking should stamp their
conduct with the mark of imprudence. And yet
there are throughout the whole world — througliout
all Greece, and all foreign countries — countless in-
dividuals who have abandoned the laws of their
country, and those whom they had believed to be
gods, and have yielded themselves up to the obedi-
ence of the law of Moses, and to the discipleship
and worship of Christ ; and have done this, not
without exciting against themselves the intense ha-
tred of the worshippers of images, so as frequently
to be exposed to cruel tortures from the latter, and
sometimes even to be put to death. And yet they
embrace, and with all affection preserve, the words
and teaching of Christ.


2. And we may see, moreover, how that religion
itself grew up in a short time, making progress by
the punishment and death 'of its worshippers, by the
plundering of their goods, and by the tortures of
every kind which they endured ; and this result is the
more surprising, that even the teachers of it them-
selves neither were men of skill,' nor very numerous ;
and yet these words are preached throughout the
whole world, so that Greeks and Barbarians, wise and
foohsh, adopt the doctrines of the Christian religion. ^
From which it is no doubtful inference, that it is not
by human power or might that the words of Jesus
Christ come to prevail with all faith and power over
the understandings and souls of all men. For, that
these results were both predicted by Him, and es-
tablished by divine answers proceeding from Him,
is clear from His own words : "Ye shall be brought
before governors and kings for My sake, for a testi-
mony against them and the Gentiles." 7 And again :
" This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached
among all nations." ^ And again : " Many shall say
to Me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not eaten
and drunk in Thy name, and in Thy name cast out
devils ? And I will say unto them. Depart from Me,
ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you."^ If these


reception of his words ; and although
those who professed to philosophize about
truth brought forward a great apparatus
of apparent logical demonstration, no
one has been able to impress what was
deemed by him the truth upon other na-
tions, or even on any number of persons
worth mentioning in a single nation. And
yet not only would the legislators have
liked to enforce those laws which appeared
to be good, if possible, upon the whole
human race, but the teachers also to have
spread what they imagined to be truth
everywhere throughout the world. But as
they were unable to call men of other lan-
guages and from many nations to observe
their laws, and accept their teaching, they
did not at all attempt to do this, consider-
ing not unwisely the impossibility of such
a result happening to them. Whereas all
Greece, and the barbarous part of our
world, contains innumerable zealots, who
have deserted the laws of their fathers and
the established gods, for the observance
of the laws of Moses and the discipleship
of the words of Jesus Christ ; although
those who clave to the law of Moses were
hated by the worshippers of images, and
those who accepted the words of Jesus
Christ were exposed, in addition, to the
danger of death.

2. And if we observe how powerful the
word has become in a very few years,
notwithstanding that against those who
acknowledged Christianity conspiracies
were formed, and some of them on its
account put to death, and others of them
lost their property, and that, notwithstand-
ing the small number of its teachers,^ it
was preached everywhere throughout tne
world, so that Greeks and Barbarians, wise
and foolish, gave themselves • up to the
worship that is through Jesus,-* we have no
difficulty in saying that the result is be-
yond any human power,5 Jesus having
taught with all authority and persuasive-
ness that His word should not be over-
come ; so thatg'we may rightly regard as
oracular responses ^ those utterances of
His, such as, " Ye shall be brought before
governors and kings for My sake, for a
testimony against them and the Gen-
tiles ; " 7 and, " Many shall say unto Me in
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not eaten
in Thy name, and drunk in Thy name, and
in Thy name cast out devils ? And I shall


' Satis idonei. * ovSe twv 8i.Sa<TK0i\iDv ■jr\eovai6vTuiv, 3 Relicionem Christianae doctrinse. ■♦ T>j 5ia 'Im-m" SeoTeReia.
5 fjLel^ov ij Kara avOpaivov to npayft.a civai. * j^prjo-jaovs. ' Matt. x. 18. ^ Cf. Matt. xxiv. 14. 9 Cf. Matt. vii. zz, Z3.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


351


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


sayings, indeed, had been so uttered by Him, and
yet if these predictions had not been fulfilled, they
might perhaps appear to be untrue,- and not to pos-
sess any authority. But now, when His declarations
do pass into fulfilment, seeing they were predicted
with such power and authority, it is most clearly
shown to be true that He, when He was made man,
delivered to men the precepts of salvation. ^

3. What, then, are we to say of this, which the
prophets had beforehand foretold of Him, that princes
would not cease from Judah, nor leaders from be-
tween his thighs, until He should come for whom
it has been reserved (viz., the kingdom), and until
the expectation of the Gentiles should come? For
it is most distinctly evident from the history itself,
from what is clearly seen at the present day, that
from the times of Christ onwards there were no
kings amongst the Jews. Nay, even all those objects
of Jewish pride,*^ of which they vaunted so much,
and in which they exulted, whether regarding the
beauty of the temple or the ornaments of the altar,
and all those sacerdotal fillets and robes of the high
priests, were all destroyed together. For the proph-
ecy was fulfilled which had declared, " For the chil-
dren of Israel shall abide many days without king
and prince : there shall be no victim, nor altar, nor
priesthood, nor answers." '° These testimonies, ac-
cordingly, we employ against those who seem to assert
that what is spoken in Genesis by Jacob refers to
Judah ; and who say that there still remains a prince
of the race of Judah — he, viz., who is the prince of
their nation, whom they style Patriarch " — and that
there cannot fail (a ruler) of his seed, who will re-
main until the advent of that Christ whom they pic-
ture to themselves. But if the prophet's words be
true, when he says, " The children of Israel shall
abide many days without king, without prince ; and
there shall be no victim, nor altar, nor priesthood ; " '3
and if, certainly, since the overthrow of the temple,
victims are neither offered, nor any altar found, nor
any priesthood exists, it is most certain that, as it is
written, princes have departed from Judah, and a
leader from between his thighs, until the coming of
Him for whom it has been reserved. It is established,
then, that He is come for whom it has been reserved,
and in whom is the expectation of the Gentiles. And
this manifestly seems to be fulfilled in the multitude
of those who have believed on God through Christ
out of the different nations.


say unto them. Depart from Me, ye work-
ers of iniquity, I never knew you." • Now
it was perhaps (once) probable that, in
uttering these words, He spoke them in
vain, so that they were not true ; but when
"^that which was delivered with so much
authority has come to pass, it shows that
God, having really become man, delivered
to men the doctrines of salvation.-*

3. And what need is there to mention
also that it was predicted of Christ s that
then would the rulers fail from Judah, and
the leaders from his thighs,^ when He
came for whom it is reserved (the king-
dom, namely) ; and that the expectation
of the Gentiles should dwell in the land ? ^
For it is clearly manifest from the history,
and from what is seen at the present day,
that from the times of Jesus there were no
longer any who were called kings of the
Jews ; 9 all those Jewish institutions on
which they prided themselves — I mean
those arrangements relating to the temple
and the altar, and the offering of the ser-
vice, and the robes of the high priest —
having been destroyed. For the prophecy
was fulfilled which said, "The children of
Israel shall sit many days, there being no
king, nor ruler, nor sacrifice, nor altar, nor
priesthood, nor responses." '° And these
predictions we employ to answer those
who, in their perplexity as to the words
spoken in Genesis by Jacob to Judah, as-
sert that the Ethnarch,'^ being of the race
of Judah, is the ruler of the people, and
that there will not fail some of his seed,
until the advent of that Christ whom they
figure to their imagination. But if " the
children of Israel are to sit many days
without a king, or ruler, or altar, or priest-
hood, or responses ; " and if, since the
temple was destroyed, there exists no
longer sacrifice, nor altar, nor priesthood,
it is manifest that the ruler has failed out
of Judah, and the leader from between his
thighs. And since the prediction declares
that " the ruler shall not fail from Judah,
and the leader from between his thighs,
until what is reserved for Him shall come,"
it is manifest that He is come to whom
(belongs) what is reserved — the expecta-
tion of the Gentiles. And this is clear
from the multitude of the heathen who
have believed on God through Jesus
Christ.


' Cf. Matt. vii. 22, 23. 2 Fortasse minus vera esse viderentur. ' Salutaria praccepta. 4 crMX^pia 66'y/iOTa._

S 7rpo<;(<)t)Teu6i) 6 \oi<TTds. <> eic Twi/ firjp.ui'. 7 ^n-iSrjjuijfff). 6 lHae omnes ambitiones Judaicae. 9 oOk fTi ^oo-iAtis 'lovJai'oi'

c\or)|iioTi<roi'. 'o Cf. Hos. iii. 4 Quoted from the Septuapint. " On the Patriarch of the Jew^ cf. Milman's History of the

"Patriarch." '^ Deut. xxxli.


yeios, vol. ii. p. 399 sq., and vol. iii. p. 7 1


'^ Termed by Kufin


352


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATI>


FROM THE GREEK.


4. In the song of Deuteronomy,' also, it is pro-
phetically declared that, on account of the sins of the
former people, there was to be an election of a fool-
ish nation, — no other, certainly, than that which was
brought about by Christ ; for thus the words run :
" They have moved Me to anger with their images,
and I will stir them up to jealousy ; I will arouse
them to anger against a foolish nation." ^ We may
therefore evidendy see how the Hebrews, who are
said to have excited God's anger by means of those
(idols), which are no gods, and to have aroused His
wrath by their images, were themselves also excited
to jealousy by means of a foolish nation, which God
hath chosen by the advent of Jesus Christ and His
disciples. For the following is the language of the
apostle : " For ye see your calling, brethren, how that
not many wise men among you after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble (are called) : but God
has chosen the foolish things of the world, and the
things which are not, to destroy the things which
formerly existed."-* Carnal Israel, therefore, should
not boast ; for such is the term used by the apostle :
" No flesh, I say, should glory in the presence of
God." 5


5. What are we to say, moreover, regarding those
prophecies of Christ contained in the Psalms, espe-
cially the one with the superscription, " A song for
the Beloved ; " ? in which it is stated that " His
tongue is the pen of a ready writer ; fairer than the
children of men ; " that " grace is poured into His
lips?" Now, the indication that grace has been
poured upon His lips is this, that, after a short period
had elapsed — for He taught only during a year and
some mojiths *^ — the whole world, nevertheless, be-
came filled with His doctrine, and with faith in His
religion. There arose, then, "in His days righteous
men, and abundance of peace," ^ abiding even to
the end, which end is entitled " the taking away of the
moon; " and " His dominion shall extend from sea
to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth." '°
There was a sign also given to the house of David.
For a virgin conceived, and bare Emmanuel, which,
when interpreted, signifies, " God with us : know it,
O nations, and be overcome." " For we are con-
quered and overcome, who are of the Gentiles, and
remain as a kind of spoils of His victory, who have
subjected our necks to His grace. Even the place
of His birth was predicted in the prophecies of


4. And in the song in Deuteronomy/
also, it is prophetically made known that,
on account of the sins of the former peo-
ple,^ there was to be an election of foolish
nations, which has been brought to pass
by no other than by Jesus. " For they,"
He says, " moved Me to jealousy with that
which is not God, they have provoked Me
to anger with their idols ; and I will move
them to jealousy with those which are not
a people, and will provoke them to anger
with a foolish nation." ^ Now it is possi-
ble to understand with all clearness how
the Hebrews, who are said to have moved
God to jealousy by that which is not God,
and to have provoked Him to anger by
their idols, were (themselves) aroused to
jealousy by that which was not a people
— the foolish nation, namely, which God
chose by the advent of Jesus Christ and
His disciples. We see, indeed, "our call-
ing, that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble (are
called) ; but God hath chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise ;
and base things, and things that are de-
spised, hath God chosen, and things that
are not, to bring to nought the things
which formerly existed ; "^ and let not the
Israel according to the flesh, which is
called by the apostle " flesh," boast in the
presence of God.

5 . And what are we to say regarding the
prophecies of Christ in the Psalms, there
being a certain ode with the superscripdon
" For the Beloved," ^ whose " tongue " is
said to be the " pen of a ready writer,
who is fairer than the sons of men," since
"grace was poured on His lips?" For a
proof that grace was poured on His lips is
this, that although the period of His teach-
ing was short — for He taught somewhere
about a year and a, few months — the world
has been filled with his teaching, and with
the worship of God (established) through
Him. For there arose " in His days right-
eousness and abundance of peace," 9 which
abides until the consummation, which has
been called the taking away of the moon ;
and He continues " ruhng from sea to sea,
and from the rivers to the ends of the
earth." '° And to the house of David has
been given a sign : for the Virgin bore, and
was pregnant,'^ and brought forth a son,
and His name is Emmanuel, which is,
" God with us , " and as the same prophet


' Deut. xxvii. ^ toO irporepou \aoO. 3 Deut. xxxii. zi. < i Cor. i. 26-28. Quse erant prius. s i Cor i. 29. ^ Cf. i
i. 26-28. " The things which formerly existed, TO Trpdrepoi'oi'Ta." 7Ps. xlv. 1,2. « \^^^nQ\.e: infra, Cotttra Cehttm,V,.\\.c-\^ xii.
9 Cf. Ps. Ixxii. 7. '0 Ps. Ixxii. 8. " Cf. Isa. viii. 8, 9. Quoted from the Septuagmt. '^ ji-jKe xoi iv yaarpi eax«> ""^ ireKtv i


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


353


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


Micah, who said, " And thou, Bethlehem, land of
Judah, art by no means small among the leaders
of Judah : for out of thee shall come forth a Leader,
who shall rule My people Israel." ' The weeks of
years, also, which the prophet Daniel had predicted,
extending to the leadership of Christ,^ have been ful-
filled. Moreover, he is at hand, who in the book of
Job ■♦ is said to be about to destroy the huge beast,
who also gave power to his own disciples to tread on
serpents and scorpions, and on all the power of the
enemy, without being injured by him. But if any.
one will consider the journeys of Christ's apostles
throughout the different places, in which as His mes-
sengers they preached the Gospel, he will find that
both what they ventured to undertake is beyond the
power of man, and what they were enabled to ac-
complish is from God alone. If we consider how
men, on hearing that a new doctrine was introduced
by these, were able to receive them ; or rather, when
desiring often to destroy them, they were prevented
by a divine power which was in them, we shall find
that in this nothing was effected by human strength,
but that the whole was the result of the divine power
and providence, — signs and wonders, manifest be-
yond all doubt, bearing testimony to their word and
doctrine.


6. These points now being briefly established, viz.,
regarding the deity of Christ, and the fulfilment of
all that was prophesied respecting Him, I think that
this position also has been made good, viz., that the
Scriptures themselves, which contained these predic-
tions, were divinely inspired, — those, namely, which
had either foretold His advent, or the power of His
doctrine, or the bringing over of all nations (to His
obedience). To which this remark must be added,
that the divinity and inspiration both of the predic-
tions of the prophets and of the law of Moses have
been clearly revealed and confirmed, especially since
the advent of Christ into the world. For before the
fulfilment of those events which were predicted by
them, they could not, although true and inspired
by God, be shown to be so, because they were as yet
unfulfilled. But the coming of Christ was a declara-
tion that their statements were true and divinely in-
spired, although it was certainly doubtful before that
whether there would be an accomplishment of those
things which had been foretold.


says, the prediction has been fulfilled,
" God (is) with us ; know it, O nations,
and be overcome ; ye who are strong, be
vanquished : " ^ for we of the heathen have
been overcome and vanquished, we who
have been taken by the grace of His
teaching. The place also of His birth has
been foretold in (the prophecies oO
Micah : " For thou, Bethlehem," he says,
" land of Judah, art by no means the least
among the rulers of Judah ; for out of
thee shall come forth a Ruler, who shall
rule My people Israel." ' And according
to Daniel, seventy weeks were fulfilled
until (the coming of) Christ the Ruler.s
And He came, who, according to Job,^
has subdued the great fish,? and has given
power to His true disciples to tread upon
serpents and scorpions, and all the power
of the enemy,^ without sustaining any in-
jury from them. And let one notice also
the universal advent of the apostles sent by
Jesus to announce the Gospel, and he will
see both that the undertaking was beyond
human power, and that the commandment
came from God. And if we examine how
men, on hearing new doctrines, and strange
words, yielded themselves up to these
teachers, being overcome, amid the very
de«ire to plot against them, by a divine
power that watched over these (teachers),
we shall not be incredulous as to whether
they also wrought miracles, God bearing
witness to their words both by signs, and
wonders, and divers miracles.

6. And while we thus briefly'' demon-
strate the deity of Christ, and (in so doing)
make use of the prophetic declarations
regarding Him, we demonstrate at the
same time that the writings which prophe-
sied of Him were divinely inspired ; and
that those documents which annoimced
His coming and His doctrine were given
forth with all power and authority, and
that on this account they obtained the
election from the Gentiles. '° We must
say, also, that the divinity of the prophetic
declarations, and the spiritual nature of
the law of Moses, shone forth after the
advent of Christ. For before the advent
of Christ it was not altogether possible to
exhibit manifest proofs of the divine in-
spiration of the ancient Scripture ; whereas
His coming led those who might suspect
the law and the prophets not to be divine,
to the clear conviction that they were


' Cf. Mic. V. 2 with Matt. ii. 6. ^ Cf Isa. viii. 8, 9. Quoted from the Septuagint. 3 Cf. Dan. ix. 25. Ad diicem Chr
Messiah the Prince," Auth. Vers. ■• The allusion is perhaps to Job .\Ii. i. S_Cf. Dan. ix. 25. _ <> Cf. Job xl. and xli.
^ TO iktya. Ky\To%. ^ Cf. Luke x. 19. 9 lus kv «7riT0njj. 1° 6cd toiJto t^s an-o TWf iSvitv eK\oyiJ9 (ceicpaTijicdTO.


354


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


If any one, moreover, consider the words of the
prophets with all the zeal and reverence which they
deserve, it is certain that, in the perusal and careful
examination thus given them, he will feel his mind
and senses touched by a divine breath, and will ac-
knowledge that the words which he reads were no
human utterances, but the language of God ; and
from his own emotions he will feel that these books
were the composition of no human skill, nor of any
mortal eloquence, but, so to speak, of a style that is
divine.^ The splendour of Christ's advent, therefore,
illuminating the law of Moses by the light of truth,
has taken away that veil which had been placed over
the letter (of the law), and has unsealed, for every
one who believes upon Him, all the blessings which
were concealed by the covering of the word.

7. It is, however, a matter attended with consider-
able labour, to point out, in every instance, how and
when the predictions of the prophets were fulfilled,
so as to appear to confirm those who are in doubt,
seeing it is possible for every one who wishes to be-
come more thoroughly acquainted with these things,
to gather abundant proofs from the records of the
truth themselves. But if the sense of the letter,
which is beyond man, does not appear to present
itself at once, on the first glance, to those who are
less versed in divine discipline, it is not at all to be
wondered at, because divine things are brought down
somewhat slowly to (the comprehension of) men,
and elude the view in proportion as one is either
sceptical or unworthy. For although it is certain
that all things which exist in this world, or take
place in it, are ordered by the providence of God,
and certain events indeed do appear with sufficient
clearness to be under the disposal of His providential
government, yet others again unfold themselves so
mysteriously and incomprehensibly, that the plan of
Divine Providence with regard to them is completely
concealed ; so that it is occasionally believed by
some that particular occurrences do not belong to
(the plan of) Providence, because the principle
eludes their grasp, according to which the works of
Divine Providence are administered with indescri-
bable skill ; which principle of administration, how-
ever, is not equally concealed from all. For even
among men themselves, one individual devotes less
consideration to it, another more ; while by every
man. He who is on earth, whoever is the inhabitant
of heaven, is more acknowledged. 7 And the nature
of bodies is clear to us in one way, that of trees in
another, that of animals in a third ; the nature of
souls, again, is concealed in a different way ; and
the manner in which the diverse movements of ra-


composed by (the aid of) heavenly grace.
And he who reads the words of the proph-
ets with care and attention, feeling by the
very perusal the traces of the divinity '
that is in them, will be led by his own
emotions to believe that those words which
have been deemed to be the words of God
are not the compositions of men. The
light, moreover, which was contained in
the law of Moses, but which had been
concealed by a veil, shone forth at the
advent of Jesus, the veil being taken away,
and those blessings, the shadow of which
was contained in the letter, coming forth
gradually to the knowledge (of men).

7. It would be tedious now to enumer-
ate the most ancient prophecies respecting
each future event, in order that the doubter,
being impressed by their divinity, may lay
aside all hesitation and distraction, and
devote himself with his whole soul to the
words of God, But if in every part of
the Scriptures the superhuman element
of thought 3 does not seem to present
itself to the uninstructed, that is not at all
wonderful ; for, with respect to the works
of that providence which embraces the
whole world, some show with the utmost
clearness that they are works of provi-
dence, while others are so concealed as to
seem to furnish ground for unbelief with
respect to that God who orders all things
with unspeakable skill and power. For
the artistic plan •♦ of a providential Ruler
is not so evident in those matters belong-
ing to the earth, as in the case of the sun,
and moon, and stars ; and not so clear in
what relates to human occurrences, as it is
in the souls and bodies of animals, — the
object and reason of the impulses, and
phantasies and natures of animals, and the
structure of their bodies, being carefully
ascertained by those who attend to these
things. 5 But as (the doctrine of) provi-
dence is not at all weakened^ (on account
of those things which are not understood)
in the eyes of those who have once hon-
estly accepted it, so neither is the divinity
of Scripture, which extends to the whole
of it, (lost) on account of the inability of
our weakness to discover in every expres-
sion the hidden splendour of the doctrines


I ixi'o? evBovcriaa-iJLOv, ^ Divino, ut ita dixerim, cothurno. 3 to inrep avBpuiirov tmv i/oij^iaTui'. 4 6 TexviKOi; Adyos.

5 '2.(f)6Spa Tou 7rpo9 Tt Kal kv€Ka Ttfo? evptaKoix^t'ov rot? tovtiov cirtfieAojUcVot?, nepl ra? opjtxa?, kol tol? (^avracriag, /cat </>u(Tet9 tCsv
^wwi', Ka'i Ta? KaTa<TK€va<; Tiov coifxaruiv, ^ \p€o*co7re(Tat.

7 "Nam et inter ipsos homines ab alio minus, ab alio amplius cnnsideratur: plus vero ab omni homine, qui in terris est, quis-quis ille
est coeli habitator, agnoscitur." The translation of Rufinus, as Redepenning remarks, seems very confused. Probably also the te.\t is
corrupt. The Greek without doubt gives the genuine thought of Origen. By omitting the ab we approximate to the CIreek, and get: " but
he, whoever he be, who is inhabitant of heaven, is better known than any man who is on the earth; " or according to the punctuation in the
old editions, " but he who is inhabitant of heaven is better known than any man on earth, whoever he be."


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


355


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


tional understandings are ordered by Providence,
eludes the view of men in a greater degree, and
even, in my opinion, in no small degree that of the
angels also. But as the existence of divine provi-
dence is not refuted by those especially who are
certain of its existence, but who do not comprehend
its workings or arrangements by the powers of the
human mind ; so neither will the divine inspiration
of holy Scripture, which extends throughout its body,
be believed to be non-existent, because the weakness
of our understanding is unable to trace out the hid-
den and secret meaning in each individual word, the
treasure of divine wisdom being hid in the vulgar
and unpolished vessels of words,^ as the apostle also
points out when he says, " We have this treasure in
earthen vessels," ■♦ that the virtue of the divine power
may shine out the more brightly, no colouring of
human eloquence being intermingled with the truth
of the doctrines. For if our books induced men to
believe because they were composed either by rhe-
torical arts or by the wisdom of philosophy, then
undoubtedly our faith would be considered to be
based on the art of words, and on human wisdom,
and not upon the power of God ; whereas it is now
known to all that the word of this preaching has
been so accepted by numbers throughout almost the
whole world, because they understood their belief to
rest not on the persuasive words of human wisdom,
but on the manifestation of the Spirit and of power.
On which account, being led by a heavenly, nay, by a
more than heavenly power, to faith and acceptance,^
that we may worship the sole Creator of all things as
our God, let us also do our utmost endeavour, by
abandoning the language of the elements of Christ,
which are but the first beginnings of wisdom, to go
on to perfection, in order that that wisdom which is
given to them who are perfect, may be given to us
also. For such is the promise of him to whom was
entrusffed the preaching of this wisdom, in the words :
" Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are
perfect ; yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of
the princes of this world, who will be brought to
nought ; " '° by which he shows that this wisdom of
ours has nothing in common, so far as regards the
beauty of language, with the wisdom of this world.
This wisdom, then, will be inscribed more clearly
and perfectly on our hearts, if it be made known
to us according to the revelation of the mystery
which has been hid from eternity," but now is mani-
fest through the Scriptures of prophecy, and the
advent of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory for ever. Amen.

Many, not understanding the Scriptures in a spir-
itual sense, but incorrectly,'- have fallen into heresies.

8. These particulars, then, being briefly stated re-
garding the inspiration of the sacred Scriptures by


veiled in common and unattractive phrase-
ology.' For we have the treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power
of God may shine forth, and that it may
not be deemed to proceed from us (who
are but) human beings. For if the hack-
neyed ^ methods of demonstration (com-
mon) among men, contained in the books
(of the Bible), had been successful in pro-
ducing conviction, then our faith would
righdy have been supposed to rest on the
wisdom of men, and not on the power of
God ; but now it is manifest to every one
who lifts up his eyes, that the word and
preaching have not prevailed among the
multitude "by persuasive words of wisdom,
but by demonstration of the Spirit and of
power." 5 Wherefore, since a celestial or
even a super-celestial power compels us to
worship the only Creator, let us leave the
doctrine of the beginning of Christ, i.e.,
the elements,^ and endeavour to go on to
perfection, in order that the wisdon spoken
to the perfect may be spoken to us also.
For he who possesses it promises to speak
wisdom among them that are perfect, but
another wisdom than that of this world,
and of the rulers of this world, which is
brought to nought. And this wisdom will
be distinctly stamped ^ upon us, and will
produce a revelation of the mystery that
was kept silent in the eternal ages,^ but
now has been manifested through the pro-
phetic Scriptures, and the appearance of
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.


8. Having spoken thus briefly '^ on the
subject of the divine inspiration of the


5 I Cor. ii. 4. 6 TTJs o-Toix^ixia'""'!. ' ivrvnmSi\<jft

'^ Temporibus eternis. '^ Male. '3 ij iv tjrifipo/njj.


3 In vilioribus et incomptis verborum vasculis. * Cf. 2 Cor. iv. 7.
.■\d fidem credulitateriique. 9 \p6vot.% aiui'ioc;. '° 1 Cor. ii. 6.


356


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


the Holy Spirit, it seems necessary to explain this
point also, viz., how certain persons, not reading them
correctly, have given themselves over to erroneous
opinions, inasmuch as the procedure to be followed,
in order to attain an understanding of the holy writ-
ings, is unknown to many. The Jews, in fine, owing
to the hardness of their heart, and from a desire to
appear wise in their own eyes, have not believed in
our Lord and Saviour, judging that those statements
which were uttered respecting Him ought to be
understood literally, i.e., that He ought in a sensible
and visible manner to preach deliverance to the cap-
tives, and first build a city which they truly deem
the city of God, and cut off at the same time the
chariots of Ephraim,5 and the horse from Jerusalem ;
that He ought also to eat butter and honey,*" in order
to choose the good before He should come to know
how to bring forth evil.^ They think, also, that it
has been predicted that the wolf — that four-footed
animal — is, at the coming of Christ, to feed with
the lambs, and the leopard to lie down with kids,
and the calf and the bull to pasture with lions, and
that they are to be led by a little child to the pas-
ture ; that the ox and the bear are to lie down together
in the green fields, and that their young ones are to
be fed together ; that lions also will frequent stalls
with the oxen, and feed on straw. And seeing that,
according to history, there was no accomplishment
of any of those things predicted of Him, in which
they believed the signs of Christ's advent were espe-
cially to be observed, they refused to acknowledge
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ ; nay, contrary
to all the principles of human and divine law,^ i.e.,
contrary to the faith of prophecy, they crucified Him
for assuming to Himself the name of Christ. There-
upon the heretics, reading that it is written in the
law, " A fire has been kindled in Mine anger ; " " and
that "I the Lord am a jealous (God), visiting the
sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third
and fourth generation ; " '^ and that " it repenteth
Me that I anointed Saul to be king ; " '^ and, " I am
the Lord, who make peace and create evil ; " "'^ and
again, " There is not evil in a city which the Lord
hath not done ; " 's and, " Evils came down from the
Lord upon the gates of Jerusalem ;"'^ and, "An evil
spirit from the Lord plagued Saul ; " '7 and reading
many other passages similar to these, which are found
in Scripture, they did not venture to assert that these
were not the Scriptures of God, but they considered
them to be tiie words of that creator God whom the
Jews worshipped, and who, they judged, ought to be
regarded as just only, and not also as good ; but that
the Saviour had come to announce to us a more per-
fect God, who, they allege, is not the creator of the
world, — there being different and discordant opinions


holy Scriptures, it is necessary to proceed
to the (consideration of the) manner in
which they are to be read and understood,
seeing numerous errors have been com-
mitted in consequence of the method in
which the holy documents ' ought to be
examined,^ not having been discovered by
the multitude. For both the hardened in
heart, and the ignorant persons ^ belonging
to the circumcision, have not believed on
our Saviour, thinking that they are follow-
ing the language of the prophecies re-
specting Him, and not perceiving in a
manner palpable to their senses '* that He
had proclaimed liberty to the captives, nor
that He had built up what they truly con-
sider the city of God, nor cut off " the
chariots of Ephraim, and the horse from
Jerusalem," 5 nor eaten butter and honey,
and, before knowing or preferring the evil,
had selected the good.^ And thinking,
moreover, that it was prophesied that the
wolf — the four-footed animal — was to
feed with the lamb, and the leopard to lie
down with the kid, and the calf and bull
and lion to feed together, being led by a
little child, and that the ox and bear were
to pasture together, their young ones
growing up together, and that the lion was
to eat straw like the ox : ^ seeing none of
these things visibly accomplished during
the advent of Him who is believed by us
to be Christ, they did not accept our Lord
Jesus ; but, as having called Himself Christ
improperly,'" they crucified Him. And
those belonging to heretical sects reading
this (statement), "A fire has been kindled
in Mine anger ; " " and this, " I am a jealous
God, visiting the iniquities of the "fathers
upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation ; " '^ and this, " I repent of having
anointed Saul to be king ; " '^ and this, " I
am a God that maketh peace, and createth
evil ; " "t and, among others, this, "There
is not wickedness in the city which the
Lord hath not done ; " '5 and again this,
" Evils came down from the Lord upon
the gates of Jerusalem ; " '^ and, " An evil
spirit from the Lord plagued Saul ; " '? and
countless other passages like these — they
havp not ventured to disbelieve these as
the Scriptures of God ; but believing them
to be the (words) of the Demiurge, whom
the Jews worship, they thought that as the
Demiurge was an imperfect and unbenevo-


' Ta ayia avayvuttr/iaTa. ^ ttoj? Sei i<poSevfiv. 3 ol iSiuTai Tuiv ex tt;? 7repiT0/x^s. * aio-flr;™?. S Cf. Zech. ix. lo.

6 Cf. Isa. vii. 15. 7 Ut priusquam cognosceret proferre malum, eligeret t)onum. 8 Cf. Isa. xi. 6, 7. 9 Contra jus fasque.
»o napa t6 Seor. " Cf Jer. xv. 14. 12 Cf Ex. xx. 5. " Cf i Sam. xv. 11. W Cf. Isa. xlv. 7. ^5 Cf. Amos iii. 6.
»6 Cf. Mic. i. 12. 17 Cf. I Sam. xvi. 14, xviii. 10.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


o7


FKOM THE LATIN.


FROM THE CREEK.


among them even on this very point, because, when
they once depart from a beUef in God the Creator,
who is Lord of all, they have given themselves over
to various inventions and fables, devising certain
(fictions), and asserting that some things were visi-
ble, and made by one (God), and that certain other
things were invisible, and were created by another,
according to the vain and fanciful suggestions of their
own minds. But not a few also of the more simple
of those, who appear to be restrained within the faith
of the Church, are of opinion that there is no greater
God than the Creator, holding in this a correct and
sound opinion ; and yet they entertain regarding Him
such views as would not be entertained regarding the
most unjust and cruel of men.


9. Now the reason of the erroneous apprehension
of all these points on the part of those whom we
have mentioned above, is no other than this, that
holy Scripture is not understood by them according
to its spiritual, but according to its literal meaning.
And therefore we shall endeavour, so far as our mod-
erate capacity will permit, to point out to those who
believe the holy Scriptures to be no human compo-
sitions, but to be written by inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, and to be transmitted and entrusted to us by
the will of God the Father, through His only-begot-
ten Son Jesus Christ, what appears to us, who ob-
serve things by a right way of understanding,^ to be
the standard and discipline delivered to the apostles
by Jesus Christ, and which they handed down in suc-
cession to their posterity, the teachers of the holy
Church. Now, that there are certain mystical econo-
mies 5 indicated in holy Scripture, is admitted by all,
I think, even the simplest of believers. But what
these are, or of what kind they are, he who is rightly
minded, and not overcome with the vice of boasting,
will scrupulously'' acknowledge himself to be igno-
rant. For if any one, e.g., were to adduce the case
of the daughters of Lot, who seem, contrary to the
law of God,? to have had intercourse with their father,
or that of the two wives of Abraham, or of the two
sisters who were married to Jacob, or of the two hand-
maids who increased the number of his sons, what
other answer could be returned than that these were
certain mysteries,^ and forms of spiritual things, but
that we are ignorant of what nature they are ? Nay,
even when we read of the construction of the taber-
nacle, we deem it certain that the written descriptions
are the figures of certain hidden things ; but to adapt
these to their appropriate standards, and to open up


lent God, the Saviour had come to an-
nounce a more perfect Deity, who, they
say, is not the Demiurge, being of different
opinions regarding Him ; and having once
departed from the Demiurge, who is the
only uncreated God, they have given them-
selves up to fictions, inventing to themselves
hypotheses, according to which they im-
agine that there are some things which are
visible, and certain other things which
are not visible, all which are the fancies
of their own minds. And yet, indeed, the
more simple among those who profess to
belong to the Church have supposed that
there is no deity greater than the Demi-
urge, being right in so thinking, while they
imagine regarding Him such things as
would not be believed of the most savage
and unjust of mankind.

9. Now the cause, in all the points pre-
viously enumerated, of the false opinions,
and of the impious statements or ignorant
assertions ' about God, appears to be
nothing else than the not understanding
the Scripture according to its spiritual
meaning, but the interpretation of it agree-
ably to the mere letter. And therefore, to
those who believe that the sacred books
are not the compositions of men, but that
they were composed by inspiration- of the
Holy Spirit, agreeably to the will of the
Father of all things through Jesus Christ,
and that they have come down to us, we
must point out the ways (of interpreting
them) which appear (correct) to us, who
cling to the standard* of the heavenly
Church of Jesus Christ according to the
succession of the apostles. Now, that
there are certain mystical economies made
known by the holy Scriptures, all — even
the most simple of those who adhere to
the word — have believed ; but what these
are, candid and modest individuals confess
that they know not. If, then, one were to
be perplexed about the intercourse of Lot
with his daughters, and about the two
wives of Abraham, and the two sisters
married to Jacob, and the two handmaids
who bore him children, they can return
no other answer than this, that these are
mysteries not understood by us. Nay,
also, when the (description of the) fitting
out of the tabernacle is read, believing
that what is written is a type,^ they seek


3 The text, as it stands, is probably corrupt: " Propter quod conabimur pro mediocritate sensus nostri his, qui credunt Scripturas sanctas
non huiiiana verba aliqua esse composita, sed Sancti Spiritus inspiratione conscripta, et voluntate Dei patris per unigenitum filium suum
Jesum Christum nobis quoque esse tradita et commissa, qua; nobis videntur, recta via intelligentia; observantibus, demonstrare illam regulam
et disciplinam, quam ab Jesu Christo traditam sibi apostoli per successionem posteris quoque suis, sanctam ecclesiam docentibus, tradiderunt."

•♦ xa^/dios. i Dispensationes. ^ Religiosius. ' Contra fas. » Sacramenta quaedam. 9 tuttous eifai to yeypa/[i/i«>a.


358


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


and discuss every individual point, I consider to be
exceedingly difficult, not to say impossible. That
that description, however,-^ is, as I have said, full of
mysteries, does not escape even the common under-
standing. But all the narrative portion, relating
either to the marriages, or to the begetting of the
children, or to battles of different kinds, or to any
other histories whatever, what else can they be sup-
posed to be, save the forms and figures of hidden
and sacred things? As men, however, make little
effort to exercise their intellect, or imagine that they
possess knowledge before they really learn, the con-
sequence is that they never begin to have knowledge ;
or if there be no want of a desire, at least, nor of an
instructor, and if divine knowledge be sought after,
as it ought to be, in a religious and holy spirit, and
in the hope that many points will be opened up by
the revelation of God — since to human sense they
are exceedingly difficult and obscure — then, perhaps,
he who seeks in such a manner will find what it is
lawful' to discover.

lo. But lest this difficulty perhaps should be sup-
posed to exist only in the language of the prophets,
seeing the prophetic style is allowed by all to abound
in figures and enigmas, what do we find when we
come to the Gospels? Is there not hidden there
also an inner, namely a divine sense, which is re-
vealed by that grace alone which he had received
who said, " But we have the mind of Christ, that we
might know the things freely given to us by God.
Which things also we speak, not in the words which
man's wisdom teaches, but which the Spirit teach-
eth?"^ And if one now were to read the revelations
which were made to John, how amazed would he not
be that there should be contained within thei-q so
great an amount of hidden, ineffable mysteries,-* in
which it is clearly understood, even by those who
cannot comprehend what is concealed, that so7ne-
thing certainly is concealed. And yet are not the
Epistles of the Apostles, which seem to some to be
plainer, filled with meanings so profound, that by
means of them, as by some small receptacle, 5 the
clearness of incalculable light ^ appears to be poured
into those who are capable of understanding the
meaning of divine wisdom ? And therefore, because
this is the case, and because there are many who go
wrong in this life, I do not consider that it is easy
to pronounce, without danger, that any one knows
or understands those things, which, in order to be
opened up, need the key of knowledge ; which key,
the Saviour declared, lay with those who were skilled
in the law. And here, although it is a digression, I
think we should inquire of those who assert that be-
fore the advent of the Saviour there was no truth
among those who were engaged in the study of the


to adapt what they can to each particular
related about the tabernacle, — not being
wrong so far as regards their belief that
the tabernacle is a type of something, but
erring sometimes in adapting the descrip-
tion of that of which the tabernacle is a
type, to some special thing in a manner
worthy of Scripture. And all the history
that is considered to tell of marriages, or
the begetting of children, or of wars, or
any histories whatever that are in circula-
tion among the multitude, they declare to
be types ; but of what in each individual
instance, partly owing to their habits not
being thoroughly exercised — partly, too,
owing to their precipitation — sometimes,
even when an individual does happen to
be well trained and clear-sighted, owing
to the excessive difficulty of discovering
things on the part of men, — the nature of
each particular regarding these (types) is
not clearly ascertained.

lo. And what need is there to speak of
the prophecies, which we all know to be
filled with enigmas and dark sayings?
And if we come to the Gospels, the exact
understanding of these also, as being the
mind of Christ, requires the grace that was
given to him who said, " But we have the
mind of Christ, that we might know the
things freely given to us by God. Which
things also we speak, not in the words
which man's wisdom teacheth, but which
the Spirit teacheth." ^ And who, on read-
ing the revelations made to John, would
not be amazed at the unspeakable mys-
teries therein concealed, and which are
evident (even) to him who does not com-
prehend what is written? And to what
person, skilful in investigating words, would
the Epistles of the Apostles seem to be
clear and easy of understanding, since even
in them there are countless numbers of
most profound ideas, which, (issuing forth)
as by an aperture, admit of no rapid com-
prehension ? ? And therefore, since these
things are so, and since innumerable indi-
viduals fall into mistakes, it is not safe in
reading (the Scriptures) to declare that
one easily understands what needs the key
of knowledge, which the Saviour declares
is with the lawyers. And let those answer
who will not allow that the truth was with
these before the advent of Christ, how the
key of knowledge is said by our Lord Jesus
Christ to be with those who, as they allege,


' Fas. * Cf. T Cor. ii. i6 and 12, 13. ^ i Cor. ii. 12, 13, and 16 ad fin. * Tantam occultationem ineffabilium sacramentorum.

5 Per breve quoddam receptaculum. * ImmensEe lucis claritas.

7 Mupcui' ouuiv KaKil, (US Si ott^s, fisyicrTiov (cat TrAtio'Taji' vor)iJ.a.Tuiv oil Ppaxflay a^opixriv 7rape)(6vToiv.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


359


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


law, how it could be said by our Lord Jesus Christ
that the keys of knowledge were with them, who had
the books of the prophets and of the law in their
hands. For thus did He speak : "Woe unto you, ye
teachers of the law, who have taken away the key of
knowledge : ye entered not in yourselves, and them
who wished to enter in ye hindered." ^

II. But, as we had begun to observe, the way
which seems to us the correct one for the understand-
ing of the Scriptures, and for the investigation of
their meaning, we consider to be of the following
kind : for we are instructed by Scripture itself in re-
gard to the ideas which we ought to form of it. In
the Proverbs of Solomon we find some such rule as
the following laid down, respecting the consideration
of holy Scripture : " And do thou," he says, " de-
scribe these things to thyself in a threefold manner,
in counsel and knowledge, and that thou mayest an-
swer the words of truth to those who have proposed
them to thee."^ Each one, then, ought to describe
in his own mind, in a threefold manner, the under-
standing of the divine letters, — that is, in order that
all the more simple individuals may be edified, so to
speak, by the very body of Scripture ; for such we
term that common and historical sense : while, if
some have commenced to make considerable prog-
ress, and are able to see something more (than that),
they may be edified by the very soul of Scripture.
Those, again, who are perfect, and who resemble
those of whom the apostle says, " We speak wisdom
among them that are perfect, but not the wisdom of
this world, nor of the princes of this world, who will
be brought to nought ; but we speak the wisdom of
God, hidden in a mystery, which God hath decreed
before the ages unto our glory ; " 7 — all such as these
may be edified by the spiritual law itself (which has
a shadow of good things to come), as if by the
Spirit. For as man is said to consist of body, and
soul, and spirit, so also does sacred Scripture, which
has been granted by the divine bounty ^ for the salva-
tion of man ; which we see pointed out, moreover,
in the little book of The Shepherd, which seems to
be despised by some, where Hermas is commanded
to write two little books, and afterwards to announce
to the presbyters of the Church what he learned from
the Spirit. For these are the words that are written :
" And you will write." he says, " two books ; and
you will give the one to Clement, and the other to
Grapte.9 And let Grapte admonish the widows and
orphans, and let Clement send through all the cities


had not the books which contain the
secrets ' of knowledge, aSid perfect mys-
teries.'' For His words run thus : " Woe
unto you, ye lawyers ! for ye have taken
away the key of knowledge : ye have not
entered in yourselves, and them that were
entering in ye hindered." ^

1 1 , The way, then, as it appears to us,
in which we ought to deal with the Scrip-
tures, and extract from them their mean-
ing, is the following, which has been ascer-
tained from the Scriptures themselves. By
Solomon in the Proverbs we find some such
rule as this enjoined respecting the divine
doctrines of Scripture : ^ " And do thou
portray them in a threefold manner, in
counsel and knowledge, to answer words
of truth to them who propose them to
thee." 5 The individual ought, then, to
portray the ideas of holy Scripture in a
threefold manner upon his own soul ; in
order that the simple man may be edified
by the " flesh," as it were, of the Scripture,
for so we name the obvious sense ; while
he who has ascended a certain way (may
be edified) by the "soul," as it were.
The perfect man, again, and he who resem-
bles those spoken of by the apostle, when
he says, " We speak wisdom among them
that are perfect, but not the wisdom of the
world, nor of the rulers of this world, who
come to nought ; but we speak the wisdom
of God in a mystery, the hidden wisdom,
which God hath ordained before the ages,
unto our glory," ^ (may receive edification)
from the spiritual law, which has a shadow
of good things to come. For as man
consists of body, and soul, and spirit, so in
the same way does Scripture, which has
been arranged to be given by God for
the salvation of men. And therefore we
deduce this also from a book which is
despised by some — The Shepherd — in
respect of the command given to Hermas
to write two books, and after so doing to
announce to the presbyters of the Church
what he had learned from the Spirit. The
words are as follows : " You will write two
books, and give one to Clement, and one
to Grapte. And Grapte shall admonish


' aTToppjjTa. 2 7rai»TeAjj |ii;<7Tr)pia. 3 Luke xi. 52.

^ The Septuagint; Kat cu Se aTro-ypai/^at aura aeavTw Tptcffa)?, ety ^fjv\r\v Kat ycoxrti' cttI to TrAaro^ t^? Kap5ia<; <TOV ' 6i5a<TKu> ovv
<Ti akriBif Koyov, KaX yvOxnv aAijSi) virrkKovfiv, Tou airoKpiveaQai ere Aoyou? oArjAeia? Toi? Trpo^aAAojuefOi? aoi. The Vulgate reads:
Ecce, descripsi earn tibi tripHciter, in coRitationibus et scicntia, ut ostenderem tibi firmitatem et eloquia verilatis, responderc ex his illis,
qui miserunt te. 5 Cf. note 4, ut supra.

<> Cf. Prov. xxii. 20, 21. The Masoretic text reads, ^i'.'ll'nS '■ ^y.']\ niVj.;b3 (D'IJ/Sb', J^eri) Owhu '"jS "B^i^D N^H

.■yn7tJ'S npK d'^on ^'lynV n-pN 'lox qiir'p

' I Cor. ii. 6, 7. 8 Largitione.

9 [Hermas, vol. ii. pp. 3, 8, 12, this series. Origen seems to overrule this contempt of a minority: and, what is more .strange, he
appears to have accepted the fiction of the Fauline Hermas as authentic history'. How naturally this became the impression in the East
has been explained; and the De Principiis, it must not be forgotten, was not the product of the author's mature mind.J


36o


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.

which are abroad, while you will announce to the
presbyters of the Church." Grapte, accordingly,
who is commanded to admonish the orphans and
widows, is the pure understanding of the letter itself;
by which those youthful minds are admonished, who
have not yet deserved to have God as their Father,
and are on that account styled orphans. They, again,
are the widows, who have withdrawn themselves from
the unjust man, to whom they had been united con-
trary to law ; but who have remained widows, because
they have not yet advanced to the stage of being
joined to a heavenly Bridegroom. Clement, more-
over, is ordered to send into those cities which are
abroad what is written to those individuals who
already are withdrawing from the letter, — as if the
meaning were to those souls who, being built up by this
means, have begun to rise above the cares of the
body and the desires of the flesh ; while he himself,
who had learned from the Holy Spirit, is commanded
to announce, not by letter nor by book, but by the
living voice, to the presbyters of the Church of Christ,
i.e., to those who possess a mature faculty of wisdom,
capable of receiving spiritual teaching.

12. This point, indeed, is not to be passed by with-
out notice, viz., that there are certain passages of
Scripture where this "body," as we termed it, i.e.,
this inferential historical sense,"* is not always found,
as we shall prove to be the case in the following
pages, but where that which we termed " soul " or
" spirit " can only be understood. And this, I think,
is indicated in the Gospels, where there are said to
be placed, according to the manner of purification
among the Jews, six water-vessels, containing two or
three firkins 5 a-piece ; by which, as I have said, the
language of the Gospel seems to indicate, with respect
to those who are secretly called by the apostle
" Jews," that they are purified by the word of Scrip-
ture,— receiving indeed sometimes two firkins, i.e.,
the understanding of the " soul " or " spirit," accord-
ing to our statement as above ; sometimes even three
(firkins), when in the reading (of Scripture) the
"bodily" sense, which is the "historical," may be
preserved for the edification of the people. Now
six water-vessels are appropriately spoken of, with
regard to those persons who are purified by being
placed in the world ; for we read that in six days —
which is the perfect number — this world and all
things in it were finished. How great, then, is the
utility of this first "historical" sense which we have
mentioned, is attested by the multitude of all be-
lievers, who believe with adequate faith and sim-
plicity, and does not need much argument, because
it is openly manifest to all ; whereas of that sense
which we have called above the "soul," as it were,
of Scripture, the Apostle Paul has given us numerous
examples in the first Epistle to the Corinthians. For
we find the expression, " Thou shalt not muzzle the


FROM THE GREEK.


the widows and the orphans, and Clement
will send to the cities abroad, while you
will announce to the presbyters of the
Church." Now Grapte, who admonishes
the widows and the orphans, is the mere
letter (of Scripture), which admonishes
those who are yet children in soul, and not
able to call God their Father, and who are
on that account styled orphans, — admon-
ishing, moreover, those who no longer have
an unlawful bridegroom," but who remain
widows, because they have not yet become
worthy of the (heavenly) Bridegroom ;
while Clement, who is already beyond the
letter, is said to send what is written to
the cities abroad, as if we were to call these
the " souls," who are above (the influence
of) bodily (affections) and degraded ^ ideas,
— the disciple of the Spirit himself being
enjoined to make known, no longer by let-
ters, but by living words, to the presbyters
of the whole Church of God, who have
become grey ^ through wisdom.

12. But as there are certain passages of
Scripture which do not at all contain the
"corporeal" sense, as we shall show in
the following (paragraphs), there are also
places where we must seek only for the
" soul," as it were, and " spirit " of Scrip-
ture. And perhaps on this account the
water- vessels containing two or three firkins
a-piece are said to lie for the purification
of the Jews, as we read in the Gospel ac-
cording to John : the expression darkly
intimating, with respect to those who (are
called) by the apostle " Jews " secretly,
that they are purified by the word of
Scripture, receiving sometimes two firkins,
i.e., so to speak, the "psychical" and
"spiritual" sense; and sometimes three
firkins, since some have, in addition to
those already mentioned, also the " cor-
poreal " sense, which is capable of (pro-
ducing) edification. And six water-vessels
are reasonably (appropriate) to those who
are purified in the world, which was made
in six days — the perfect number. That
the first " sense," then, is profitable in this
respect, that it is capable of imparting edi-
fication, is testified by the multitudes of
genuine and simple believers ; while of that
interpretation which is referred back to the
"soul," there is an illustration in Paul's
first Epistle to the Corinthians. The ex-
pression is, "Thou shalt not muzzle the
mouth of the ox that treadeth out the
corn ; " ^ to which he adds, " Doth God


7rapav6jU.(o vvfjL^LU). ^ Ttov Kara) vOTfJixaTOiV,

Cf. I Cor. ix. 9 and Deut. xxv. 4.


Consequentia historialis intelligentiae. 5 Metretes.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


361


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


mouth of the ox that treadeth out the com." ' And
afterwards, when explaining what precept ought to be
understood by this, he adds the words : " Doth God
take care for oxen ? or saith He it altogether for our
sakes ? For our sakes, no doubt, this is written ;
that he who plougheth should plough in hope, and
he that thresheth, in hope of partaking." ^ Very-
many other passages also of this nature, which are in
this way explained of the law, contribute extensive
information to the hearers.

13. Now a "spiritual" interpretation is of this
nature : when one is able to point out what are the
heavenly things of which these serve as the pat-
terns and shadow, who are Jews " according to the
flesh," and of what things future the law contains a
shadow, and any other expressions of this kind that
may be found in holy Scripture ; or when it is a subject
of intjuiry, what is that wisdom hidden in a mystery
which "God ordained before the world for our glory,
which none of the princes of this world knew ;" ^ or
the meaning of the apostle's language, when, employ-
ing certain illustrations from Exodus or Numbers, he
says : " These things happened to them in a figure,^
and they are written on our account, on whom the
ends of the ages have come."^ Now, an opportunity
is afforded us of understanding of what those things
which happened to them were figures, when he adds :
" And they drank of that spiritual Rock which fol-
lowed them, and that Rock was Christ,." ^ In an-
other Epistle also, when referring to the tabernacle,
he mentions the direction which was given to Moses :
"Thou shalt make (all things) according to the pat-
tern which was showed thee in the mount." ^ And
writing to the Galatians, and upbraiding certain indi-
viduals who seem to themselves to read the law, and
yet without understanding it, because of their igno-
rance of the fact that an allegorical meaning underlies
what is written, he says to them in a certain tone of
rebuke : " Tell me, ye who desire to be under the
law, do ye not hear the law ? For it is written that
Abraham had two sons ; the one by a bond-maid,
the other by a free woman. But he who was of the
bond-woman was born according to the flesh ; but
he of the free woman was by promise. Which things
are an allegory : for these are the two covenants." 9
And here this point is to be attended to, viz., the
caution with which the apostle employs the expres-
sion, " Ye who are under the law, do ye not hear the
law?" Do ye not hear, i.e., do ye not understand
j and know? In the Epistle to the Colossians, again,
I briefly summing up and condensing the meaning of

ithe whole law, he says : " Let no man therefore judge
you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of holy days,
or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath, which are a
I shadow of things to come." " Writing to the Hebrews


take care of oxen? or saith He it alto-
gether for our sakes ? For our sakes, no
doubt, this was written : that he that
plougheth should plough in hope, and
that he who thresheth, in hope of partak-
ing." ^ And there are numerous interpre-
tations adapted to the multitude which are
in circulation, and which edify those who
are unable to understand profounder mean-
ings, and which have somewhat the same
character.

13. But the interpretation is "spiritual,"
when one is able to show of what heavenly
things the Jews " according to the flesh "
served as an example and a shadow, and
of what future blessings the law contains a
shadow. And, generally, we must investi-
gate, according to the apostolic promise,
" the wisdom in a mystery, the hidden wis-
dom which God ordained before the world
for the glory " of the just, which "none of
the princes of this world knew."-* And the
same apostle says somewhere, after refer-
ring to certain events mentioned as occur-
ring in Exodus and Numbers, " that these
things happened to them figuratively, but
that they were written on our account, on
whom the ends of the world are come." ^
And he gives an opportunity for ascertain-
ing of what things these were patterns,
when he says : " For they drank of the
spiritual Rock that followed them, and
that Rock was Christ." 7 And in another
Epistle, when sketching the various mat-
ters relating to the tabernacle, he used the
words : " Thou shalt make everything ac-
cording to the pattern showed thee in the
mount." ^ Moreover, in the Epistle to
the Galatians, as if upbraiding those who
think that they read the law, and yet do
not understand it, judging that those do not
understand it who do not reflect that alle-
gories are contained under what is written,
he says : " Tell me, ye that desire to be
under the law, do ye not hear the law?
For it is written, Abraham had two sons ;
the one by the bond-maid, the other by
the free woman. But he who was l)y the
bond-maid was born according to the
flesh ; but he of the free woman was by
promise. Which things are an allegory : '°
for these are the two covenants," and so
on. Now we must carefully observe each
word employed by him. He says : " Ye
who desire to be under the law," not " Ye
that are under the law ;" and, " Do ye not


» Cf. I Cor. ix. 9 .ind Deut. xxv. 4. 2 Cf. i Cor. ix. 9, 10. 3 Cf. i Cor. ii. 7. ■♦ Cf. i Cor ii. 6, 7, 8
5 In figurS. Greek {ii:ti. reccfit.) Tvitoi. Lachmann reads tvttikws. & 1 Cor. x. 11. "1 Cor. x. 4.
8 Cf. Ex. xxv. 40 and Heb. viii. 5. 9 Gal. iv. 21-24. '° aAAjjyopovintva. " Col. ii. 16.


362


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


also, and treating of those who belong to the circum-
cision, he says : " Those who serve to the example
and shadow of heavenly things." ' Now perhaps,
through these illustrations, no doubt will be enter-
tained regarding the five books of Moses, by those
who hold the writings of the apostle, as divinely in-
spired. And if they require, with respect to the rest
of the history, that those events which are contained
in it should be considered as having happened for an
ensample to those of whom they are written, we have
observed that this also has been stated in the Epistle
to the Romans, where the apostle adduces an in-
stance from the third book of Kings, saying, " I have
left me seven thousand men who have not bowed the
knee to Baal ; " ^ which expression Paul understood
as figuratively spoken of those who are called Israel-
ites according to the election, in order to show that
the advent of Christ had not only now been of ad-
vantage to the Gentiles, but that very many even of
the race of Israel had been called to salvation.


14. This being the state of the case, we shall
sketch out, as if by way of illustration and pattern,
what may occur to us with regard to the manner in
which holy Scripture is to be understood on these
several points, repeating in the first instance, and
pointing out this fact, that the Holy Spirit, by the
providence and will of God, through the power of
His only-begotten Word, who was in the beginning
God with God, enlightened the ministers of truth,
the prophets and apostles, to understand the mys-
teries of those things or causes which take place
among men, or with respect to men.^ And by
" men," I now mean souls that are placed in bodies,
who, relating those mysteries that are known to them,
and revealed through Christ, as if they were a kind
of human transactions, or handing down certain legal
observances and injunctions, described them figura-
tively ; ^ not that any one who pleased might view
these expositions as deserving to be trampled under
foot, but that he who should devote himself with all
chastity, and sobriety, and watchfulness, to studies
of this kind, might be able by this means to trace
out the meaning of the Spirit of God, which is
perhaps lying profoundly buried, and the context,
which may be pointing again in another direction
than the ordinary usage of speech would indicate.


hear the law?" — "hearing" being under-
stood to mean ^^comprehending'" and
" knowing^ And in the Epistle to the
Colossians, briefly abridging the meaning
of the whole legislation, he says : " Let no
man therefore judge you in meat, or in
drink, or in respect of a festival, or of a
new moon, or of Sabbaths, which are a
shadow of things to come." ^ Moreover,
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, discoursing
of those who belong to the circumcision,
he writes : " who serve for an ensample
and shadow of heavenly things." ' Now
it is probable that, from these illustrations,
those will entertain no doubt with respect
to the five books of Moses, who have once
given in their adhesion to the apostle, as
divinely inspired ; ■♦ but do you wish to
know, with regard to the rest of the his-
tory, if it also happened as a pattern ? We
must note, then, the expression in the
Epistle to the Romans, " I have left to
myself seven thousand men, who have not
bowed the knee to Baal," ^ quoted from
the third book of Kings, which Paul has
understood as equivalent (in meaning) to
those who are Israelites according to elec-
tion, because not only were the Gentiles
benefited by the advent of Christ, but also
certain of the race of God.s

14. This being the state of the case, we
have to sketch what seem to us to be the
marks of the (true) understanding of
Scriptures. And, in the first place, this
must be pointed out, that the object of
the Spirit, which by the providence of God,
through the Word who was in the begin-
ning with God, illuminated the ministers
of truth, the prophets and apostles, was
especially (the communication) of ineffa-
ble mysteries regarding the affairs of men
(now by men I mean those souls that
make use of bodies), in order that he who
is capable of instruction may by investiga-
tion, and by devoting himself to the study
of the profundities of meaning contained
in the words, become a participator of all j
the doctrines of his counsel. And among I
those matters which relate to souls (who I
cannot otherwise obtain perfection apart
from the rich and wise truth of God), the
(doctrines) belonging to God and His
only-begotten Son are necessarily laid
down as primary, viz., of what nature He
is, and in what manner He is the Son of
God, and what are the causes of His


* Heb. viii. 5. 2 QqI. ;;. ig. 3 Rom. xi. 4; cf. i Kings xix. 18. [3 Kings according to the Septuagint and Vulgate enumeration. S.)

* tus St'iov avSpa. S rii'as airo Toi 0eiov yevovs, i.e., Israelites. * Quae inter homines, vel de hominibus geruntur. ' Figuraliter
describebant.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


And in this way he might become a sharer in the
knowledge of the Spirit, and a partaker in the divine
counsel, because the soul cannot come to the perfec-
tion of knowledge otherwise than by inspiration of
the truth of the divine wisdom. Accordingly, it is
of God, i.e. of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit, that these men, filled with the Divine
Spirit, chiefly treat ; then the mysteries relating to
the Son of God — how the Word became flesh, and
why He descended even to the assumption of the
form of a servant — are the subject, as I .have said,
of explanation by those persons who are filled with
the Divine Spirit. It next followed, necessarily, that
they should instruct mortals by divine teaching, re-
garding rational creatures, both those of heaven and
the happier ones of earth ; and also (should explain)
the differences among souls, and the origin of these
differences ; and then should tell what this world is,
and why it was created ; whence also sprung the
great and terrible wickedness which extends over
the earth. And whether that wickedness is found
on this earth only, or in other places, is a point which
it was necessary for us to learn from divine teaching.
Since, then, it was the intention of the Holy Spirit
to enlighten with respect to these and similar sub-
jects, those holy souls who had devoted themselves
to the service of the truth, this object was kept in
view, in the second place, viz., for the sake of those
who either could not or would not give themselves
to this labour and toil by which they might deserve
to be instructed in or to recognise things of such
value and importance, to wrap up and conceal, as
we said before, in ordinary language, under the cover-
ing of some history and narrative of visible things,
hidden mysteries. There is therefore introduced the
narrative of the visible creation, and the creation and
formation of the first man ; then the offspring which
followed from him in succession, and some of the
actions which were done by the good among his
posterity, are related, and occasionally certain crimes
also, which are stated to have been committed by
them as being human ; and afterwards certain un-
chaste or wicked deeds also are narrated as being
the acts of the wicked. The description of battles,
moreover, is given in a wonderful manner, and the
alternations of victors and vanquished, by which
certain ineffable mysteries are made known to those
who know how to investigate statements of that kind.
By an admirable discipline of wisdom, too, the law
of truth, even of the prophets, is implanted in the
Scriptures of the law, each of which is woven by a
divine art of wisdom, as a kind of covering and veil
of spiritual truths ; and this is what we have called
the " body " of Scrijjture, so that also, in this way,
what we have called the covering of the letter, woven
by the art of wisdom, might be capable of edifying and
profiting many, when others would derive no benefit.


descending even to (the assumption of)
human flesh, and of complete humanity ;
and what, also, is the operation of this
(Son), and upon whom and when exer-
cised. And it was necessary also that the
subject of kindred beings, and other ration-
al creatures, both those who are divine
and those who have fallen from blessed-
ness, together with the reasons of their
fall, should be contained in the divine
teaching ; and also that of the diversities
of souls, and of the origin of these diver-
sities, and of the nature of the world, and
the cause of its existence. We must learn
also the origin of the great and terrible
wickedness which overspreads the earth,
and whether it is confined to this earth
only, or prevails elsewhere. Now, while
these and similar objects were present to
the Spirit, who enlightened the souls of
the holy ministers of the truth, there was
a second object, for the sake of those who
were unable to endure the fatigue of in-
vestigating matters so important, viz., to
conceal the doctrine relating to the pre-
viously mentioned subjects, in expressions
containing a narrative which conveyed an
announcement regarding the things of the
visible creation,' the creation of man, and
the successive descendants of the first men
until they became numerous ; and other
histories relating the acts of just men, and
the sins occasionally committed by these
same men as being human beings, and the
wicked deeds, both of unchastity and vice,
committed by sinful and ungodly men.
And what is most remarkable, by the his-
tory of wars, and of the victors, and the
vanquished, certain mysteries are indi-
cated to those who are able to test these
statements. And more wonderful still, the
laws of truth are predicted by the written
legislation ; — all these being described in
a connected series, with a power which is
truly in keeping with the wisdom of God.
For it was intended that the covering also
of the spiritual truths — I mean the " bodi-
ly " part of Scripture — should not be with-
out profit in many cases, but should be
capable of improving the multitude, ac-
cording to their capacity.


nepi Tuiv aia-9rjTuiy Srjfj.ii


3^4


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


15. But as if, in all the instances of this covering
(i.e., of this history), the logical connection and
order of the law had been preserved, we would not
certainly believe, when thus possessing the meaning
of Scripture in a continuous^series, that anything else
was contained i;i it save what was indicated on the
surface ; so for that reason divine wisdom took care
that certain stumbling-blocks, or interruptions,^ to the
historical meaning should take place, by the intro-
duction into the midst (of the narrative) of certain
impossibilities and incongruities ; that in this way
the very interruption of the narrative might, as by the
interposition of a bolt, present an obstacle to the
reader, whereby he might refuse to acknowledge
the way which conducts to the ordinary meaning;
and being thus excluded and debarred from it, we
might be recalled to the beginning of another way,
in order that, by entering upon a narrow path, and
passing to a loftier and more sublime road, he might
lay open the immense breadth of divine wisdom. s
This, however, must not be unnoted by us, that as
the chief object of the Holy Spirit is to preserve the
coherence of the spiritual meaning, either in those
things which ought to be done or which have been
already performed, if He anywhere finds that those
events which, according to the history, took place,
can be adapted to a spiritual meaning. He composed
a texture of both kinds in one style of narration,
always concealing the hidden meaning more deeply ;
but where the historical narrative could not be made
appropriate to the spiritual coherence of the occur-
rences. He inserted sometimes certain things which
either did not take place or could not take place ;
sometimes also what might happen, but what did
not : and He does this at one time in a few words,
which, taken in their " bodily " meaning, seem inca-
pable of containing truth, and at another by the in-
sertion of many. And this we find frequently to be
the case in the legislative portions, where there are
many things manifestly useful among the " bodily "
precepts, but a very great number also in which no
principle of utility is at all discernible, and some-
times even things which are judged to be impossi-
bilities. Now all this, as we have remarked, was
done by the Holy Spirit in order that, seeing those
events which lie on the surface can be neither true
nor useful, we may be led to the investigation of that
truth which is more deeply concealed, and to the
ascertaining of a meaning worthy of God in those
Scriptures which we believe to be inspired by Him.

16. Nor was it only with regard to those Scriptures
which were composed down to the advent of Christ
that the Holy Spirit thus dealt ; but as being one
and the same Spirit, and proceeding from one God,
He dealt in the same way with the evangelists and
apostles. For even , those narratives which He in-


15. But since, if the usefulness of the
legislation, and the sequence and beauty '
of the history, were universally evident of
itself,^ we should not beheve that any other
thing could be understood in the Scriptures
save what was obvious, the word of God
has arranged that certain stumbling-blocks,
as it were, and offences, and impossibili-
ties, should be introduced into the midst
of the law and the history, in order that
we may not, through being drawn away in
all directions by the merely attractive na-
ture of the language,'* either altogether fall
away from the (true) doctrines, as learn-
ing nothing worthy of God, or, by not
departing from the letter, come to the
knowledge of nothing more divine. And
this also we must know, that the principal
aim being to announce the " spiritual "
connection in those things that are done,
and that ought to be done, where the Word
found that things done according to the
history could be adapted to these mystical
senses, He made use of them, concealing
from the multitude the deeper meaning ;
but where, in the narrative of the develop-
ment of super-sensual things,*^ there did
not follow the performance of those certain
events, which was already indicated by the
mystical meaning, the Scripture interwove
in the history (the account of) some eveftt
that did not take place, sometimes what
could not have happened ; sometimes what
could, but did not. And sometimes a
few words are interpolated which are not
true in their literal acceptation, ^ and some-
times a larger number. And a similar
practice also is to be noticed with regard
to the legislation, in which is often to be
found what is useful in itself, and appro-
priate to the times of the legislation ; and
sometimes also what does not appear to be
of utility ; and at other times impossibili-
ties are recorded for the sake of the more
skilful and inquisitive, in order that they
may give themselves to the toil of investi-
gating what is written, and thus attain to
a becoming conviction of the manner in
which a meaning worthy of God must be
sought out in such subjects.

16. It was not only, however, with the
(Scriptures composed) before the advent
(of Christ) that the Spirit thus dealt ; but
as being the same Spirit, and (proceeding)
from the one God, He did the same thing
both with the evangelists and the apostles,


I y\a<j>vp6v. 2 avToBev, 3 Intercapedines. 4 vn'o ttJ';

5 Ut ita celsioris cujusdam et eminentioris tramitis per angusti

6 ill T7J £irjy7Jo-et t)]5 irepi Twi' vorjTtDV aKoAovfias. 7 KaT


:w? eAKOjUeroi to ayuiy'ov axpaTOv exo"""^^.

s ingressum immensam divinse scientise latitudii


pandat.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


365


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


spired them to write were not composed without the
aid of that wisdom of His, the nature of which we
have above explained. Whence also in them were
intermingled not a few things by which, the historical
order of the narrative being interrupted and broken
up, the attention of the reader might be recalled,
by the impossibility of the case, to an examination of
the inner meaning. But, that our meaning may be
ascertained by the facts themselves, let us examine
the passages of Scripture. Now who is there, pray,
possessed of understanding, that will regard the
statement as appropriate,^ that the first day, and
the second, and the third, in which also both evening
and morning are mentioned, existed without sun, and
moon, and stars — the first day even without a sky?
And who is found so ignorant as to suppose that God,
as if He had been a husbandman, planted trees in
paradise, in Eden towards the east, and a tree of life
in it, i.e., a visible and palpable tree of wood,3 so
that any one eating of it with bodily teeth should
obtain life, and, eating again of another tree, should
come to the knowledge of good and evil? No one,
I think, can doubt that the statement that God walked
in the afternoon in paradise, and that Adam lay hid
under a tree, is related figuratively in Scripture, that
some mystical meaning may be indicated by it. The
departure of Cain from the presence of the Lord
will manifestly cause a careful reader to inquire what
is the presence of God, and how any one can go out
from it. But not to extend the task which we have
before us beyond its due limits, it is very easy for
any one who pleases to gather out of holy Scripture
what is recorded indeed as having been done, but
what nevertheless cannot be believed as having rea-
sonably and appropriately occurred according to the
historical account. The same style of Scriptural
narrative occurs abundantly in the Gospels, as when
the devil is said to have placed Jesus on a lofty
mountain, that he might show Him from thence all
the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.
How could it literally come to pass, either that Jesus
should be led up by the devil into a high mountain,
or that the latter should show him all the kingdoms
of the world (as if they were lying beneath his bodily
eyes, and adjacent to one mountain), i.e., the king-
doms of the Persians, and Scythians, and Indians?
or how could he show in what manner the kings of
these kingdoms are glorified by men? And many
other instances similar to this will be found in the
Gospels by any one who will read them with atten-
tion, and will observe that in those narratives which
appear to be literally recorded, there are inserted
and interwoven things which cannot be admitted his-
torically, but which may be accepted in a spiritual
signification.^


— as even these do not contain through-
out a pure history of events, which are in-
terwoven indeed according to the letter,
but which did not actually occur.' Nor
even do the law and the commandments
wholly convey what is agreeable to reason.
For who that has understanding will sup-
pose that the first, and second, and third
day, and the evening and the morning, ex-
isted without a sun, and moon, and stars?
and that the first day was, as it were, also
without a sky ? And who is so foolish as to
suppose that God, after the manner of a
husbandman, planted a paradise in Eden,
towards the east, and placed in it a tree
of life, visible and palpable, so that one
tasting of the fruit by the bodily teeth
obtained life? and again, that one was a
partaker of good and evil by masticating
what was taken from the tree? And if
God is said to walk in the paradise in the
evening, and Adam to hide himself under
a tree, I do not suppose that any one
doubts that these things figuratively indi-
cate certain mysteries, the history having
taken place in appearance, and not lit-
erally.* Cain also, when going forth from
the presence of God, certainly appears to
thoughtful men as likely to lead the reader
to inquire what is the presence of God,
and what is the meaning of going out from
Him. And what need 'is there to say
more, since those who are not altogether
blind can collect countless instances of a
similar kind recorded as having occurred,
but which did not literally 5 take place ?
Nay, the Gospels themselves are filled
with the same kind of narratives ; e.g., the
devil leading Jesus up into a high moun-
tain, in order to show him from thence
the kingdoms of the whole world, and the
glory of them. For who is there among
those who do not read such accounts care-
lessly, that would not condemn those who
think that with the eye of the body —
which requires a lofty height in order that
the parts lying (immediately) under and
adjacent may be seen — the kingdoms of
the Persians, and Scythians, and Indians,
and Parthians, were beheld, and the manner
in which their princes are glorified among
men ? And the attentive reader may no-
tice in the Gospels innumerable other pas-
sages like these, so that he will be convinced
that in the histories that are literally re-


Ov&e TouTto;' navTr) aKparov ttjv KTTOpiav Tuiv npo<TV<t>a<TtJ.euo>v Kara to (TotfiaTtKOV ixovTiav, fj-r) yeyevrjwivutv ovSi ttiv i/oixo6t(Tia.v
(IxiiiaivovTa.. One MS. reads yfytvy]iJ.ivy\v, referring to laTopia-v, on whicti one editor remarks, " Hie


u Ta? ei'ToAn; iravTiix; to euAoy
in sequentibvis imploro fidem codicum
^ Consequenler, alii " convenienter," 3 T.ignum. •* fiia i^o\-ou<rj)« lO-Topt'o? ical o\i aioiiaTiKun; yeytvriit.ivr]<;,

* [See note, p. 262, supra. See also Dr. Lee, The Inspiration of Holy Scripture, pp. 523-527. S.]


5 KaTo tr[V Atfii


366


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


1 7. In the passages containing the commandments
also, similar things are found. For in the law Moses
is commanded to destroy every male that is not cir-
cumcised on the eighth day, which is exceedingly
incongruous,^ since it would be necessary, if it were
related that the law was executed according to the
history, to command those parents to be punished
who did not circumcise their children, and also those
who were the nurses of little children. The declara-
tion of Scripture now is, " The uncircumcised male,
i.e., who shall not have been circumcised, shall be cut
off from his people." ^ And if we are to inquire
regarding the impossibilities of the law, we find an
animal called the goat-stag,^ which cannot possibly
exist, but which, as being in the number of clean
beasts, Moses commands to be eaten ; and a griffin, 5
which no one ever remembers or heard of as yielding
to human power, but which the legislator forbids to
be used for food. Respecting the celebrated ^ ob-
servance of the Sabbath also he thus speaks : " Ye
shall sit, every one in your dwellings ; no one shall
move from his place on the Sabbath-day." ^ Which
precept it is impossible to observe literally ; for no
man can sit a whole day so as not to move from the
place where he sat down. With respect to each one
of these points now, those who belong to the cir-
cumcision, and all who would have no more meaning
to be found in sacred Scripture than what is indicated
by the letter, consider that there should be no inves-
tigation regarding the goat-stag, and the griffin, and
the vulture ; and they invent some empty and trifling
tales about the Sabbath, drawn from some traditional
sources or other, alleging that every one's place is
computed to him within two thousand cubits." '°
Others, again, among whom is Dositheus the Samari-
tan, censure indeed expositions of this kind, but
themselves lay down something more ridiculous, viz.,
that each one must remain until the evening in the
posture, place, or position in which he found himself
on the Sabbath-day ; i.e., if found sitting, he is to sit
the whole day, or if reclining, he is to recline the
whole day. Moreover, the injunction which runs,
"Bear no burden on the Sabbath-day," '^ seems to me
an impossibility. For the Jewish doctors, in conse-
quence of these (prescriptions), have betaken them-
selves, as the holy apostle says, to innumerable fables,
saying that it is not accounted a burden if a man
wear shoes without nails, but that it is a burden if
shoes with nails be worn ; and that if it be carried
on one shoulder, they consider it a burden ; but if
on both, they declare it to be none.


corded, circumstances that did not occur
are inserted.

17. And if we come to the legislation
of Moses, many of the laws manifest the
irrationality, and others the impossibility,
of their literal ' observance. The irration-
ality (in this), that the people are forbid-
den to eat vultures, although no one even
in the direst famines was (ever) driven by
want to have recourse to this bird ; and
that children eight days old, which are un-
circumcised, are ordered to be extermi-
nated from among their people, it being
necessary, if the law were to be carried
out at all literally with regard to these, that
their fathers, or those with whom they are
brought up, should be commanded to be
put to death. Now the Scripture says :
" Every male that is uncircumcised, who
shall not be circumcised on the eighth day,
shall be cut off from among his people." ^
And if you wish to see impossibilities con-
tained in the legislation, let us observe that
the goat-stag is one of those animals that
cannot exist, and yet Moses commands us
to offer it as being a clean beast ; whereas
a griffin, which is not recorded ever to
have been subdued by man, the lawgiver
forbids to be eaten. Nay, he who care-
fully considers (the famous injunction re-
lating to) the Sabbath, "Ye shall sit each
one in your dwellings : let no one go out
from his place on the seventh day," ? will
deem it impossible to be Ifterally observed :
for no living being is able to sit throughout
a whole day, and remain without moving
from a sitting position. And therefore
those who belong to the circumcision, and
all who desire that no meaning should be
exhibited, save the literal one, do not in-
vestigate at all such subjects as those of
the goat-stag and griffin and vulture, but
indulge in foolish talk on certain points,
multiplying words and adducing tasteless"
traditions ; as, for example, with regard to
the Sabbath, saying that two thousand cu-
bits is each one's limit. '^ Others, again,
among whom is Dositheus the Samaritan,
condemning such an interpretation, think
that in the position in which a man is
found on the Sabbath-day, he is to remain
until evening. Moreover, tlie not carrying
of a burden on the Sabbath-day is an im-
possibility ; and therefore the JewisH teach-


* 6<ro>' eTrl tm Kad' iavToiii rrfpelaBai.,


Inconsequens. 3 Cf. Gen. xvii. 14.


* Tragelaphus; " wild goat," Auth. Vers. Deut. xiv. 5: Heb. ip^{, oin-of A«y.

i Gryphus; "ossifrage," Auth.Vers. Lev. xi. 13; Heb. D").^. 6 Opinatissima. 7 Gen. xvii. 14. 8 Cf. Ex. xvi. 29.

9 Ex. xvi. 29. '° Ulnas, " ipvxpas TrapaSdceis. '- Jer. xvii. 21. '^ ronov ixdario elvai iio-x'^'oi'S "■'JX^'S-


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


367


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


18. And now, if we institute a similar examination
with regard to the Gospels, how shall it appear other-
wise than absurd to take the injunction literally, " Sa-
lute no man by the way ? " ^ And yet there are simple
individuals, who think that our Saviour gave this com-
mand to His apostles ! How, also, can it appear
possible for such an order as this to be observed,
especially in those countries where there is a rigorous
winter, attended by frost and ice, viz., that one should
possess "neither two coats, nor shoes ?"^ And this,
that when one is smitten on the right cheek, he is
ordered to present the left also, since every one who
strikes with the n'g/if hand smites the /<// cheek?
This precept also in the Gospels must be accounted
among impossibilities, viz., that if the right eye " of-
fend " thee, it is to be plucked out; for even if we
were to suppose that bodily eyes were spoken of,
how shall it appear appropriate, that when both eyes
have the property of sight, the responsibility of the
"offence " should be transferred to one eye, and that
the right one ? Or who shall be considered free of
a crime of the greatest enormity, that lays hands
upon himself? But perhaps the Episdes of the
Apostle Paul will appear to be beyond this. For
what is his meaning, when he says, " Is any man
called, being circumcised? Let him not become
uncircumcised."'* This expression indeed, in the
first place, does not on careful consideration seem to
be spoken with reference to the subject of which he
was treating at the time, for this discourse consisted
of injunctions relating to marriage and to chastity ;
and these words, therefore, will have the appearance
of an unnecessary addition to such a subject. In
the second place, however, what objection would
there be, if, for the sake of avoiding that unseemli-
ness which is caused by circumcision, a man were
able to become uncircumcised?'^ And, in the third
place, that is altogether impossible.

The object of all these statements on our part, is
to show that it was the design of the Holy Spirit,
who deigned to bestow upon us the sacred Scriptures,
to show that we were not to be edified by the letter
alone, or by everything in it, — a thing which we see
to be frequently impossible and inconsistent ; for in
that way not only absurdities, but impossibilities,
would be the result ; but that we are to understand
that certain occurrences were interwoven in this
"visible" history, which, when considered and un-


ers have fallen into countless absurdities,'
saying that a shoe of such a kind was a
burden, but not one of another kind ; and
that a sandal which had nails was a bur-
den, but not one that was without them ;
and in like manner what was borne on one
shoulder (was a load), but not that which
was carried on both.

18. And if we go to the Gospel and
institute a similar examination, what would
be more irrational than (to take literally
the injunction), "Salute no man by the
way,"- which simple persons think the Sav-
iour enjoined on the apostles? The com-
mand, moreover, that the right cheek
should be smitten, is most incredible, since
every one who strikes, unless he happen to
have some bodily defect,^ smites the /e/^
cheek with his ng/U hand. And it is im-
possible to take (literally, the statement)
in the Gospel about the " offending " of
the right eye. For, to grant the possibility
of one being "offended " by the sense of
sight, how, when there are two eyes that
see, should the blame be laid upon the
right eye? And who is there that, con-
demning himself for having looked upon
a woman to lust after her, would rationally
transfer the blame to the right eye alone,
and throw zV away? The apostle, more-
over, lays down the law, saying, " Is any
man called, being circumcised? Let him
not become uncircumcised."'* In the first
place, any one will see that he does not
utter these words in connection with the
subject before him. For, when laying
down precepts on marriage and purity,
how will it not appear that he has intro-
duced these words at random ? s But, in
the second place, who will say that a man
does wrong who endeavours to become un-
circumcised, if that be possible, on account
of the disgrace that is considered by the
multitude to attach to circumcision.

All these statements have been made by
us, in order to show that the design of that
divine power which gave us the sacred
Scriptures is, that we should not receive
what is presented by the letter alone (such
things being sometimes not true in their
literal acceptation, but absurd and impos-
sible), but that certain things have been
introduced into the actual history and into
the legislation that are useful in their literal


' El? a.TTfpavToKoyi'n.v e\rf\v0a<Ti. ^ Luke x. 4. 3 ei firj apa Treirov9u>^ Ti iropd <t>v(Tiv~Tvy)(dvoi, * i Cor. vii. 18. i ei

* Secundo vero, quid obesset, si obscoenitatis vitands causa ejus, quae ex circumcisione est, posset aliquis revocare prxputium?
7 Kat Tj7 Kara to prjror \pr\(JiixifiV yofioOea^a,


i68


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


derstood in their inner meaning, give forth a law
which is advantageous to men and worthy of God.

19. Let no one, however, entertain the suspicion
that we do not believe any history in Scripture to be
real, because we suspect certain events related in it
not to have taken place ; or that no precepts of the
law are to be taken literally, because we consider
certain of them, in which either the, nature or possi-
bility of the case so requires, incapable of being ob-
served ; or that we do not believe those predictions
which were written of the Saviour to have been ful-
filled in a manner palpable to the senses ; or that
His commandments are not to be literally obeyed.
We have therefore to state in answer, since we are
manifestly so of opinion, that the truth of the history
may and ought to be preserved in the majority of
instances. For who can deny that Abraham was
buried in the double cave ^ at Hebron, as well as
Isaac and Jacob, and each of their wives ? Or who
doubts that Shechem was given as a portion to
Joseph ?■♦ or that Jerusalem is the metropolis of
Judea, on which the temple of God was built by
Solomon ? — and countless other statements. For
the passages which hold good in their historical ac-
ceptation are much more numerous than those which
contain a purely spiritual meaning. Then, again, who
would not maintain that the command to " honour
thy father and tliy mother, that it may be well with
thee," 5 is sufficient of itself without any spiritual
meaning, and necessary for those who observe it?
especially when Paul also has confirmed the com-
mand by repeating it in the same words. And what
need is there to speak of the prohibitions, "Thou
shalt not commit adultery," "Thou shalt not steal,"
" Thou shalt not bear false witness," ^ and others of
the same kmd ? And with respect to the precepts
enjoined m the Gospels, no doubt can be entertained
that very many of these are to be literally observed,
as e.g., when our Lord says, " But I say unto you,
Swear not at all ;" * and when He says, " Whosoever
looketh upon a woman to lust after her, hath com-
mitted adultery with her already in his heart ;"9 the
admonitions also which are found in the writings of
the Apostle Paul, " Warn them that are unruly, com-
fort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient
towards all men," " and very many others. And yet
I have no doubt that an attentive reader will, in
numerous instances, hesitate whether this or that his-
tory can be considered to be literally true or not ; or
whether this or that precept ought to be observed
according to the letter or no. And therefore great
pains and labour are to be employed, until every
reader reverentially understand that he is dealing
with divine and not human words inserted in the
sacred books.


19. But that no one may suppose that
we assert respecting the whole that no his-
tory is real ' because a certain one is not ;
and that no law is to be literally observed,
because a certain one, (understood) ac-
cording to the letter, is absurd or impossi-
ble ; or that the statements regarding the
Saviour are not true in a manner percept-
ible to the senses ; ^ or that no command-
ment and precept of His ought to be
obeyed; — we have to answer that, with
regard to certain things, it is perfectly clear
to us that the historical account is true ;
as that Abraham was buried in the double
cave at Hebron, as also Isaac and Jacob,
and the wives of each of them ; and that
Shechem was given as a portion to Joseph ; '^
and that Jerusalem is the metropolis of
Judea, in which the temple of God was
built by Solomon ; and innumerable other
statements. For the passages that are true
in their historical meaning are much more
numerous than those which are interspersed
with a purely spiritual signification. And
again, who would not say that the com-
mand which enjoins to " honour thy father
and thy mother, that it may be well with
thee," 5 is useful, apart from all allegorical
meaning,^ and ought to be observed, the
Apostle Paul also having employed these
very same words ? And what need is there
to speak of the (prohibitions), "Thou
shalt not commit adultery," " Thou shalt
not kill," "Thou shalt not steal," "Thou
shalt not bear false witness ? " ? And again,
there are commandments contained in the
Gospel which admit of no doubt whether
they are to be observed according to the
letter or not ; e.g., that which says, " But
I say unto you. Whoever is angry with his
brother," '° and so on. And again, " But
I say unto you. Swear not at all." " And
in the writings of the apostle the literal
sense is to be retained : " Warn them that
are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded,
support the weak, be patient towards all
men ; " " although it is possible for those
ambitious of a deeper meaning to retain
the profundities of the wisdom of God,
without setting aside the commandment in
its literal meaning. '^ The careful (reader),
however, will be in doubt '•♦ as to cer-
tain points, being unable to show without


' yi-^oviv. 2 Ko-To. TO ax<rS-i\T6v. 3 DupHci spelunca. * Cf. Gen. xlviii. 22 and Josh. xxiv. 32. 5 Cf. Ex. xx. 12 and Eph. vi. 2, 3.
6 Xi^P'? Tao-rj; araYwyij?. ^ Cf. Ex. XX. 13-16. ^ Cf. Matt. v. 34. _ 9 Matt. y. 28. ^° [Matt. y. 22.] " Matt. v. 34.

'^ I Thess, V. 14. '3 Et Kat ■aa.pa. Tois <|)iAoTinoTepois 6i/caTai omC^h-v €Ka.<7Tov avTOiv, ixeTo. Tou far) dStTei(70ai TJjv Kara to pryTo;'
efToAriv, ^dOr) Qeoi (ro4>iai. '* 7repteAicvad)jo-eTat.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


369


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


20. The understanding, therefore, of holy Scrip-
ture which we consider ought to be deservedly and
consistently maintained, is of the following kind. A
certain nation is declared by holy Scripture to have
been chosen by God upon the earth, which nation
has received several names : for sometimes the whole
of it is termed Israel, and sometimes Jacob ; and it
was divided by Jeroboam son of Nebat into two por-
tions ; and the ten tribes which were formed under
him were called Israel, while the two remaining ones
(with which were united the tribe of Levi, and that
which was descended from the royal race of David)
was named Judah. Now the whole of the country
possessed by that nation, which it had received from
God, was called Judea, in which was situated the
metropolis, Jerusalem ; and it is called metropolis,
being as it were the mother of many cities, the names
of which you will frequently find mentioned here and
there in the other books of Scripture, but which are
collected together into one catalogue in the book of
Joshua the son of Nun.*


j 21. This, then, being the state of the case, the

! holy apostle desiring to elevate in some degree, and


long investigation whether this history so
deemed literally occurred or not, and
whether the literal meaning of this law is
to be observed or not. And therefore
the exact reader must, in obedience to the
Saviour's injunction to " search the Scrip-
tures," ' carefully ascertain in how far the
literal meaning is true, and in how far im-
possible ; and so far as he can, trace out,
by means of similar statements, the mean-
ing everywhere scattered through Scripture
of that which cannot be understood in a
literal signification.

20. Since, therefore, as will be clear to
those who read, the connection taken
literally is impossible, while the sense pre-
ferred^ is not impossible, but even the
true one, it must be our object to grasp
the whole meaning, which connects the
account of what is literally impossible in
an intelligible manner with what is not only
not impossible, but also historically true,
and which is allegorically understood, in
respect of its not having literally occurred.^
For, with respect to holy Scripture, our
opinion is that the whole of it has a " spir-
itual," but not the whole a "bodily"
meaning, because the bodily meaning is
in many places proved to be impossible.
And therefore great attention must be
bestowed by the cautious reader on the
divine books, as being divine writings ;
the manner of understanding which ap-
pears to us to be as follows : — The Scrip-
tures relate that God chose a certain nation
upon the earth, which they call by several
names. For the whole of this nation is
termed Israel, and also Jacob. And when
it was divided in the times of Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, the ten tribes related as
being subject to him were called Israel ;
and the remaining two, along with the
tribe of Levi, being ruled over by the de-
scendants of David, were named Judah.
And the whole of the territory which the
people of this nation inhabited, being given
them by God, receives the name of Judah,
the metropolis of which is Jerusalem, — a
metropolis, namely, of numerous cities,
the names of which lie scattered about in
many other passages (of Scripture), but
are enumerated together in the book of
Joshua the son of Nun.s

21. Such, then, being the state of the
case, 'the apostle, elevating our power of


' ^ohn V. 39. 2 J npo-qyoviJ.ei'oi;.

^ OAoi" Toi' vovv (^iAoTt|OLr)Teoi' KaTaKatx^dveiv, trvvfipovTa Toi' Trepl Toil' Kara T>)»' Ae'fii' aSvva.Tu}V \6yov vor)Tu>s TOis ov ixovov oiiK
aouvttToi?, oAAi /cni oArj^eVi. Kara. Tt)v icTTopiav, avvaWriyopovfievoi.i Tois fiaoi' «irl Tfl Aefei, /i>) ytycmrinevon.
* In libro Jesu Naue. 5 iy 'Irjaoi rip toO Nav^.


370


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


to raise our understanding above the earth, says in
a certain place, " Behold Israel after the flesh ; " '
by which he certainly means that there is another
Israel which is not according to the flesh, but accord-
ing to the Spirit. And again in another passage,
" For they are not all Israelites who are of Israel." ^


FROM THE GREEK.

discernment (above the letter), says some-
where, " Behold Israel after the flesh," '
as if there were an Israel " according to
the Spirit." And in another place he says,
" For they who are the children of the
flesh are not the children of God ; " nor
are " they all Israel who are of Israel ; " ^
nor is " he a Jew who is one outwardly,
nor is that ' circumcision ' which is outward
in the flesh : but he is a Jew who is one
' inwardly ; ' and circumcision is that of
the heart, in the spirit, and not in the let-
ter." 4 For if the judgment respecting the
"Jew inwardly" be adopted, we must
understand that, as there is a " bodily "
race of Jews, so also is there a race of
" Jews inwardly," the soul having acquired
this nobility for certain mysterious reasons.
Moreover, there are many prophecies which
predict regarding Israel and Judah what is
about to befall them. And do not such
promises as are written concerning them,
in respect of their being mean in expres-
sion, and manifesting no elevation (of
thought) , nor anything worthy of the prom-
ise of God, need a mystical interpretation ?
And if the " spiritual " promises are an-
nounced by visible signs, then they to
whom the promises are made are not " cor-
poreal." And not to linger over the point
of the Jew who is a Jew "inwardly," nor
over that of the Israelite according to
the " inner man " — these statements being
sufficient for those who are not devoid of
understanding — we return to our subject,
and say that Jacob is the father of the
twelve patriarchs, and they of the rulers of
the people ; and these, again, of the other
Israelites. Do not, then, the " corporeal "
Israelites refer their descent to the rulers
of the people, and the rulers of the people
to the patriarchs, and the patriarchs to
Jacob, and those still higher up ; while are
not the " spiritual " Israelites, of whom
the " corporeal " Israehtes were the type,
sprung from the families, and the families
from the tribes, and the tribes from some
one individual whose descent is not of a
" corporeal " but of a better kind, — he,
too, being born of Isaac, and he of Abra-
ham, — all going back to Adam, whom the
apostle declares to be Christ? For every
beginning of those families which have rela-
tion to God as to the Father of all, took
its commencement lower down with Christ,
who is next to the God and Father of all,5
being thus the Father of every soul, as


' I Cor. X. iS. 2 Rom. ix. 6. 3 Rom. ix. 6, 8. ■♦ Rom. ii. 28, 29.

S Uacra yap apxh iraTpiiov Tui;' lis Trpbs Toi' Tuiv oAuiv ®iov, KaTuiripia anb ToO XpiCTToO ^p^aTO ToO /xera Toi' Tw;/ 6\uiv Qehv KoX naripa..


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


371


FROM THE LATIN.


2 2. Being taught, then, by him that there is one
Israel according to the flesh, and another according
to the Spirit, when the Saviour says, " I am not sent
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel," ' we do
not understand these words as those do who savour
of earthly things, i.e., the Ebionites, who derive the
appellation of " poor " from their very name (for
"Ebion" means "poor" in Hebrew^); but we
understand that there exists a race of souls which is
termed " Israel," as is indicated by the interpretation
of the name itself: for Israel is interpreted to mean
a " mind," or " man seeing God." The apostle,
again, makes a similar revelation respecting Jeru-
salem, saying, " The Jerusalem which is above is free,
which is the mother of us all." *♦ And in another of
his Epistles he says : " But ye are come unto mount
Zion, and to the city of the living God, and to the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
of angels, and to the Church of the first-born which
is written in heaven." 5 jf^ then, there are certain
souls in this world who are called Israel, and a city
in heaven which is called Jerusalem, it follows that
those cities which are said to belong to the nation of
Israel have the heavenly Jerusalem as their metrop-
olis ; and that, agreeably to this, we understand as
referring to the whole of Judah (of which also we are
of opinion that the prophets have spoken in certain
mystical narratives), any predictions delivered either
regarding Judea or Jerusalem, or invasions of any kind,
which the sacred histories declare to have happened
to Judea or Jerusalem. Whatever, then, is either
narrated or predicted of Jerusalem, must, if we accept
the words of Paul as those of Christ speaking in him,
be understood as spoken in conformity with his opin-
ion regarding that city which he calls the heavenly
Jerusalem, and all those places or cities which are
said to be cities of the holy land, of which Jerusalem
is the metropolis. For we are to suppose that it is
from these very cities that the Saviour, wishing to
raise us to a higher grade of intelligence, promises
to those who have well managed the money entrusted
to them by Himself, that they are to have power over
ten or five cities. If, then, the prophecies delivered
concerning Judea, and Jerusalem, and Judah, and
Israel, and Jacob, not being understood by us in a
carnal sense, signify certain divine mysteries, it cer-
tainly follows that those prophecies also which were
delivered either concerning Egypt or the Egyptians,


FROM THE GREEK.

Adam is the father of all men. And if
Eve also is intended by the apostle to refer
to the Church, it is not surprising that Cain,
who was born of Eve, and all after him,
whose descent goes back to Eve, should
be types of the Church, inasmuch as in a
pre-eminent sense they are all descended
from the Church.

22. Now, if the statements made to us
regarding Israel, and its tribes and its fam-
ilies, are calculated to impress us, when
the Saviour says, " I was not sent but to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel," '
we do not understand the expression as
the Ebionites do, who are poor in under-
standing (deriving their name from the
poverty of their intellect — " Ebion " sig-
nifying " poor " in Hebrew), so as to sup-
pose that the Saviour came specially to
the " carnal " Israelites ; for " they who
are the children of the flesh are not the
children of God." ^ Again, the apostle
teaches regarding Jerusalem as follows :
"The Jerusalem which is above is free,
which is the mother of us all." '^ And in
another Epistle : " But ye are come unto
mount Zion, and to the city of the living
God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of angels, to the gen-
eral assembly and to the Church of the
first-born which are written in heaven." ^
If, then, Israel is among the race of souls,'
and if there is in heaven a city of Jeru-
salem, it follows that the cities of Israel
have for their metropolis the heavenly Jeru-
salem, and it consequently is the metrop-
olis of all Judea. Whatever, therefore, is
predicted of Jerusalem, and spoken of it,
if we listen to the words of Paul as those
of God, and of one who utters wisdom, we
must understand the Scriptures as speaking
of the heavenly city, and of the whole ter-
ritory included within the cities of the holy
land. For perhaps it is to these cities that
the Saviour refers us, when to those who
have gained credit by having managed
their " pounds " well, He assigns the presi-
dency over five or ten cities. If, therefore,
the prophecies relating to Judea, and Jeru-
salem, and Israel, and Judah, and Jacob,
not being understood by us in a " carnal "
sense, indicate some such mysteries (as
already mentioned), it will follow also that
the predictions concerning Egypt and the
Egyptians, Babylon and the Babylonians,
Tyre and the Tyrians, Sidon and the Si-


' Matt. XV. 24. 2 Ebion, Heb. ; V3X, (from 7\2H, to desire) , lit. " wishing," " desiring; " secondarily, " poor."
3 Rom. ix. 8. [See Dr. Burton's Inquiry into the Heresies of the Apostolic Age (Bampton Lectures), pp. 184, 185, 498, 499. S.]
' " 22, 23. 6 Heb. xii. 22, 23. ' iv i^vx^^v ytfti..


26. 5 Cf. Heb.


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


or Babylonia and the Babylonians, and Sidon and the
Sidonians, are not to be understood as spoken of that
Egypt which is situated on the earth, or of the earthly
Babylon, Tyre, or Sidon. Nor can those predictions
which the prophet Ezekiel delivered concerning
Pharaoh king of Egypt, apply to any man who may
seem to have reigned over Egypt, as the nature of
the passage itself declares. In a similar manner also,
what is spoken of the prince of Tyre cannot be under-
stood of any man or king of Tyre. And how could
we possibly accept, as spoken of a man, what is
related in many passages of Scripture, and especially
in Isaiah, regarding Nebuchadnezzar? For he is not
a man who is said to have " fallen from heaven," or
who was " Lucifer," or who " arose in the morning."
But with respect to those predictions which are found
in Ezekiel concerning Egypt, such as that it is to be
destroyed in forty years, so that the foot of man
should not be found within it, and that it should suf-
fer such devastation, that throughout the whole land
the blood of men should rise to the knees, I do not
know that any one possessed of understanding could
refer this to that earthly Egypt which adjoins Ethio-
pia. But let us see whether it may not be under-
stood more fittingly in the following manner : viz.,
that as there is a heavenly Jerusalem and Judea, and
a nation undoubtedly which inhabits it, and is named
Israel ; so also it is possible that there are certain
localities near to these which may seem to be called
either Egypt, or Babylon, or Tyre, or Sidon, and that
the princes of these places, and the souls, if there be
any, that inhabit them, are called Egyptians, Baby-
lonians, Tyrians, and Sidonians. From whom also,
according to the mode of life which they lead there,
a sort of captivity would seem to result, in conse-
quence of which they are said to have fallen from
Judea into Babylonia or Egypt, from a higher and
better condition, or to have been scattered into other
countries.

23. For perhaps as those who, departing this world
in virtue of that death which is common to all, are
arranged, in conformity with their actions and deserts
— according as they shall be deemed worthy — some
in the place which is called " hell," • others in the
bosom of Abraham, and in different localities or
mansions ; so also from those places, as if dying
there, if the expression can be used,^ do they come
down from the " upper world " ^ to this " hell." For
that " hell " to which the souls of the dead are con-
ducted from this world, is, I believe, on account of
this distinction, called the " lower hell " by Scripture,
as is said in the book of Psalms : "Thou hast deHv-
ered my soul from the lowest hell." ^ Every one,
accordingly, of those who descend to the earth is,
according to his deserts, or agreeably to the position
which he occupied there, ordained to be born in this
world, in a different country, or among a different


donians, or the other nations, are spoken
not only of these "bodily" Egyptians, and
Babylonians, and Tyrians, and Sidonians,
but also of their " spiritual " (counterparts) .
For if there be " spiritual " Israelites, it
follows that there are also " spiritual "
Egyptians and Babylonians. For what is
related in Ezekiel concerning Pharaoh king
of Egypt does not at all apply to the case of
a certain man who ruled or was said to rule
over Egypt, as will be evident to those who
give it careful consideration. Similarly,
what is said about the ruler of Tyre cannot
be understood of a certain man who ruled
over Tyre. And what is said in many
places, and especially in Isaiah, of Nebu-
chadnezzar, cannot be explained of that
individual. For the man Nebuchadnezzar
neither fell from heaven, nor was he the
morning star, nor did he arise upon the
earth in the morning. Nor would any man
of understanding interpret what is said in
Ezekiel about Egypt — viz., that in forty
years it should be laid desolate, so that the
footstep of man should not be found there-
on, and that the ravages of war should be
so great that the blood should nm through-
out the whole of it, and rise to the knees
— of that Egypt which is situated beside
the Ethiopians whose bodies are blackened
by the sun.


23. And perhaps as those here, dying
according to the death common to all,
are, in consequence of the deeds done
here, so arranged as to obtain different
places according to the proportion of their
sins, if they should be deemed worthy of
the place called Hades ; ^ so those there
dying, so to speak, descend into this
Hades, being judged deserving of different
abodes — better or worse — throughout
all this space of earth, and (of being de-
scended) from parents of different kinds, 5
so that an Israelite may sometimes fall
among Scythians, and an Egyptian de-
scend into Judea. And yet the Saviour
came to gather together the lost sheep of
the house of Israel ; but many of the Isra-
elites not having yielded to His teaching.


' Infernus. 2 toC KoAou/neVov x'"P^°^ dSov,
i /cai Trapd toktSc, ^ T0i(76e Tois Tta.Tp6.ui..


3 Velut illic, si dici potest, morientes.
Cf. Ps. XXX. 3 and Deut. xxxii. 22.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


FROM THE LATIN.


FROM THE GREEK.


nation, or in a different mode of life, or surrounded
by infirmities of a different kind, or to be descended
from religious parents, or parents who are not reli-
gious ; so that it may sometimes happen that an
Israelite descends among the Scythians, and a poor
Egyptian is brought down to Judea. And yet our
Saviour came to gather together the lost sheep of the
house of Israel ; and as many of the Israelites did
not accept His teaching, those who belonged to the
Gentiles were called. From which it will appear to
follow, that those prophecies which are delivered
to the individual nations ought to be referred rather
to the souls, and to their different heavenly mansions.
Nay, the narratives of the events which are said to
have happened either to the nation of Israel, or to
Jerusalem, or to Judea, when assailed by this or that
nation, cannot in many instances be understood as
having actually ^ occurred, and are much more ap-
propriate to those nations of souls who inhabit that
heaven which is said to pass away, or who even now
are supposed to be inhabitants of it.

If now any one demand of us clear and distinct
declarations on these points out of holy Scripture, we
must answer that it was the design of the Holy Spirit,
in those portions which appear to relate the history
of events, rather to cover and conceal the meaning :
in those passages, e.g., where they are said to go
down into Egypt, or to be carried captive to Baby-
lonia, or when in these very countries some are said
to be brought to excessive humiliation, and to be
placed under bondage to their masters ; while others,
again, in these very countries of their captivity, were
held in honour and esteem, so as to occupy positions
of rank and ])ower, and were appointed to the gov-
ernment of provinces ; — all which things, as we have
said, are kept hidden and covered in the narratives
of holy Scripture, because " the kingdom of heaven
is like a treasure hid in a field ; which when a man
findeth, he hideth it, and for joy thereof goeth away
and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field." '
By which similitude, consider whether it be not
pointed out that the very soil and surface, so to
speak, of Scripture — that is, the literal meaning —
is the field, filled with plants and flowers of all kinds ;
while that deeper and profounder " spiritual " mean-
ing are the very hidden treasures of wisdom and
knowledge which the Holy Spirit by Isaiah calls the
dark and invisible and hidden treasures, for the find-
ing out of which the divine help is required : for
God alone can burst the brazen gates by which they
are enclosed and concealed, and break in pieces the
iron bolts and levers by which access is prevented to
all those things which are written and concealed in
Genesis respecting the different kinds of souls, and
of those seeds and generations which either have a
close connection with Israel 5 or are widely separated
from his descendants ; as well as what is that descent


those from the Gentiles were called. . . .
And these points, as we suppose, have
been concealed in the histories. For " the
kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid
in a field ; the which when a man hath
found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth
and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth
that field." ' Let us notice, then, whether
the apparent and superficial and obvious
meaning of Scripture does not resemble a
field filled with plants of every kind, while
the things lying in it, and not visible to
all, but buried, as it were, under the plants
that are seen, are the hidden treasures of
wisdom and knowledge ; which the Spirit
through Isaiah^ calls dark and invisible
and concealed, God alone being able to
break the brazen gates that conceal them,
and to burst the iron bars that are upon
the gates, in order that all the statements
in the book of Genesis may be discovered
which refer to the various genuine kinds,
and seeds, as it were, of souls, which stand
nearly related to Israel, or at a distance
from it ; and the descent into Egypt of
the seventy souls, that they may there be-
come as the '• stars of heaven in multi-
tude." But since not all who are of them
are the light of the world — " for not all
who are of Israel are Israel " '^ — they be-
come from seventy souls as the " sand that
is beside the sea-shore innumerable."


Cf. Isa. xlv. 3.


Corporalil


5 Ad propinquitatem perti


374


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV,


FROM THE LATIN.


of seventy souls into Egypt, which seventy souls be-
came in that land as the stars of heaven in multitude.
But as not all of them were the light of this world —
"for all who are of Israel are not Israel"' — they
grow from being seventy souls to be an important
people/ and as the "sand by the sea-shore innumer-
able."


2 Ex ipsis Septuaginta animabus fiunt aliqui.


FROM THE LATIN.


24. This descent of the holy fathers into
Egypt will appear as granted to this world by
the providence of God for the illumination of
others, and for the instruction of the human
race, that so by this means the souls of others
might be assisted in the work of enlightenment.
For to them was first granted the privilege of
converse with God, because theirs is the only
race which is said to see God ; this being the
meaning, by interpretation, of the word " Is-
rael."' And now it follows that, agreeably to
this view, ought the statement to be accepted
and explained that Egypt was scourged with ten
plagues, to allow the people of God to depart,
or the account of what was done with the people
in the wilderness, or of the building of the taber-
nacle by means of contributions from all the
people, or of the wearing of the priestly robes,
or of the vessels of the public service, because,
as it is written, they truly contain within them
the " shadow and form of heavenly things."
For Paul openly says of them, that " they serve
unto the example and shadow of heavenly
things." ^ There are, moreover, contained in
this same law the precepts and institutions, ac-
cording to which men are to live in the holy
land. Threatenings also are held out as im-
pending over those who shall transgress the law ;
different kinds of purifications are moreover pre-
scribed for those who required purification, as
being jjersons who were liable to frequent pol-
lution, that by means of these they may arrive
at last at that one purification after which no
further pollution is permitted. The very people
are numbered, though not all ; for the souls of
children are not yet old enough to be numbered
according to the divine command : nor are those
souls who cannot become the head of another,
but are themselves subordinated to others as to
a head, who are called "women," who certainly
are not included in that numbering which is en-
joined by God ; but they alone are numbered


who are called " men," by which it might be
shown that the women could not be counted
separately,^ but were included in those called
men. Those, however, especially belong to the
sacred number, who are prepared to go forth to
the battles of the Israelites, and are able to fight
against those public and private enemies '^ whom
the Father subjects to the Son, who sits on His
right hand that He may destroy all principality
and power, and by means of these bands of His
soldiery, who, being engaged in a warfare for
God, do not entangle themselves in secular busi-
ness. He may overturn the Kingdom of His
adversary ; by whom the shields of faith are
borne, and the weapons of wisdom brandished ;
among whom also the helmet of hope and sal-
vation gleams forth, and the breastplate of
brightness fortifies the breast that is filled with
God. Such soldiers appear to me to be indi-
cated, and to be prepared for wars of this kind,
in those persons who in the sacred books are
ordered by God's command to be numbered.
But of these, by far the more perfect and dis-
tinguished are shown to be those of whom the
very hairs of the head are said to be numbered.
Such, indeed, as were punished for their sins,
whose bodies fell in the wilderness, appear to
possess a resemblance to those who had made
indeed no little progress, but who could not at
all, for various reasons, attain to the end of per-
fection ; because they are reported either to
have murmured, or to have worshipped idols, or
to have committed fornication, or to have done
some evil work which the mind ought not even
to conceive. I do not consider the following
even to be without some mystical meaning,^ viz.,
that certain (of the Israelites), possessing many
flocks and animals, take possession by anticipa-
tion of a country adapted for pasture and the
feeding of cattle, which was the very first that
the right hand of the Hebrews had secured in


3 Extrinsecus.

* Hostes inimicosque.

S Ne illud quidem sacramento aliquo


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


375


war.' For, making a request of Moses to re-
ceive this region, they are divided off by the
waters of the Jordan, and set apart from any
possession in the holy land. And this Jordan,
according to the form of heavenly things, may
appear to water and irrigate thirsty souls, and
the senses that are adjacent to it.^ In connec-
tion with which, even this statement does not
appear superfluous, that Moses indeed hears
from God what is described in the book of Le-
viticus, while in Deuteronomy it is the people
that are the auditors of Moses, and who learn
from him what they could not hear from God.
For as Deuteronomy is called, as it were, the
second law, which to some will appear to convey
this signification, that when the first law which
was given through Moses had come to an end,
so a second legislation seems to have been en-
acted, which was specially transmitted by Moses
to his successor Joshua, who is certainly believed
to embody a type^ of our Saviour, by whose
second law — that is, the precepts of the Gos-
pel — all things are brought to perfection.

25. We have to see, however, whether this
deeper meaning may not perhaps be indicated,
viz., that as in Deuteronomy the legislation is
made known with greater clearness and distinct-
ness than in those books which were first written,
so also by that advent of the Saviour which He
accomplished in His state of humiliation, when
He assumed the form of a servant, that more
celebrated and renowned second advent in the
glory of His Father may not be pointed out, and
in It the types of Deuteronomy may be fulfilled,
when in the kingdom of heaven all the saints
shall live according to the laws of the everlasting
Gospel ; and as in His coming now He fulfilled
that law which has a shadow of good things to
come, so also by that (future) glorious advent
will be fulfilled and brought to perfection the
shadows of the present advent. For thus spake
the prophet regarding it : " The breath of our
countenance, Christ the Lord, to whom we said,
that under Thy shadow we shall live among the
nations ; "■♦ at the time, viz., when He will more
worthily transfer all the saints from a temporal
to an everlasting Gospel, according to the desig-
nation, employed by John in the Apocalypse, of
"an everlasting Gospel." s

26. But let it be sufficient for us in all these
matters to adapt our understanding to the rule
of religion, and so to think of the words of the
Holy Spirit as not to deem the language the or-
nate composition of feeble human eloquence,
but to hold, according to the scriptural state-


' Quern primum omnium Israclitici belli dextra defenderat.

2 Rigare et inundare animas sitientes, et sensus adjaeentes sibi.

3 Formam.

* Lam. iv. 20.
S Cf. Rev. xiv. 6.


ment, that " all the glory of the King is within,"^
and that the treasure of divine meaning is en-
closed within the frail vessel of the common
letter. And if any curious reader were still to
ask an explanation of individual points, let him
come and hear, along with ourselves, how the
Apostle Paul, seeking to penetrate by help of
the Holy Spirit, who searches even the " deep
things " of God, into the depths of divine wis-
dom and knowledge, and yet, unable to reach
the end, so to speak, and to come to a thorough
knowledge, exclaims in despair and amazement,
" Oh the depth of the riches of the knowledge
and wisdom of God ! " 7 Now, that it was from
despair of attaining a perfect understanding that
he uttered this exclamation, listen to his o\vn
words : " How unsearchable are God's judg-
ments ! and His ways, how past finding out ! " ?
For he did not say that God's judgments were
difficult to discover, but that they were altogether
inscrutable ; nor that it was (simply) difficult to
trace out His ways, but that they were altogether
past finding out. For however far a man may
advance in his investigations, and how great so-
ever the progress that he may make by unremit-
ting study, assisted even by the grace of God,
and with his mind enlightened, he will not be
able to attain to the end of those things which
are the object of his inquiries. Nor can any
created mind deem it possible in any way to
attain a full comprehension (of things) ; but
after having discovered certain of the objects of
its research, it sees again others which have still
to be sought out. And even if it should suc-
ceed in mastering these, it will see again many
others succeeding them which must form the
subject of investigation. And on this account,
therefore, Solomon, the wisest of men, behold-
ing by his wisdom the nature of things, says, " I
said, I will become wise ; and wisdom herself
was made far from me, far further than it was ;
and a profound depth, who shall find ? " ^ Isaiah
also, knowing that the beginnings of things could
not be discovered by a mortal nature, and not
even by those natures which, although more
divine than human, were nevertheless themselves
created or formed ; knowing then, that by none
of these could either the beginning or the end
be discovered, says, "Tell the former things
which have been, and we know that ye are
gods ; or announce what are the last things, and
then we shall see that ye are gods." ^ For my
Hebrew teacher also used thus to teach, that as
the beginning or end of all things could be


* Omnis gloria regis intrinsecus est. Heb., Sept., and Vulgate
all read, " daughter of the king." Probably the omission of " filise "
in the text may be due to an error of the copyists. [Cf. Ps. xlv. 13.]

^ Rom. xi. 33. ,

8 [Eccles. vii. 23, 24.] The Septuagint reads: E.n-a, 2oi<)i(r9T)<ro-
Moi • (cai auTT) i\i.a.Kfi\iv«T\ aff" e/Ltou, /xaKpav iinio b V. ««' ^0.6x1
/SoSos, Ti> €up>)(Tei avTo ; the Vulgate translates this literally.

9 Cf. Isa. xli. 23, 23.


11^


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


comprehended by no one, save only our Lord
Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit, so under the
form of a vision Isaiah spake of two seraphim
alone, who with two wings cover the countenance
of God, and with two His feet, and with two
do fly, calling to each other alternately, and say-
ing, " Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Saba-
oth ; the whole earth is full of Thy glory." '
That the seraphim alone have both their wings
over the face of God, and over His feet, we ven-
ture to declare as meaning that neither the
hosts of holy angels, nor the "holy seats," nor
the " dominions," nor the " principalities," nor the
"powers," can fully understand the beginning
of all things, and the limits of the universe.
But we are to understand that those " saints "
whom the Spirit has enrolled, and the " virtues,"
approach very closely to those very beginnings,
and attain to a height which the others cannot
reach ; and yet whatever it be that these " vir-
tues " have learned through revelation from the
Son of God and from the Holy Spirit — and
they will certainly be able to learn very much,
and those of higher rank much more than those
of a lower — nevertheless it is impossible for
them to comprehend all things, according to the
statement, " The most part of the works of God
are hid." ^ And therefore also it is to be desired
that every one, according to his strength, should
ever stretch out to those things that are before,
" forgetting the things that are behind," both to
better works and to a clearer apprehension and
understanding, through Jesus Christ our Saviour,
to whom be glory for ever !

27. Let every one, then, who cares for truth,
be little concerned about words and language,
seeing that in every nation there prevails a dif-
ferent usage of speech ; but let him rather direct
his attention to the meaning conveyed by the
words, than to the nature of the words that con-
vey the meaning, especially in matters of such
importance and difficulty : as, e.g., when it is
an object of investigation whether there is any
"substance" in which neither colour, nor form,
nor touch, nor magnitude is to be understood as
existing visible to the mind alone, which any one
names as he pleases ; for the Greeks call such
drrwyuaTov, i.e., " incorporeal," while holy Scrip-
ture declares it to be " invisible," for Paul calls
Christ the " image of the invisible God," and
says again, that by Christ were created all things
"visible and invisible." And by this it is de-
clared that there are, among created things, cer-
tain "substances" that are, according to their
peculiar nature, invisible. But although these
are not themselves " corporeal," they neverthe-
less make use of bodies, while they are them-


selves better than any bodily substances. But
that "substance" of the Trinity which is the
beginning and cause of all things, " from which
are all things, and through which are all things,
and in which are all things," cannot be believed
to be either a body or in a body, but is altogether
incorporeal. And now let it suffice to have
spoken briefly on these points (although in a
digression, caused by the nature of the subject),
in order to show that there are certain things,
the meaning of which cannot be unfolded at all
by any words of human language, but which are
made known more through simple apprehension
than by any properties of words. And under
this rule must be brought also the understanding
of the sacred Scripture, in order that its state-
ments may be judged not according to the worth-
lessness of the letter, but according to the divinity
of the Holy Spirit, by whose inspiration they
were caused to be written.

SUMMARY (of DOCTRINE) REGARDING THE FATHER,
THE SON, AND THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE OTHER
TOPICS DISCUSSED IN THE PRECEDING PAGES.

28. It is now time, after the rapid considera-
tion which to the best of our ability we have
given to the topics discussed, to recapitulate, by
way of summing up what we have said in dif-
ferent places, the individual points, and first of
all to restate our conclusions regarding the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

Seeing God the Father is invisible and in-
separable from the Son, the Son is not generated
from Him by " prolation," as some suppose.
For if the Son be a "prolation" of the Father
(the term "prolation" being used to signify such
a generation as that of animals or men usually
is), then, of necessity, both He who "prolated"
and He who ivas "prolated" are corporeal. For
we do not say, as the heretics suppose, that some
part of the substance of God was converted into
the Son, or that the Son was procreated by the
Father out of things non-existent,^ i.e., beyond
His own substance, so that there once was a
time when He did not exist ; but, putting away
all corporeal conceptions, we say that the Word
and Wisdom was begotten out of the invisible
and incorporeal without any corporeal feeling, as
if it were an act of the will proceeding from
the understanding. Nor, seeing He is called the
Son of (His) love, will it appear absurd if in this
way He be called the Son of (His) will. Nay,
John also indicates that " God is Light," ■♦ and
Paul also declares that the Son is the splendour
of everlasting light. 5 As light, accordingly, could
never exist without splendour, so neither can the


Isa. vi. 3.
Cf. Ecclus.


3 Ex nullis substantibus.

4 I John i. 5.

5 Cf. Heb. I. 3.


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


377


Son be understood to ^ist without the Father ;
for He is called the " express image of His per-
son," ' and the Word and Wisdom. How, then,
can it be asserted that there once was a time
when He was not the Son ? For that is nothing
else than to say that there was once a time
when He was not the Truth, nor the Wisdom,
nor the Life, although in all these He is judged
to be the. perfect essence of God the Father ;
for these things cannot be severed from Him,
or even be separated from His essence. And
although these qualities are said to be many in
understanding,^ yet in their nature and essence
they are one, and in them is the fulness of di-
vinity. Now this expression which we employ
— " that there never was a time when He did
not exist " — is to be understood with an allow-
ance. For these very words " when " or " never "
have a meaning that relates to time, whereas the
statements made regarding Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit are to be understood as transcend-
ing all time, all ages, and all eternity. For it is
the Trinity alone which exceeds the comprehen-
sion not only of temporal but even of eternal
intelligence ; while other things which are not
included in it^ are to be measured by times and
I ages. This Son of God, then, in respect of the
I Word being God, which was in the beginning
with God, no one will logically suppose to be
contained in any place ; nor yet in respect
of His being "Wisdom," or "Truth," or the
"Life," or "Righteousness," or "Sanctification,"
or " Redemption : " for all these properties do
not require space to be able to act or to operate,
but each one of them is to be understood as
meaning those individuals who participate in His
virtue and working.

29. Now, if any one were to say that, through

those who are partakers of the " Word " of God,

or of His "Wisdom," or His "Truth," or His

" Life," the Word and Wisdom itself appeared

to be contained in a place, we should have to

say to him in answer, that there is no doubt that

I Christ, in respect of being the "Word " or " Wis-

I dom," or all other things, was in Paul, and that

j he therefore said, " Do you seek a proof of Christ

I speaking in me?"'* and again, "I live, yet not

i I, but Christ liveth in me." 5 Seeing, then. He

I was in Paul, who will doubt that He was in a

I similar manner in Peter and in John, and in each

one of the saints ; and not only in those who are

I upon the earth, but in those also who are in

1 heaven ? For it is absurd to say that Christ was

I in Peter and in Paul, but not in Michael the

j archangel, nor in Gabriel. And from this it is

I distinctly shown that the divinity of the Son of


' Cf. Heb. i. 3.

* Quae quidem quamvis intellectu multa esse dicantur.
3 Quae sunt extra Trinitatera.

♦ Cf. 2 Cor. xiii. 3.
S Gal. ii. 20.


God was not shut up in some place ; otherwise
it would have been in it only, and not in another.
But since, in conformity with the majesty of its,
incorporeal nature, it is confined to no place ;
so, again, it cannot be understood to be wanting
in any. But this is understood to be the sole
difference, that although He is in different indi-
viduals as we have said — as Peter, or Paul, or
Michael, or Gabriel — He is not in a similar way
in all beings whatever. For He is more fully
and clearly, and, so to speak, more openly in
archangels than in other holy men.*^ And this
is evident from the statement, that when all who
are saints have arrived at the summit of perfec-
tion, they are said to be made like, or equal to,
the angels, agreeably to the declaration in the
Gospels.7 Whence it is clear that Christ is in
each individual in as great a degree as the
amount of his deserts allows.*^

30. Having, then, briefly restated these pomts
regarding the nature of the Trinity, it follows
that we notice shortly this statement also, that
" by the Son " are said to be created " all things
that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible
and invisible, whether they be thrones, or do-
minions, or principalities, or powers : all things
were created by Him, and for Him ; and He is
before all, and all things consist by Him, who is
the Head." 9 Li conformity with which John also
in his Gospel says : " All things were created
by Him ; and without Him was not anything
made." '° And David, intimating that the mys-
tery of the entire Trinity was (concerned) in
the creation of all things, says : " By the Word
of the Lord were the heavens made ; and all
the host of them by the Spirit of His mouth." "

After these points we shall appropriately re-
mind (the reader) of the bodily advent and
incarnation of the only-begotten Son of God,
with respect to whom we are not to suppose
that all the majesty of His divinity is confined
within the limits of His slender body, so that all
the "word" of God, and His "wisdom," and
"essential truth," and "life," was either rent
asunder from the Father, or restrained and con-
fined within the narrowness of His bodily per-
son, and is not to be considered to have operated
anywhere besides ; but the cautious acknowledg-
ment of a religious man ought to be between
the two, so that it ought neither to be believed
that anything of divinity was wanting in Christ,
nor that any separation at all was made from
the essence of the Father, which is everywhere.
For some such meaning seems to be indicated


6 Quam in aliis Sanctis viris. " Aliis" is found in the MSS., but
is wanting in many editions.

7 Cf. Matt. xxii. 30 and Luke xx. 36.

8 Unde constat ni singulis quibusque tantum eflici Christiun,
quantum ratio indulserit meritorum.

9 Cf. Col. i. 16-18.
'° John i. 3.

" Ps. xxxiii. 6.


2>7^


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


by John the Baptist, when he said to the multi-
tude in the bodily absence of Jesus, "There
standeth one among you whom ye know not :
He it is who cometh after me, the latchet of
whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose." ' For
it certainly could not be said of Him, who was
absent, so far as His bodily presence is con-
cerned, that He was standing in the midst of
those among whom the Son of God was not
bodily present.

3 1 . Let no one, however, suppose that by this
we aiifirm that some portion of the divinity of
the Son of God was in Christ, and that the re-
maining portion was elsewhere or everywhere,
which may be the opinion of those who are ig-
norant of the nature of an incorporeal and invis-
ible essence. For it is impossible to speak of
the parts of an incorporeal being, or to make
any division of them ; but He is in all things,
and through all things, and above all things, in
the manner in which we have spoken above, i.e.,
in the manner in which He is understood to be
either "wisdom," or the "word," or the "life,"
or the " truth," by which method of understand-
ing all confinement of a local kind is undoubt-
edly excluded. The Son of God, then, desiring
for the salvation of the human race to appear
unto men, and to sojourn among them, assumed
not only a human body, as some suppose, but
also a soul resembling our souls indeed in na-
ture, but in will and power ^ resembling Him-
self, and such as might unfailingly accomplish
all the desires and arrangements of the " word "
and " wisdom." Now, that He had a soul,^ is
most clearly shown by the Saviour in the Gos-
pels, when He said, " No man taketh my Hfe
from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have
power to lay down my life, and I have power to
take it again." ■♦ And again, " My soul is sor-
rowful even unto death." 5 And again, " Now
is my soul troubled." ^ For the " Word " of God
is not to be understood to be a " sorrowful and
troubled " soul, because with the authority of
divinity He says, " I have power to lay down
my life." Nor yet do we assert that the Son
of God was in that soul as he was in the soul of
Paul or Peter and the other saints, in whom
Christ is believed to speak as He does in Paul.
But regarding all these we are to hold, as Scrip-
ture declares, " No one is clean from filthiness,
not even if his life lasted but a single day." 7 But
this soul which was in Jesus, before it knew the
evil, selected the good ; and because He loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity, therefore God


' Cf. John i 26, 27.

^ Proposito vero et virtute similem sibi.

3 Animam.

* John X. 18.

5 Matt. xxvi. 38.

' John xii. 27.

7 Cf. Job XV. 14.


" anointed Him with the oil of gladness above
His fellows."^ He is anointed, then, with the
oil of gladness when He is united to the " word "
of God in a stainless union, and by this means
alone of all souls was incapable of sin, because
it was capable of (receiving) well and fully the
Son of God ; and therefore also it is one with
Him, and is named by His titles, and is called
Jesus Christ, by whom all things are said to be
made. Of which soul, seeing it had received
into itself the whole wisdom of God, and the
truth, and the life, I think that the apostle also
said this : " Our life is hidden with Christ in
God ; but when Christ, who is our life, shall ap-
pear, then shall we also appear with him in
glory." 9 For what other Christ can be here un-
derstood, who is said to be hidden in God, and
who is afterwards to appear, except Him who is
related to have been anointed with the oil of
gladness, i.e., to have been filled with God es-
sentially,'° in whom he is now said to be hidden?
For on this account is Christ proposed as an
example to all believers, because as He always,
even before he knew evil at all, selected the
good, and loved righteousness, and hated in-
iquity, and therefore God anointed Him with
the oil of gladness ; so also ought each one,
after a lapse or sin, to cleanse himself from his
stains, making Him his example, and, taking
Him as the guide of his journey, enter upon the
steep way of virtue, that so perchance by this
means, as far as possible we may, by imitating
Him, be made partakers of the divine nature,
according to the words of Scripture : " He that
saith that he. believeth ill Christ, ought so to
walk, as He also walked." "

This " word," then, and this " wisdom," by the
imitation of which we are said to be either wise
or rational (beings), becomes "all things to all
men, that it may gain all ; " and because it is
made weak, it is therefore said of it, " Thdtigh
He was crucified through weakness, yet He
liveth by the power of God." '^ Finally, to the
Corinthians who were weak, Paul declares that
he " knew nothing, save Jesus Christ, and Him
crucified." '^

32. Some, indeed, would have the following
language of the apostle applied to the soul itself,
as soon as it had assumed flesh from Mary,"* viz.,
" Who, being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, but divested Him-
self (of His glory), '5 taking upon Himself the
form of a servant ; " '^ since He undoubtedly re-


8 Ps. xlv. 7.

9 Cf. Col. iii. 3, 4.
'° Substantialiter.
" Cf I John ii. 6.
•2 2 Cor. xiii. 4.

'3 I Cor. ii. 2.

-■' De Maria corpus assumsit.

'S Semet ipsum exinanivit.

16 Phil. ii. 6, 7.


CH.vr. T.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


379


stored it to the form of God by means of better
examples and training, and recalled it to that
fulness of which He had divested Himself.

As now by participation in the Son of God
one is adopted as a son/ and by participating in
that wisdom which is in God is rendered wise,
so also by participation in the Holy Spirit is a
man rendered holy and spiritual. For it is one
and the same thing to have a share in the Holy
Spirit, which is (the Spirit) of the Father and
the Son, since the nature of the Trinity is one
and incorporeal. And what we have said regard-
ing the participation of the soul is to be under-
stood of angels and heavenly powers in a similar
way as of souls, because every rational creature
needs a participation in the Trinity.

Respecting also the plan of this visible world
— seeing one of the most important questions
usually raised is as to the manner of its exist-
ence — we have spoken to the best of our ability
in the preceding pages, for the sake of those who
are accustomed to seek the grounds of their be-
lief in our religion, and also for those who stir
against us heretical questions, and who are ac-
customed to bandy about ^ the word "matter,"
which they have not yet been able to under-
stand ; of which subject I now deem it neces-
sary briefly to remind (the reader).

33. And, in the first place, it is to be noted
that we have nowhere found in the canonical
Scriptures,^ up to the present time, the word
" matter " used for that substance which is said
to underlie bodies'" For in the expression of
Isaiah, " And he shall devour uA?/," i.e., matter,
" Hke hay," ■♦ when speaking of those who were
appointed to undergo their punishments, the
word "matter" was used instead of "sins."
And if this word " matter " should happen to
occur in any other passage, it will never be
found, in my opinion, to have the signification
of which we are now in quest, unless perhaps in
the book which is called the Wisdom of Solomon,
a work which is certainly not esteemed authori-
tative by all. 5 In that book, however, we find
written as follows : " For thy almighty hand, that
made the world out of shapeless matter, wanted
not means to send among them a multitude of
bears and fierce lions." ^ Very many, indeed,
are of opinion that the matter of which things
are made is itself signified in the language used
by Moses in the beginning of Genesis : " In the
beginning God made heaven and earth ; and the
earth was invisible, and not arranged : "? for by


' In filium adoptatur.
2 Ventilare.

* In Scripturis canonicis.

* Isa. X. 17, Kai ij)dyeTai ujirei xdpTOi' riji' iiArjt-, Sept. The
Vulgate follows the Masoretic text.

5 rElucidationVIl.

6 Wisd. xi. 17.

' Gen. i. 2, " invisibilis et incomposita ; " " inanis et vacua,"
Vulg.


the words " invisible and not arranged " Moses
would seem to mean nothing else than shapeless
matter. But if this be truly matter, it is clear
then that the original elements of bodies'* are
not incapable of change. For those who posited
"atoms" — either those particles which are in-
capable of subdivision, or those which are sub-
divided into equal parts — or any one element,
as the principles of bodily things, could not posit
the word " matter " in the proper sense of the
term among the first principles of things. For
if they will have it that matter underlies every
body — a substance convertible or changeable,
or divisible in all its parts — they will not, as is
proper, assert that it exists without qualities.
And with them we agree, for we altogether deny
that matter ought to be spoken of as " unbe-
gotten " or " uncreated," agreeably to our for-
mer statements, when we pointed out that from
water, and earth, and air or heat, different kinds
of fruits were produced by different kinds of
trees ; or when we showed that fire, and air, and
water, and earth were alternately converted into
each other, and that one element was resolved
into another by a kind of mutual consanguinity ;
and also when we proved that from the food
either of men or animals the substance of the
flesh was derived, or that the moisture of the
natural seed was converted into solid flesh and
bones ; — all which go to prove that the sub-
stance of the body is changeable, and may pass
from one quality into all others.

34. Nevertheless we must not forget that a
substance never exists without a quality, and that
it is by an act of the understanding alone that
this (substance) which underlies bodies, and
which is capable of quality, is discovered to be
matter. Some indeed, in their desire to investi-
gate these subjects more profoundly, have ven-
tured to assert that bodily nature ^ is nothing
else than qualities. For if hardness and softness,
heat and cold, moisture and aridity, be qualities ;
and if, when these or other (qualities) of this
sort be cut away, nothing else is understood to
remain, then all things will appear to be " quali-
ties." And therefore also those persons who
make these assertions have endeavoured to
maintain, that since all who say that matter was
uncreated will admit that qualities were created
by God, it may be in this way shown that even
according to them matter was not uncreated ;
since qualities constitute everything, and these
are declared by all without contradiction to have
been made by God. Those, again, who would
make out that qualities are superimposed from
without upon a certain underlying matter, make
use of illustrations of this kind : e.g., Paul un-


8 Initia corporum.

9 Naturam corpoream.


38o


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


[Book IV.


doubtedly is either silent, or speaks, or watches,
or sleeps, or maintains a certain attitude of body ;
for he is either in a sitting, or standing, or re-
cumbent position. For these are " accidents "
belonging to men, without which they are almost
never found. And yet our conception of man
does not lay down any of these things as a defini-
tion of him ; but we so understand and regard
him by their means, that we do not at all take
into account the reason of his (particular) con-
dition either in watching, or in sleeping, or in
speaking, or in keeping silence, or in any other
action that must necessarily happen to men.'
If any one, then, can regard Paul as being with-
out all these things which are capable of hap-
pening, he will in the same way also be able to
understand this underlying (substance) without
qualities. When, then, our mind puts away all
qualities from its conception, and gazes, so to
speak, upon the underlying element alone, and
keeps its attention closely upon it, without any
reference to the softness or hardness, or heat or
cold, or humidity or aridity of the substance,
then by means of this somewhat simulated pro-
cess of thought - it will appear to behold matter
clear from qualities of every kind.

35. But some one will perhaps inquire whether
we can obtain out of Scripture any grounds for
such an understanding of the subject. Now I
think some such view is indicated in the Psalms,
when the prophet says, " Mine eyes have seen
thine imperfection ; " 3 by which the mind of
the prophet, examining with keener glance the
first principles of things, and separating in thought
and imagination only between matter and its
qualities, perceived the imperfection of God,
which certainly is understood to be perfected by
the addition of qualities. Enoch also, in his
book, speaks as follows : " I have walked on
even to imperfection ;"■* which expression I con-
sider may be understood in a similar manner,
viz., that the mind of the prophet proceeded in
its scrutiny and investigation of all visible things,
until it arrived at that first beginning in which
it beheld imperfect matter (existing) without
"qualities." For it is written in the same book
of Enoch, " I beheld the whole of matter ; " 5
which is so understood as if he had said : " I


' Nee tamen sensus noster manifeste de eo aliquid horum definit,
sed ita eum per hsec intelligimus, vel consideramus, ut non omnino
rationem status ejus comprehendamus, vel in eo, quod vigilat, vel in
eo, quod dormit, aut in quo loquitur, vel tacet, et si qua alia sunt,
quae accidere necesse est hominibus.

2 Tunc simulata quodammodo cogitatione.

3 Ps. cxxxix. 16, TO a/caTepyao-Toc fxov eiSocrav oi ix^dakiioi (rov,
Sept.; " Imperfectum meum viderunt oculi tut," Vulg. (same as in
the text.) Tyj^ 1J<1 'P/J — "Thine eyes did see my substance,
yet being imperfect," Auth. Vers. Cf. Gesenius and Fiirst, s.v.,

■* Ambulavi usque ad imperfectum: cf. Book of Enoch, chap. xvii.

S Universas materias perspexi; cf. Book of Enoch, chap. xvii.
[On this apocryphal book, see the learned remarks of Dr. Pusey in
liis reply to Canon Farrar, U7iai is of Faith as to Everlasting
Punishment ; pp. 52-59. London, 1881.]


have clearly seen all the divisions of matter
which are broken up from one into each individ-
ual species either of men, or animals, or of the
sky, or of the sun, or of all other things in this
world." After these points, now, we proved to
the best of our power in the preceding pages
that all things which exist were made by God,
and that there was nothing which was not made,
save the nature of the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit ; and that God, who is by nature
good, desiring to have those upon whom He
might confer benefits, and who might rejoice in
receiving His benefits, created creatures worthy
(of this), i.e., who were capable of receiving Him
in a worthy manner, who, He says, are also be-
gotten by Him as his sons. He made all things,
moreover, by number and measure. For there
is nothing before God without either limit or
measure. For by His power He comprehends
all things, and He Himself is comprehended by
the strength of no created thing, because that
nature is known to itself alone. For the Father
alone knoweth the Son, and the Son alone know-
eth the Father, and the Holy Spirit alone search-
eth even the deep things of God. All created
things, therefore, i.e., either the number of
rational beings or the measure of bodily matter,
are distinguished by Him as being within a cer-
tain number or measurement ; since, as it was
necessary for an intellectual nature to employ
bodies, and this nature is shown to be changeable
and convertible by the very condition of its being
created (for what did not exist, but began to
exist, is said by this very circumstance to be of
mutable nature), it can have neither goodness
nor wickedness as an essential, but only as an
accidental attribute of its being. Seeing, then, as
we have said, that rational nature was mutable
and changeable, so tliat it made use of a different
bodily covering of this or that sort of quality,
according to its merits, it was necessary, as God
foreknew there would be diversities in souls or
spiritual powers, that He should create also a
bodily nature the qualities of which might be
changed at the will of the Creator into all that
was required. And this bodily nature must last
as long as those things which require it is a cov-
ering : for there will be always rational natures
which need a bodily covering; and there will
therefore always be a bodily nature whose cov-
erings must necessarily be used by rational crea-
tures, unless some one be able to demonstrate
by arguments that a rational nature can live
without a body. But how difficult — nay, how
almost impossible — this is for our understand-
ing, we have shown in the preceding pages, in
our discussion of the individual topics.

36. It will not, I consider, be opposed to the
nature of our undertaking, if we restate with all ,.
possible brevity our opinions on the immortality |


Chap. I.]


ORIGEN DE PRINCIPIIS.


381


of rational natures. Every one who participates
in anything, is unquestionably of one essence
and nature with him who is partaker of the same
thing. For example, as all eyes participate in
the light, so accordingly all eyes which partake
of the light are of one nature ; but although
every eye partakes of the light, yet, inasmuch as
one sees more clearly, and another more ob- j
scurely, every eye does not equally share in the
light. And again, all hearing receives voice or
sound, and therefore all hearing is of one na-
ture ; but each one hears more rapidly or more
slowly, according as the quality of his hearing
is clear and sound. Let us pass now from these
sensuous illustrations to the consideration of in-
tellectual things. Every mind which partakes
of intellectual light ought undoubtedly to be of
one nature with every mind which partakes in
a similar manner of intellectual light. If the
heavenly virtues, then, partake of intellectual
light, i.e., of divine nature, because they partici-
pate in wisdom and holiness, and if human souls
have partaken of the same light and wisdom,
and thus are mutually of one nature and of one
essence, — then, since the heavenly virtues are
incorruptible and immortal, the essence of the
human soul will also be immortal and incor-
ruptible. And not only so, but because the na-
ture of Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, of
whose intellectual light alone all created things
have a share, is incorruptible and eternal, it is
altogether consistent and necessary that every
substance which partakes of that eternal nature
should last for ever, and be incorruptible and
eternal, so that the eternity of divine goodness
may be understood also in this respect, that they
who obtain its benefits are also eternal. But as,
in the instances referred to, a diversity in the
participation of the light was observed, when
the glance of the beholder was .described as
being duller or more acute, so also a diversity is
to be noted in the participation of Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, varying with the degree of zeal
or capacity of mind. If such were not the
case,' we have to consider whether it would not
seem to be an act of impiety to say that the
mind which is capable of (receiving) God
should admit of a destruction of its essence ; ^
as if the very fact that it is able to feel and un-
derstand God could not suffice for its perpetual
existence, especially since, if even through neg-
lect the mind fall away from a pure and complete
reception of God, it nevertheless contains within
it certain seeds of restoration and renewal to a
better understanding, seeing the "inner," which
is also called the " rational " man, is renewed
after " the image and likeness of God, who cre-


Alioquin.
Subsiantialem interitum.


ated him." And therefore the prophet says,
" All the ends of the earth shall remember, and
turn unto the Lord ; and all the kindreds of the
nations shall worship before Thee." ^

37. If any one, indeed, venture to ascribe
essential corruption to Him who was made after
the image and likeness of God, then, in my
opinion, this impious charge extends even to the
Son of God Himself, for He is called in Scrip-
ture the image of God.^ Or he who holds this
opinion would certainly impugn the authority of
Scripture, which says that man was made in the
image of God ; and in him are manifestly to be
discovered traces of the divine image, not by
any appearance of the bodily frame, which is
corruptible, but by mental wisdom, by justice,
moderation, virtue, wisdom, discipline ; in fine,
by the whole band of virtues, which are innate
in the essence of God, and which may enter into
man by diligence and imitation of God ; as the
Lord also intimates in the Gospel, when He
says, " Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father
also is merciful ; " s and, " Be ye perfect, even as
your Father also is perfect." ^ From which it
is clearly shown that all these virtues are per-
petually in God, and that they can never ap-
proach to or depart from Him, whereas by men
they are acquired only slowly, and one by one.
And hence also by these means they seem to
have a kind of relationship with God ; and since
God knows all things, and none of things intel-
lectual in themselves can elude His notice ^ (for
God the Father alone, and His only-begotten
Son, and the Holy Spirit, not only possess a
knowledge of those things which they have cre-
ated, but also of themselves), a rational under-
standing also, advancing from small things to
great, and from things visible to things invisible,
may attain to a more perfect knowledge. For it
is placed in the body, and advances from sensi-
ble things themselves, which are corporeal, to
things that are intellectual. But lest our state-
ment that things intellectual are not cognisable
by the senses should appear unbecoming, we
shall employ the instance of Solomon, who says,
" You will find also a divine sense ; " ** by which
he shows that those things which are intellectual
are to be sought out not by means of a bodily
sense, but by a certain other which he calls " di-
vine." And with this sense must we look on
each of those rational beings which we have
enumerated above ; and with this sense are to
be understood those words which we speak, and
those statements to be weighed which we com-


3 Ps. xxii. 27.

4 Cf. Col. i. 15 and 2 Cor. iv. 4.

5 Luke vi. 36.

6 Matt. V. 48.

7 Nihil cum rerum intellectualium ex se lateat.

8 Cf. Prov. ii. 5, cTTiynoaii' ©eoO eupjjo-ei! (Sept.), Scientiam Dei

invenies (Vulg.). Xi'On D'hSn n>l^.


382 ELUCIDATIONS.


mit to writing. For the divine nature knows
even those thoughts which we revolve within us
in silence. And on those matters of which we


have spoken, or on the others which follow from
them, according to the rule above laid down,
are our opinions to be formed.


ELUCIDATIONS.


(Teaching of the Church, p. 240.)

It is noteworthy how frequently our author employs this expression in this immediate connec-
tion. Concerning the punishment of the wicked he asserts a " clearly defined teaching." He
shows what the Church's teaching " has laid down " touching demons and angels. Touching the
origin of the world, he again asserts the Church's teaching, and then concedes, that, over and
above what he maintains, there is "no clear statement regarding it," — i.e., the creation and its
antecedents. Elsewhere he speaks of " the faith of the Church," and all this as something
accepted by all Christians recognised as orthodox or Catholics.

Not to recur to the subject of the creeds ' known at this period in the East and West, this
frequent recognition of a system of theology, or something like it, starts some interesting inquiries.
We have space to state only some of them : —

1. Was Origen here speaking of the catechetical school of Alexandria, and assuming its
teaching to be that of the whole Church ?

2. If so, was not this recognition of the Alexandrian leadership the precursor of that terrible
shock which was given to Christendom by the rise of Arianism out of such a stronghold of
orthodoxy ?

3. Does not the power of Athanasius to stand "against the world" assure us that he was_
strong in the position that "the teaching of the Church," in Alexandria and elsewhere, was against.
Arius, whom he was able to defeat by prescription as well as by Scripture ?

4. Is it not clear that all this was asserted, held, and defined without help from the West, and
that the West merely responded Amen to what Alexandria had taught from the beginning?

5 . Is not the evidence overwhelming, that nothing but passive testimony was thus far heard
of in connection with the see of Rome ?

6. If the "teaching of the Church," then, was so far independent of that see that Christendom
neither waited for its voice, nor recognised it as of any exceptional importance in the definition
of the faith and the elimination of heresy, is it not evident that the entire fabric of the Middle-
Age polity in the West has its origin in times and manners widely differing from the Apostolic
Age and that of the Ante-Nicene Fathers?

IL

(Subjection, p. 343.)
The subordination of the Son, as held by all Nicene Christians, is defended by Bull ^ at great
length and with profound learning. It is my purpose elsewhere to quote his splendid tribute to
the substantial orthodoxy of Origen. Professor Shedd, in his work on Christian Doctrine,^ pro-
nounces the Nicene Creed " the received creed-statement among all Trinitarian Churches." I
assume that this note will be of interest to all theological minds. For an unsatisfactory and
meagre account of primitive creeds, see Bunsen, HippoL, iii. pp. 125-132.

' On which consult Dupin, and, for another view, Bunsen's Hippolytui. See also p. 383, infra.
* Vol. V. p. 134, and passim to 745; also vi. 368.
3 Vol. ii. p. 438.


ELUCIDATIONS. 383


III.

(Proceedeth from the Father, p. 344.)

The double procession is no part of the Creed of Christendom ; nor did it become fixed in the
West, till, by the influence of Charlemagne, the important but not immaculate Council of Frank-
fort (a.d. 794) completed the work of Toledo, and committed the whole West to its support.
The Anglican Church recites the Filioqiie liturgically, but explains its adhesion to this formula in
a manner satisfactory to the Easterns. It has no rightful place in the Creed, however ; and its
retention in the Nicene Symbol is a just offence, not only to the Greeks, but against the great
canon, Quod semper, etc.

Compare Pearson on the Creed,^ and these candid words : "Although the addition of words to
the formal Creed be tiot justifiable" etc. Consult the valuable work of Theophanes Procopowicz,
Bishop of Novgorod, which contains a history of the literature of the subject down to his times.^
It is a matter debated anew in our own age, in view of advances to the Greeks made by Dr.
Dollinger and the Old Catholics. Let me refer to a volume almost equally learned and ill-
digested,3 written by a clever author who was perverted to Romanism, and returned, after many
years, to the Church of England. It bears the marks of many unreal impressions received during
his " Babylonish captivity." I refer to a work of E. S. Foulkes.

IV.

(The faith of the Church, p. 347.)

Before the Nicene Council local creeds were in use, all agreeing substantially ; all scriptural,
but some more full than others. Of these the ancient Symbol of Jerusalem was chief, and this
forms the base of the Nicene Creed. It is here noteworthy that Origen speaks of " the faith " as
something settled and known : clearly, he did not intentionally transgress it. Bull says,'' " Grseci
Scriptores Ante-Nicgeni rov Kavova t^s TrtVrecos passim in scriptis suis commemorant." See the
Jerusalem Creed, on the same page ; and note, the Church of Jerusalem is called by the Second
(Ecumenical Council (a.d. 381), "the mother of all the Churches." So ignorant were the
Fathers of that date of any other "mother Church," that they address this very statement to the
clergy of Rome.s Compare Eusebius, book iv. cap. viii.

V.
(Endowed with freedom of will, p. 347.)

Elsewhere in this treatise our author defines the will as " able to resist external causes." The
profound work of Edwards needs no words of mine.^ As an example of logic the most acute, it
is the glory of eaily American literature. I read it eagerly during my college course, while under
the guidance of my instructor in philosophy, the amiable and profound Dr. Tappan (afterwards
president of the University of Michigan), who taught us to admire it, but not to regard it as
infallible. See his vigorous review of Edwards,^ in which he argues as a disciple of Coleridge and
of Plato.

On allied subjects, let me refer to Wiggers's Augustinismus, etc., translated by Professor
Emerson of Andover ; ^ also to Bledsoe's Theodicy,'^ heretofore cited. I venture to say, that,
among the thinkers of America, and as Christian philosophers, both Bledsoe and Tappan are less
known and honoured than they deserve to be.

' pp. 521-526. 2 Tractatus de Processione Spiritus Sancti, Gothse, a.d. 1772. 3 Christendom's Divisions, London, 1865.

* Vol. vi. p. 132, 133. 5 Theodoret. book v. cap. ix. * Ed. Converse, New York, 1829.

' A Review of Edwards's Inquiry, by Henry Philip Tappan, New York, 1839. ^ Ng^ York, 1840.

9 New York, 1854. See vol. ii. p. 522, this series.


384


ELUCIDATIONS.


VI.

(Not esteemed authoritative by all, p. 379.)

Not by Jerome, nor Rufinus, nor Chrysostom. Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, is also
shown by Lardner {Credib., v. 127) to have quoted "'the wisdom of Solomon" only as the say-
ings of a wise man ; not at all as Scripture. The Easterns are equally represented by John
Damascene (a.d. 730), who says of this book that it is one of those "excellent and useful"
books which are not reckoned with the hagiographa. But Methodius is an exception ; for he
quotes this book twice (says Lardner) as if it were Scripture, and certainly cites it not infre-
quently. Yet his testimony does not amount, perhaps, to more than an acceptance of the same
as only deutero-ca7ionical ; i.e., as one of the books read in the Church for instruction, but not
appealed to as establishing any doctrine otherwise unknown to the Church. We may examine
this subject when we come to Methodius, in vol. vi. of this series.


NOTE.

This is a convenient place for the following tables, compiled from Eusebius as far as .his
history goes; i.e. a.d. 305. See also Dr. Robinson's Researches.


1. James, the Lord's brother.

2. Simeon.

3. Justus.

4. Zacchasus.

5. Tobias.

6. Benjamin.

7. John.

8. Matthew.

9. Philip.

10. Seneca.

11. Justus.

12. Levi.

13. Ephres.


L THE SEE OF JERUSALEM.

14. Joseph.

15. Judah.

16. Marcus.

17. Cassian.

18. Publius.

19. Maximus.

20. Julian.

21. Caius.

22. Symmachus.

23. Caius IL

24. Julian II.

25. Capito.

26. Maximus II.


27. Antoninus.

28. Valens.

29. Dolichianus.

30. Narcissus.

31. Dius.

32. Germanio.

33. Gordius.

34. Narcissus II.

35. Alexander.

36. Mazabanes.

37. Hymenseus.

38. Zabdas.

39. Hermon, A.D. 300.


II. THE SEE OF ALEXANDRIA.


1. Annianus.

2. Avilius.

3. Cerdon.

4. Primus.

5. Justus.

6. Eumenes.


7. Marcus.

8. Celadion.

9. Aggripinus.

10. Julianus.

11. Demetrius.

12. Heraclas.


13. Dionysius.

14. Maximus.

15. Theonas.

16. Peter.

17. Achillas.

18. Alexander,' A.D. 326.


* Alexander, dying just after the Nicene Council, was succeeded by the great Athanasius.


A LETTER TO ORIGEN FROM AFRICANUS ABOUT
THE HISTORY OF SUSANNA.


Greeting, my lord and son, most worthy Ori-
gen, from Africanus.' In your sacred discussion
with Agnomon you referred to that prophecy of
Daniel which is related of his youth. This at
that time, as was meet, I accepted as genuine.
Now, however, I cannot understand how it es-
caped you that this part of the book is spurious.
For,, in sooth, this section, although apart from
this it is elegantly written, is plainly a more
modern forgery. There are many proofs of this.
When Susanna is condemned to die, the prophet
is seized by the Spirit, and cries out that the sen-
tence is unjust. Now, in the first place, it is always
in some other way that Daniel prophesies — by
visions, and dreams, and an angel appearing to
him, never by prophetic inspiration. Then,
after crying out in this extraordinary fashion, he
detects them in a way no less incredible, which
not even Philistion the play-writer would have
resorted to. For, not satisfied with rebuking
them through the Spirit, he placed them apart,
and asked them severally where they saw her
committing adultery. And when the one said,
"Under a holm-tree" {prinos), he answered
that the angel would saw him asunder {prise in) ;
and in a similar fashion menaced the other who
said, "Under a mastich-tree " {schinos), with
being rent asunder (schisthenai). Now, in
Greek, it happens that " holm-tree " and " saw
asunder," and "rend" and "mastich-tree"


' [See Routh's Reliquis, vol. ii. p. 115; also Euseb., i. 7, and
Socrates, ii. 35. He ranks with the great pupils of the Alexandrian
school, with which, however, he seems to have had only a slight per-
sonal relation. Concerning this Epistle to Origen, and the answer of
the latter, consult Routh's verv full annotations {ut supra, pp. 312-
328). Concerning Gregory Thaumaturgus, the greatest of Origen's
pupils, we shall know more when we come lo vol. vi. of this series.
He died circa 270].


sound alike ; but in Hebrew they are quite
distinct. But all the books of the Old Testa-
ment have been translated from Hebrew into
Greek.

2. Moreover, how is it that they who were
captives among the Chaldaeans, lost and won at
play,^ thrown out unburied on the streets, as was
prophesied of the former captivity, their sons
torn from them to be eunuchs, and their daugh-
ters to be concubines, as had been prophesied ;
how is it that such could pass sentence of death,
and that on the wife of their king Joakim, whom
the king of the Babylonians had made partner
of his throne ? Then if it was not this Joakim,
but some other from the common people, whence
had a captive such a mansion and spacious gar-
den? But a more fatal objection is, that this
section, along with the other two at the end of
it, is not contained in the Daniel received among
the Jews. And add that, among all the many
prophets who had been before, there is no one
who has quoted from another word for word.
For they had no need to go a-begging for words,
since their own were true ; but this one, in re-
buking one of those men, quotes the words of
the Lord : " The innocent and righteous shalt
thou not slay." From all this I infer that this
section is a later addition. Moreover, the style
is different. I have struck the blow ; do you
give the echo ; answer, and instruct me. Salute
all my masters. The learned all salute thee.
With all my heart I pray for your and your
circle's health.


* Nolte would change r[<irpa.ya.\ii>\i.ivo\. (or oo'TpaYaAoijaei'Ot, as
Wetsten. has it), which is a an-af eiprj^eVoK, into <rTpaYyaAu»nevoi or
eo-TpayYouAui/aeVot, " strangled." He compares Tob. ii. 3.


A LETTER FROM ORIGEN TO AFRICANUS.


Origen to Africanus, a beloved brother in
God the Father, through Jesus Christ, His holy
Child, greeting. Your letter, from which I learn
what you think of the Susanna in the Book of
Daniel, which is used in the Churches, although
apparently somewhat short, presents in its few
words many problems, each of which demands
no common treatment, but such as oversteps
the character of a letter, and reaches the limits
of a discourse.' And I, when I consider, as best
I can, the measure of my intellect, that I may
know myself, am aware that I am wanting in the
accuracy necessary to reply to your letter ; and
that the more, that the few days I have spent
in Nicomedia have been far from sufficient to
send you an answer to all your demands and
queries even after the fashion of the present
epistle. Wherefore pardon my little ability, and
the little time I had, and read this letter with all
indulgence, supplying anything I may omit.

2. You begin by saying, that when, in my dis-
cussion with our friend Bassus, I used the Scrip-
ture which contains the prophecy of Daniel when
yet a young man in the affair of Susanna, I did
this as if it had escaped me that this part of the
book was spurious. You say that you praise
this passage as elegantly written, but find fault
with it as a more modern composition, and a
forgery ; and you add that the forger has had
recourse to something which not even Phihstion
the play-writer would have used in his puns be-
tween prinos and prisein, schinos and schists,
which words as they sound in Greek can be used
in this way, but not in Hebrew. In answer to
this, I have to tell you what it behoves us to do
in the cases not only of the History of Susanna,
which is found in every Church of Christ in that
Greek copy which the Greeks use, but is not in
the Hebrew, or of the two other passages you
mention at the end of the book containing the
history of Bel and the Dragon, which likewise
are not in the Hebrew copy of Daniel ; but of
thousands of other passages also which I found


■ [See Dr. Pusey's Lectures on Daniel the Prophet, lect. vi.
1. 326, 327; also The Uncanonical and Apocryphal Scriptures,
jy Rev. R. W. Churton, B.D. (1884), pp. 389-404. S.]
386


in many places when with my little strength I
was collating the Hebrew copies with ours. For
in Daniel itself I found the word " bound " fol-
lowed in our versions by very many verses which
are not in the Hebrew at all, beginning (accord-
ing to one of the copies which circulate in the
Churches) thus : " Ananias, and Azarias, and
Misael prayed and sang unto God," down to
" O, all ye that worship the Lord, bless ye the
God of gods. Praise Him, and say that His
mercy endureth for ever and ever. And it came
to pass, when the king heard them singing, and
saw them that they were alive." Or, as in an-
other copy, from " And they walked in the midst
of the fire, praising God and blessing the Lord,"
down to " O, all ye that worship the Lord, bless
ye the God of gods. Praise Him, and say that
His mercy endureth to all generations." ^ But
in the Hebrew copies the words, " And these
three men, Sedrach, Misach, and Abednego fell
down bound into the midst of the fire," are im-
mediately followed by the verse, " Nabouchodo-
nosor the king was astonished, and rose up in
haste, and spake, and said unto his counsellors."
For so Aquila, following the Hebrew reading,
gives it, who has obtained the credit among the
Jews of having interpreted the Scriptures with
no ordinary care, and whose version is most
commonly used by those who do not know He-
brew, as the one which has been most successful.
Of the copies in my possession whose readings
I gave, one follows the Seventy, and the other
Theodotion ; and just as the History of Susanna
which you call a forgery is found in both, to-
gether with the passages at the end of Daniel,
so they give also these passages, amounting, to
make a rough guess, to more than two hundred
verses.

3. And in many other of the sacred books I
found sometimes more in our copies than in the
Hebrew, sometimes less. I shall adduce a few
examples, since it is impossible to give them all.
Of the Book of Esther neither the prayer of
Mardochaios nor that of Esther, both fitted to


'The Song of the Three Holy Children" (in the Apocrypha).


ORIGEN TO AFRICANUS.


387


edify the reader, is found in the Hebrew.
Neither are the letters ; ■ nor the one written
to Amman about the rooting up of the Jewish
nation, nor that of Mardochaios in the name of
Artaxerxes delivering the nation from death.
Then in Job, the words from " It is written, that
he shall rise again with those whom the Lord
raises," to the end, are not in the Hebrew, and
so not in Aquila's edition ; while they are found
in the Septuagint and in Theodotion's version,
agreeing with each other at least in sense. And
many other places I found in Job where our
copies have more than the Hebrew ones, some-
times a little more, and sometimes a great deal
more : a little more, as when to the words,
"Rising up in the morning, he offered burnt-
offerings for them according to their number,"
they add, " one heifer for the sin of their soul ;"
and to the words, " The angels of God came to
present themselves before God, and the devil
came with them," " from going to and fro in the
earth, and from walking up and down in it."
Again, after "The Lord gave, the Lord has
taken away," the Hebrew has not, " It was so,
as seemed good to the Lord." Then our copies
are very much fuller than the Hebrew, when
Job's wife speaks to him, from " How long wilt
thou hold out? And he said, Lo, I wait yet a
little while, looking for the hope of my salva-
tion," down to " that I may cease from my trou-
bles, and my sorrows which compass me." For
they have only these words of the woman, " But
say a word against God, and die."

4. Again, through the whole of Job there are
many passages in the Hebrew which are wanting
in our copies, generally four or five verses, but
sometimes, however, even fourteen, and nine-
teen, and sixteen. But why should I enumerate
all the instances I collected with so much labour,
to prove that the difference between our copies
and those of the Jews did not escape me ? In
Jeremiah I noticed many instances, and indeed
in that book I found much transposition and
variation in the readings of the prophecies.
Again, in Genesis, the words, " God saw that it
was good," when the firmament was made, are
not found in the Hebrew, and there is no small
dispute among them about this ; and other in-
stances are to be found in Genesis, which I
marked, for the sake of distinction, with the sign
the Greeks call an obelisk, as on the other hand
I marked with an asterisk those passages in our
copies which are not found in the Hebrew.
What needs there to speak of Exodus, where
there is such diversity in what is said about
the tabernacle and its court, and the ark, and the
garments of the high priest and the priests, that


' This should probably be corrected, with Pat. Jun., into, "Nor
are the letters, neither ;' etc.


sometimes the meaning even does not seem to
be akin? And, forsooth,. when we notice such
things, we are forthwith to reject as spurious the
copies in use in our Churches, and enjoin the
brotherhood to put away the sacred books cur-
rent among them, and to coax the Jews, and
persuade them to give us copies which shall be
untampered with, and free from forgery ! Are
we to suppose that that Providence which in the
sacred Scriptures has ministered to the edifica-
tion of all the Churches of Christ, had no thought'
for those bought with a price, for whom Christ
died ; ^ whom, although His Son, God who is
love spared not, but gave Him up for us all, that
with Him He might freely give us all things ? ^

5. In all these cases consider whether it would
not be well to remember the words, " Thou shalt
not remove the ancient landmarks which thy
fathers have set." ^ Nor do I say this because
I shun the labour of investigating the Jewish
Scriptures, and comparing them with ours, and
noticing their various readings. This, if it be
not arrogant to say it, I have already to a great
extent done to the best of my ability, labouring
hard to get at the meaning in all the editions
and various readings ; 5 while I paid particular
attention to the interpretation of the Seventy,
lest I might to be found to accredit any forgery
to the Churches which are under heaven, and
give an occasion to those who seek such a
starting-point for gratifying their desire to slan-
der the common brethren, and to bring some
accusation against those who shine forth in our
community. And I make it my endeavour not
to be ignorant of their various readings, lest in
my controversies with the Jews I should quote
to them what is not found in their copies, and
that I may make some use of what is found
there, even although it should not be in our
Scriptures. For if we are so prepared for them
in our discussions, they will not, as is their man-
ner, scornfully laugh at Gentile believers for their
ignorance of the true reading as they have them.
So far as to the History of Susanna not being
found in the Hebrew.

6. Let us now look at the things you find fault
with in the story itself. And here let us begin
with what would probably make any one averse
to receiving the history : I mean the play of


2 I Cor. yi. 2o; Rom. xiv. 15.

3 Rom. viii. 32.
* Prov. xxii. 28.

5 Origen's most important contribution to biblical literature was
his elaborate attempt to rectify the text of the Septuagint by collating
it with the Hebrew original and other Greek versions. On this he
spent twenty-eight years, during which he travelled through the East
collecting materials. TTie form in which he first issued the result of
his labours was that of the Tetrafija, which presented in four col-
umns the texts of the LXX., Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion.
He next issued the Hcxapla, in which the Hebrew text was given,
first in Hebrew and then in Greek letters. Of some books he cave
two additional Greek versions, whence the title OctaMa; and there
was even a seventh Greek version added for some books. Unhappily
this great work, which extended to nearly fifty volumes, w.is never
transcribed, and so perished \.K.itto, CycL).


388


ORIGEN TO AFRICANUS.


words between prinos and prists, schinos and
sc/iisis. You say that you can see how this can
be in Greek, but that in Hebrew the words are
altogether distinct. On this point, however, I
am still in doubt ; because, when I was consid-
ering this passage (for I myself saw this diffi-
culty) , I consulted not a few Jews about it, asking
them the Hebrew words for prinos and prisein,
and how they would translate schinos the tree,
and how schisis. And they said that they did
not know these Greek words pritios and schinos,
and asked me to show them the trees, that they
might see what they called them. And I at
once (for the truth's dear sake) put before them
pieces of the different trees. One of them then
said, that he could not with any certainty give
the Hebrew name of anything not mentioned in
Scripture, since, if one was at a loss, he was prone
to use the Syriac word instead of the Hebrew
one ; and he went on to say, that some words
the very wisest could not translate. " If, then,"
said he, " you can adduce a passage in any
Scripture where the schinos is mentioned, or the
prinos, you will find there the words you seek,
together with the words which have the same
sound ; but if it is nowhere mentioned, we also
do not know it." This, then, being what the
Hebrews said to whom I had recourse, and who
were acquainted with the history, I am cautious
of affirming whether or not there is any corre-
spondence to this play of words in the Hebrew.
Your reason for afifirming that there is not, you
yourself probably know.

7. Moreover, I remember hearing from a
learned Hebrew, said among themselves to be
the son of a wise man, and to have been spe-
cially trained to succeed his father, with whom I
had intercourse on many subjects, the names of
these elders, just as if he did not reject the His-
tory of Susanna, as they occur in Jeremias as
follows : " The Lord make thee like Zedekias
and Achiab, whom the king of Babylon roasted
in the fire, for the iniquity they did in Israel." '
How, then, could the one be sawn asunder by
an angel, and the other rent in pieces? The
answer is, that these things were prophesied not
of this world, but of the judgment of God, after
the departure from this world. For as the lord
of that wicked servant who says, " My lord de-
layeth his coming," and so gives himself up to
drunkenness, eating and drinking with drunkards,
and smiting his fellow-servants, shall at his com-
ing " cut him asunder, and appoint him his por-
tion with the unbelievers," ^ even so the angels
appointed to punish will accomplish these things
(just as they will cut asunder the wicked steward
of that passage) on these men, who were called
indeed elders, but who administered their stew-


' Jer. xxix. 22, 23.
^ Luke xii. 45, 46.


ardship wickedly. One will saw asunder him
who was waxen old in wicked days, who had
pronounced false judgment, condemning the
innocent, and letting the guilty go free ; ^ and
another will rend in pieces him of the seed of
Chanaan, and not of Judah, whom beauty had
deceived, and whose heart lust had perverted.-*

8. And I knew another Hebrew, who told
about these elders such traditions as the follow-
ing : that they pretended to the Jews in cap-
tivity, who were hoping by the coming of Christ
to be freed from the yoke of their enemies, that
they could explain clearly the things concerning
Christ, . , . and that they so deceived the wives
of their countrymen.s Wherefore it is that the
prophet Daniel calls the one "waxen old in
wicked days," and says to the other, "Thus have
ye dealt with the children of Israel ; but the
daughters of Juda would not abide your wicked-
ness."

9. But probably to this you will say. Why then
is the " History" not in their Daniel, if, as you
say, their wise men hand down by tradition such
stories ? The answer is, that they hid from the
knowledge of the people as many of the passages
which contained any scandal against the elders,
rulers, and judges, as they could, some of which
have been preserved in uncanonical writings
(Apocrypha). As an example, take the story
told about Esaias, and guaranteed by the Epistle
to the Hebrews, which is found in none of their
public books. For the author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, in speaking of the prophets, and
what they suffered, says, "They were stoned,
they were sawn asunder, they were slain with the
sword." ^ To whom, I ask, does the " sawn
asunder" refer (for by an old idiom, not peculiar
to Hebrew, but found also in Greek, this is said
in the plural, although it refers to but one per-
son) ? Now we know very well that tradition
says that Esaias the prophet was sawn asunder ;
and this is found in some apocryphal work, which
probably the Jews have purposely tampered with,
introducing some phrases manifestly incorrect,
that discredit might be thrown on the whole.

However, some one hard pressed by this argu-
ment may have recourse to the opinion of those
who reject this Epistle as not being Paul's ;
against whom I must at some other time use
other arguments to prove that it is Paul's. ? At
present I shall adduce from the Gospel what
Jesus Christ testifies concerning the prophets,
together with a story which He refers to, but


3 Susanna 52, 53.
■♦ Susanna 56.

5 Et utrumque sigillatim in quamcunque mulierem incidebat, et
cui vitium afferre cupiebat, ei secreto affirmasse sibi a Deo datum e
suo semine progignere Christum. Hinc spe gignendi Christum de-
cepta mulier, sui copiam decipienti faciebat, et sic civium uxores
stuprabant seniores Achiab et Sedekias.

6 Heb. xi. 37.

7 [See note supra, p. 239. S.]


ORIGEN TO AFRICANUS.


389


which is not found in the Old Testament, since
in it also there is a scandal against unjust judges
in Israel. The words of our Saviour run thus :
" Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypo-
crites ! because ye build the tombs of the proph-'
ets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous,
and say. If we had been in the days of our fathers,
we would not have been partakers with them in
the blood of the prophets. Wherefore be ye
witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the chil-
dren of them which killed the prophets. Fill ye
up then the measure of your fathers. Ye ser-
pents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape
the damnation of Gehenna ? Wherefore, behold,
I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and
scribes ; and some of them ye shall kill and cru-
cify ; and some of them shall ye scourge in your
synagogues, and persecute them from city to
city : that upon you may come all the righteous
blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of
righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, son
of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple
and the altar. Verily I say unto you, All these
things shall come upon this generation." And
what follows is of the same tenor : " O Jerusa-
lem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets,
and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thy children to-
gether, even as a hen gathereth her chickens
under her wings, and ye would not ! Behold,
your house is left unto you desolate." '

Let us see now if in these cases we are not
forced to the conclusion, that while the Saviour
gives a true account of them, none of the Scrip-
tures which could prove what He tells are to be
found. For they who build the tombs of the
prophets and garnish the sepulchres of the right-
eous, condemning the crimes their fathers com-
mitted against the righteous and the prophets,
say, " If we had been in the days of our fathers,
we would not have been partakers with them in
the blood of the prophets." ^ In the blood of
what prophets, can any one tell me ? For where
do we find anything like this written of Esaias,
or Jeremias, or any of the twelve, or Daniel?
Then about Zacharias the son of Barachias, who
was slain between the temple and the altar, we
learn from Jesus only, not knowing it otherwise
from any Scripture. Wherefore I think no other
supposition is possible, than that they who had
the reputation of wisdom, and the rulers and
elders, took away from the people every passage
which might bring them into discredit among
the people. We need not wonder, then, if this
history of the evil device of the licentious elders
against Susanna is true, but was concealed and
removed from the Scriptures by men themselves


not very far removed from the counsel of these
elders.

In the Acts of the Aposdes also, Stephen, in
his other testimony, says, " Which of the proph-
ets have not your fathers persecuted ? And they
have slain them which showed before of the com-
ing of the Just One ; of whom ye have been now
^ the betrayers and murderers." ^ That Stephen
speaks the truth, every one will admit who re-
ceives the Acts of the Aposdes ; but it is impos-
sible to show from the extant books of the Old
Testament how with any justice he throws the
blame of having persecuted and slain the proph-
ets on the fathers of those who believed not in
Christ. And Paul, in the first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, testifies this concerning the Jews :
" For ye, brethren, became followers of the
Churches of God which in Judea are in Christ
Jesus : for ye also have suffered like things of
your own countrymen, even as they have of the
Jews ; who both killed the Lord Jesus and their
own prophets, and have persecuted us ; and they
please not God, and are contrary to all men." -*
What I have said is, I think, sufficient to prove
that it would be nothing wonderful if this history
were true, and the licentious and cruel attack was
actually made on Susanna by those who were at
that time elders, and written down by the wis-
dom of the Spirit, but removed by these rulers
of Sodom,5 as the Spirit would call them.

10. Your next objection is, that in this writing
Daniel is said to have been seized by the Spirit,
and to have cried out that the sentence was
unjust ; while in that writing of his which is uni-
versally received he is represented as prophesy-
ing in quite another manner, by visions and
dreams, and an angel appearing to him, but
never by prophetic inspiration. You seem to
me to pay too litde heed to the words, " At sun-
dry times, and in divers manners, God spake in
time past unto the fathers by the prophets." ^
This is true not only in the general, but also of
individuals. For if you notice, you will find that
the same saints have been favoured with divine
dreams and angelic appearances and (direct)
inspirations. For the present it will suffice to
instance what is testified concerning Jacob. Of
dreams from God he speaks thus : "And it came
to pass, at the time that the cattle conceived,
that I saw them before my eyes in a dream, and,
behold, the rams and he-goats which leaped
upon the sheep and the goats, white-spotted,
and speckled, and grisled. And the angel of
God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob.
And I said. What is it? And he said, Lift up
thine eyes and see, the goats and rams leaping


Matt, xxiii. 29-38.
Matt, xxiii. 30.


3 Acts vii. 52.
■* I Thcss. li.

5 Isa. i. 10.

6 Heb. i. I.


390


ORIGEN TO AFRICANUS.


on the goats and sheep, white-spotted, and
speckled, and grisled : for I have seen all that
Laban doeth unto thee. I am God, who ap-
peared unto thee in the place of God, where
thou anointedst to Me there a pillar, and vowedst
a vow there to Me : now arise, get thee out from
this land, and return unto the land of thy kin-
dred." ■

And as to an appearance (which is better than
a dream), he speaks as follows about himself:
" And Jacob was left alone ; and there wrestled a
man with him until the breaking of the day.
And he saw that he prevailed not against him,
and he touched the breadth of his thigh ; and
the breadth of Jacob's thigh grew stiff while he
was wrestling with him. And he said to him,
Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said,
I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. And
he said unto him. What is thy name ? And he
said, Jacob. And he said to him. Thy name
shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel shall
be thy name : for thou hast prevailed with God,
and art powerful with men. And Jacob asked
him, and said. Tell me thy name. And he said,
Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name ?
And he blessed him there. . And Jacob called
the name of the place Vision of God : for I have
seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.
And the sun rose, when the vision of God passed
by." ^ And that he also prophesied by inspira-
tion, is evident from this passage : " And Jacob
called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves
together, that I may tell you what shall befall you
in the last days. Gather yourselves together,
and hear, ye sons of Jacob ; and hearken unto
Israel your father. Reuben, my first-born, my
might, and the beginning of my children, hard
to be born, hard and stubborn. Thou wert
wanton, boil not over like water ; because thou
wentest up to thy father's bed ; then defiledst
thou the couch to which thou wentest up." ^
And so with the rest : it was by inspiration that
the prophetic blessings were pronounced. We
need not wonder, then, that Daniel sometimes
prophesied by inspiration, as when he rebuked
the elders sometimes, as you say, by dreams and
visions, and at other times by an angel appear-
ing unto him.

II. Your other objections are stated, as it ap-
pears to me, somewhat irreverently, and without
the becoming spirit of piety. I cannot do bet-
ter than quote your very words : " Then, after
crying out in this extraordinary fashion, he de-
tects them in a way no less incredible, which
not even Philistion the play-writer would have
resorted to. For, not satisfied with rebuking
them through the Spirit, he placed them apart.


' Gen. xxxi. 10-13.
^ Gen. xxxii. 24-31.
3 Gen. xlix. 1-4.


and asked them severally where they saw her
committing adultery ; and when the one said,
'Under a holm-tree' {prinos), he answered
that the angel would saw him asunder {prisein) ;
and in a similar fashion threatened the other,
who said, ' Under a mastich-tree ' {schinos),'w\\h
being rent asunder."

You might as reasonably compare to Philis-
tion the play-writer, a story somewhat like this
one, which is found in the third book of Kings,
which you yourself will admit to be well written.
Here is what we read in Kings : —

" Then there appeared two women that were
harlots before the king, and stood before him.
And the one woman said. To me, my lord, I and
this woman dwell in one house ; and we were
delivered in the house. And it came to pass,
the third day after that I was delivered, that this
woman was delivered also : and we were to-
gether ; there is no one in our house except us
two. And this woman's child died in the night ;
because she overlaid it. And she arose at mid-
night, and took my son from my arms. And
thine handmaid slept. And she laid it in her
bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom.
And I arose in the morning to give my child
suck, and he was dead ; but when I had consid-
ered it in the morning, behold, it was not my
son which I did bear. And the other woman
said, Nay ; the dead is thy son, but the living is
my son. And the other said. No ; the living is
my son, but the dead is thy son. Thus they
spake before the king. Then said the king.
Thou sayest. This is my son that liveth, and thy
son is the dead : and thou sayest. Nay ; but thy
son is the dead, and my son is the living. And
the king said, Bring me a sword. And they
brought a sword before the king. And the king
said. Divide the living child in two, and give
half to the one, and half to the other. Then
spake the woman whose the living child was
unto the king (for her bowels yearned after her
son), and she said. To me, my lord, give her
the living child, and in no wise slay it. But the
other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but
divide it. Then the king answered and said.
Give the child to her which said. Give her the
living child, and in no wise slay it : for she is
the mother of it. And all Israel heard of the
judgment which the king had judged ; and they
feared the face of the king : for they saw that
the wisdom of God was in him to do judg-
ment." ^

For if we were at liberty to speak in this scoff-
ing way of the Scriptures in use in the Churches,
we should rather compare this story of the two
harlots to the play of Philistion than that of the
chaste Susanna. And just as the people would


Kings iii. 16-28.


ORIGEN TO AFRICANUS.


191


not have been persuaded if Solomon had merely
said, " Give this one the living child, for she is
the mother of it ; " so Daniel's attack on the
elders would not have been sufficient had there
not been added the condemnation from their own |
mouth, when both said that they had seen her I
lying with the young man under a tree, but did
not agree as to what kind of tree it was. And
since you have asserted, as if you knew for cer-
tain, that Daniel in this matter judged by inspi-
ration (which may or may not have been the
case), I would have you notice that there seem
to me to be some analogies in the story of Dan-
iel to the judgment of Solomon, concerning
whom the Scripture testifies that the people saw
that the wisdom of God was in him to do judg-
ment.' This might be said also of Daniel, for
it was because wisdom was in him to do judg-
ment that the elders were judged in the manner
described.

12. I had nearly forgotten an additional re-
mark I have to make about the prino-prisein
and schino-schisein ditificulty ; that is, that in our
Scriptures there are many etymological fancies,
so to call them, which in the Hebrew are per-
fectly suitable, but not in the Greek. It need
not surprise us, then, if the translators of the
History of Susanna contrived it so that they
found out some Greek words, derived from the
same root, which either corresponded exactly to
the Hebrew form (though this I hardly think
possible) , or presented some analogy to it. Here
is an instance of this in our Scripture. When
the woman was made by God from the rib of
the man, Adam says, "She shall be called woman,
because she was taken out of her husband."
Now the Jews say that the woman was called
^' Essa,'' and that "taken" is a translation of
this word, as is evident from " chos isouoth essa,"
which means, " I have taken the cup of salva-
tion ; " ^ and that " is " means " man," as we
see from '■'■ Hesre dis," which is, "Blessed is the
man." 3 According to the Jews, then, "is" is
"man," and "essa" "woman," because she was
taken out of her husband {is) . It need not then
surprise us if some interpreters of the Hebrew
" Susanna," which had been concealed among
them at a very remote date, and had been pre-
served only by the more learned and honest,
should have either given the Hebrew word for
word, or hit upon some analogy to the Hebrew
forms, that the Greeks might be able to follow
them. For in many other passages we can find
traces of this kind of contrivance on the part of
the translators, which I noticed when I was col-
lating the various editions.

13. You raise another objection, which I give


* I Kings iii. 28.

* Ps. cxvi. 13.
3 Ps. i. I.


in your own words : " Moreover, how is it that
they, who were captives among the Chaldeans,
lost and won at play, thrown out unburied on
the streets, as was prophesied of the former cap-
tivity, their sons torn from them to be eunuchs,
and their daughters to be concubines, as had
been prophesied ; how is it that such could pass
sentence of death, and that on the wife of their
king Joakim, whom the king of the Babylonians
had made partner of his throne? Then, if it
was not this Joakim, but some other from the
common people, whence had a captive such a
mansion and spacious garden?"

Where you get your " lost and won at play,
and thrown out unburied on the streets," I know
not, unless it is from Tobias ; and Tobias (as
also Judith), we ought to notice, the Jews do
not use. They are not even found in the He-
brew Apocrypha, as I learned from the Jews
themselves. However, since the Churches use
Tobias, you must know that even in the captivity
some of the captives were rich and well to do.
Tobias himself says, " Because I remembered
God with all my heart ; and the Most High gave
me grace and beauty in the eyes of Nemessarus,
and I was his purveyor ; and I went into Media,
and left in trust with Gabael, the brother of Ga-
brias, at Ragi, a city of Media, ten talents of
silver." '' And he adds, as if he were a rich man,
" In the days of Nemessarus I gave many alms
to my brethren. I gave my bread to the hun-
gry, and my clothes to the naked : and if I saw
any of my nation dead, and cast outside the
walls of Nineve, I buried him ; and if king Se-
nachereim had slain any when he came fleeing
from Judea, I buried them privily (for in his
wrath he killed many)." Think whether this
great catalogue of Tobias's good deeds does not
betoken great wealth and much property, espe-
cially when he adds, " Understanding that I was
sought for to be put to death, I withdrew myself
for fear, and all my goods were forcibly taken
away." 5

And another captive, Dachiacharus, the son
of Ananiel, the brother of Tobias, was set over
all the exchequer of the kingdom of king Acher-
don ; and we read, " Now Achiacharus was cup-
bearer and keeper of the signet, and steward
and overseer of the accounts."^

Mardochaios, too, frequented the court of the
king, and had such boldness before him, that he
was inscribed among the benefactors of Artax-
erxes.

Again we read in Esdras, that Neemias, a cup-
bearer and eunuch of the king, of Hebrew race,
made a request about the rebuilding of the tem-
ple, and obtained it ; so that it was granleil to


* Tob. i. 12-14.

5 Tob. i. 19.

6 Tob. i. 22.


392


ORIGEN TO AFRICANUS.


him, with many more, to return and build the
temple again. Why then should we wonder that
one Joakim had garden, and house, and property,
whether these were very expensive or only mod-
erate, for this is not clearly told us in the writing ?

14. But you say, " How could they who were
in captivity pass sentence of death?" asserting,
I know not on what grounds, that Susanna was
the wife of a king, because of the name Joakim,
The answer is, that it is no uncommon thing,
when great nations become subject, that the king
should allow the captives to use their own laws
and courts of justice. Now, for instance, that
the Romans rule, and the Jews pay the half-
shekel to them, how great power by the conces-
sion of Caesar the ethnarch has ; so that we,
who have had experience of it, know that he
differs in little from a true king ! Private trials
are held according to the law, and some are con-
demned to death. And though there is not full
licence for this, still it is not done without the
knowledge of the ruler, as we learned and were
convinced of when we spent much time in the
country of that people. And yet the Romans
only take account of two tribes, while at that
time besides Judah there were the ten tribes of
Israel. Probably the Assyrians contented them-
selves with holding them in subjection, and con-
ceded to them their own judicial processes.

15. I find in your letter yet another objection
in these words : " And add, that among all the
many prophets who had been before, there is no
one who has quoted from another word for word.
For they had no need to go a-begging for words,
since their own were true. But this one, in re-
buking one of these men, quotes the words of
the Lord, 'The innocent and righteous shalt
thou not slay.' " I cannot understand how,
with all your exercise in investigating and medi-
tating on the Scriptures, you have not noticed
that the prophets continually quote each other
almost word for word. For who of all believers
does not know the words in Esaias? "And in
the last days the mountain of the Lord shall be
manifest, and the house of the Lord on the top
of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above
the hills ; and all nations shall come unto it.
And many people shall go and say, Come ye,
and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,
unto the house of the God of Jacob ; and He
will teach us His way, and we will walk in it :
for out of Zion shall go forth a law, and a word
of the Lord from Jerusalem. And He shall
judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many
people ; and they shall beat their swords into
ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-
hooks : nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more."'


But in Micah we find a parallel passage, which
is almost word for word : " And in the last days
the mountain of the Lord shall be manifest, es-
tablished on the top of the mountains, and it
shall be exalted above the hills ; and people
shall hasten unto it. And many nations shall
come, and say, Come, let us go up to the moun-
tain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob ; and they will teach us His way, and we
will walk in His paths : for a law shall go forth
from Zion, and a word of the Lord from Jeru-
salem. And He shall judge among many peo-
ple, and rebuke strong nations ; and they shall
beat their swords into ploughshares, and their
spears into pruning- hooks : nation shall not lift
up a sword against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more."^

Again, in First Chronicles, the psalm which is
put in the hands of Asaph and his brethren to
praise the Lord, beginning, " Give thanks unto
the Lord, call upon His name," 3 is in the be-
ginning almost identical with Ps. cv., down to
" and do my prophets no harm ; " and after that
it is the same as Ps. xcvi., from the beginning of
that psalm, which is something like this, " Praise
the Lord all the earth," down to " For He
Cometh to judge the earth." (It would have
taken up too much time to quote more fully ; so
I have given these short references, which are
sufficient for the matter before us.) And you
will find the law about not bearing a burden on
the Sabbath-day in Jeremias, as well as in Moses.''
And the rules about the passover, and the rules
for the priests, are not only in Moses, but also at
the end of Ezekiel.s I would have quoted these,
and many more, had I not found that from the
shortness of my stay in Nicomedia my time for
writing you was already too much restricted.

Your last objection is, that the style is differ-
ent. This I cannot see.

This, then, is my defence. I might, especially
after all these accusations, speak in praise of this
history of Susanna, dwelling on it word by word,
and expounding the exquisite nature of the
thoughts. Such an encomium, j^erhaps, some
of the learned and able students of divine things
may at some other time compose. This, how-
ever, is my answer to your strokes, as you call
them. Would that I could instruct you ! But
I do not now arrogate that to myself. My lord
and dear brother Ambrosius, who has written this
at my dictation, and has, in looking over it, cor-
rected as he pleased, salutes you. His faithful
spouse, Marcella, and her children, also salute
you. Also Anicetus. Do you salute our dear
father ApoUinarius, and all our friends.


2 Mic. iv. 1-3.

3 I Chron. xvi. 8.

■* Ex. XXXV. 2; Num. xv. 32; Jer. xvii. 21
5 In hevit. passim ,• Ezek. xliii. xliv. xlv.


A LETTER FROM ORIGEN TO GREGORY/


1. Greeting in God, my most excellent sir, and
venerable son Gregory, from Origen. A natural
readiness of comprehension, as you well know,
may, if practice be added, contribute somewhat
to the contingent end, if I may so call it, of that
which any one wishes to practise. Thus, your
natural good parts might make of you a finished
Roman lawyer or a Greek philosopher, so to
speak, of one of the schools in high reputation.
But I am anxious that you should devote all the
strength of your natural good parts to Chris-
tianity for your end ; and in order to this, I wish
to ask you to extract from the philosophy of the
Greeks what may serve as a course of study or a
preparation for Christianity, and from geometry
and astronomy what will serve to explain the
sacred Scriptures, in order that all that the sons
of the philosophers are wont to say about geome-
try and music, grammar, rhetoric, and astrono-
my, as fellow-helpers to philosophy, we may say
about philosophy itself, in relation to Christianity.

2. Perhaps something of this kind is shadowed j
forth in what is written in Exodus from the '
mouth of God, that the children of Israel were '
commanded to ask from their neighbours, and
those who dwelt with them, vessels of silver
and gold, and raiment, in order that, by spoiling
the Egyptians, they might have material for the
preparation of the things which pertained to
the service of God. For from the things which
the children of Israel took from the Egyptians the
vessels in the holy of holies were made, — the
ark with its lid, and the cherubim, and the mercy-

I seat, and the golden coffer, where was the manna,

I the angels' bread. These things were probably

j made frc^n the best of the Egyptian gold. An

inferior kind would be used for the solid golden

candlestick near the inner veil, and its branches,

and the golden table on which were the pieces

I of shewbread, and the golden censer between

j them. And if there was a third and fourth

! quality of gold, from it would be made the holy

j vessels ; and the other things would be made of

I Egyptian silver. For when the children of Israel


' This Gregory, styled the Wonder-worker, (Thaumaturgus) was
afterwards bishop of Neo-Caesarea.


dwelt in Egypt, they gained this from their
dwelling there, that they had no lack of such
precious material for the utensils of the service
of God. And of the Egyptian raiment were
probably made all those things which, as the
Scripture mentions, needed sewed and em-
broidered work, sewed with the wisdom of God,
the one to the other, that the veils might be
made, and the inner and the outer courts. And
why should I go on, in this untimely digression,
to set forth how useful to the children of Israel
were the things brought from Egypt, which the
Egyptians had not put to a proper use, but which
the Hebrews, guided by the wisdom of God,
used for God's service ? Now the sacred Scrip-
ture is wont to represent as an evil the going
down from the land of the children of Israel
into Egypt, indicating that certain persons get
harm from sojourning among the Egj'ptians, that
is to say, from meddling with the knowledge of
this world, after they have subscribed to the law
of God, and the Israelitish ser\ice of Him.
Ader ^ at least, the Idumaean, so long as he was
in the land of Israel, and had not tasted the
bread of the Egyptians, made no idols. It was
when he fled from the wise Solomon, and went
down into Egypt, as it were flying from the
wisdom of God, and was made a kinsman of
Pharaoh by marrying his wife's sister, and beget-
ting a child, who was brought up with the chil-
dren of Pharaoh, that he did this. Wherefore,
although he did return to the land of Israel, he
returned only to divide the people of God, and
to make them say to the golden calf, " These be
thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up from
the land of Egypt." ^ And I may tell you
from my experience, that not many take from Egypt
only the useful, and go away and use it for the
service of God; while Ader the Idumcean has
many brethren. * These are they who, from their
Greek studies, produce heretical notions, and set
them up, like the golden calf, in Bethel, which
signifies " God's house." In these words also


2 Oripen evidently confounds Hadad the Edomite, of i Kings
14, with Jeroboam.

^ [i Kings xii. 28. S.]

393


394


ELUCIDATION.


there seems to me an indication that they have
set up their own imaginations in the Scriptures,
where the word of God dwells, which is called in
a figure Bethel. The other figure, the word says,
was set up in Dan. Now the borders of Dan are
the most extreme, and nearest the borders of
the Gentiles, as is clear from what is written in
Joshua, the son of Nun. Now some of the de-
vices of these brethren of Ader, as we call them,
are also very near the borders of the Gentiles.

3. Do you then, my son, diligently apply your-
self to the reading of the sacred Scriptures.
Apply yourself, I say. For we who read the
things of God need much application, lest we
should say or think anything too rashly about
them. And applying yourself thus to the study
of the things of God, with faithful prejudgments
such as are well pleasing to God, k-nock at its
locked door, and it will be opened to you by the
porter, of whom Jesus says, " To him the porter


opens." ' And applying yourself thus to the divine
study, seek aright, and with unwavering trust in
God, the meaning of the holy Scriptures, which
so many have missed. Be not satisfied with
knocking and seeking ; for prayer is of all things
indispensable to the knowledge of the things of
God. For to this the Saviour exhorted, and said
not only, " Knock, and it shall be opened to you ;
and seek, and ye shall find," ^ but also, " Ask,
and it shall be given unto you." 3 My fatherly
love to you has made me thus bold ; but whether
my boldness be good, God will know, and His
Christ, and all partakers of the Spirit of God and
the Spirit of Christ. May you also be a partaker,
and be ever increasing your inheritance, that you
may say not only, "■ We are become partakers of
Christ," 4 but also partakers of God.


1 John X. 3.

2 Matt. vii. 7.

3 Luke xi. 9.
■* Heb. iii. 14.


ELUCIDATION.


This golden letter, doubtless genuine, was attended with very great consequences, of which
we shall gather more hereafter. It is worthy of the solemn consideration of young students to
whom this page may come. Gregory was unbaptized when Origen {circa a.d. 230) thus
addressed his conscience.

On the letters here inserted, let me refer the student to Routh, Reliqu., ii. pp. 312-327 ; also
same vol., pp. 222-228; also iii. 254-256.

For the facts concerning this letter to Gregory, see Cave, i. p. 400.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.
Book I.


PREFACE.

I. When false witnesses testified against our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, He remained si-
lent ; and when unfounded charges were brought
against Him, He returned no answer, beheving
that His whole life and conduct among the Jews
were a better refutation than any answer to the
false testimony, or than any formal defence
against the accusations. And I know not, my
pious Ambrosius,' why you wished me to write
a reply to the false charges brought by Celsus
against the Christians, and to his accusations
directed against the faith of the Churches in his
treatise ; as if the facts themselves did not fur-
nish a manifest refutation, and the doctrine a
better answer than any writing, seeing it both
disposes of the false statements, and does not
leave to the accusations any credibility or validity.
Now, with respect to our Lord's silence when
false witness was borne against Him, it is suffi-
cient at present to quote the words of Matthew,
for the testimony of Mark is to the same effect.
And the words of Matthew are as follow : " And
the high priest and the council sought false wit-
ness against Jesus to put Him to death, but
found none, although many false witnesses came
forward. At last two false witnesses came and
said. This fellow said, I am able to destroy the
temple of God, and after three days to build
it up. And the high priest arose, and said to
Him, Answerest thou nothing to what these wit-
ness against thee? But Jesus held His peace." ^
And that He returned no answer when falsely
accused, the following is the statement : " And
Jesus stood before the governor ; and he asked
Him, saying. Art Thou the King of the Jews ?
And Jesus said to him. Thou sayest. And when
He was accused of the chief priests and elders.


This individual is mentioned by Eusebius {Eccles. Hist., vi. c.
I) as having been converted from the fiercsy of Valentinus to the
fauh of the Church by the efforts of Origen. [Lardner {Credit.,
^"■210-212) is inclined to "place" Celsus in the year 176. Here
and elsewhere this learned authority is diffuse on the subject, and
merits careful attention.]
* Cf. Matt. xxvi. 59-63.


He answered nothing. Then said Pilate unto
Him, Hearest thou not how many things they
witness against Thee ? And He answered him
to never a word, insomuch that the governor
marvelled gready."3

2. It was, indeed, matter of surprise to men
even of ordinary intelligence, that one who was
accused and assailed by false testimony, but who
was able to defend Himself, and to show that
He was guilty of none of the charges (alleged),
and who might have enumerated the praise-
worthy deeds of His own life, and His miracles
wrought by divine power, so as to give the judge
an opportunity of delivering a more honourable
judgment regarding Him, should not have done
this, but should have disdained such a procedure,
and in the nobleness of His nature have con-
temned His accusers.4 That the judge would,
without any hesitation, have set Him at liberty
if He had offered a defence, is clear from what
is related of him when he said, " Which of the
two do ye wish that I should release unto you,
Barabbas or Jesus, who is called Christ? " s and
from what the Scripture adds, "For he knew
that for envy they had delivered Him." ^ Jesus,
however, is at all times assailed l)y false witnesses,
and, while Avickedness remains in the world, is
ever exposed to accusation. And yet even now
He continues silent before these things, and
makes no audible answer, but places His defence
in the lives of His genuine disciples, which are a
pre-eminent testimony, and one that rises supe-
rior to all false witness, and refutes and over-
throws all unfounded accusations and charges,

3. I venture, then, to say that this " apology "
which you require me to compose will somewhat
weaken that defence (of Christianity) which
rests on facts, and that power of Jesus which is
manifest to those who are not altogether devoid
of percepdon. Notwithstanding, that we may


^ Cf. Matt, xxvii. 11-14.

* MeYaAoi()uu)9 fwepewpa/ceVai Toi/; itaTij-yopovt.

S Cf. Matt, xxvii. 17.

*> Cf. Matt, xxvii. 18.

395


696


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


not have the appearance of being reluctant to
undertake the task which you have enjoined, we
have endeavoured, to the best of our abihty, to
suggest, by way of answer to each of the state-
ments ach^anced by Celsus, what seemed to us
adapted to refute them, although his arguments
have no power to shake the faith of any (true)
believer. And forbid, indeed, that any one
should be found who, after having been a par-
taker in such a love of God as was (displayed)
in Christ Jesus, could be shaken in his purpose
by the arguments of Celsus, or of any such as
he. For Paul, when enumerating the innumer-
able causes which generally separate men from
the love of Christ and from the love of God in
Christ Jesus (to all of which, the love that was
in himself rose superior), did not set down argu-
ment among the grounds of separation. For
observe that he says, firstly : " Who shall sepa-
rate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribula-
tion, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword ? (as it is written,
For Thy sake we are killed all the day long ; we
are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.) Nay,
in all these things we are more than conquerors
through Him that loved us." ' And secondly,
when laying down another series of causes which
naturally tend to separate those who are not
firmly grounded in their religion, he says : " For
I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord." ^

4. Now, truly, it is proper that we should feel
elated because afflictions, or those other causes
enumerated by Paul, do not separate us (from
Christ) ; but not that Paul and the other apos-
tles, and any other resembling them, (should
entertain that feeling), because they were far
exalted above such things when they said, " In
all these things we are more than conquerors
through Him that loved us," 3 which is a stronger
statement than that they are simply " conquer-
ors." But if it be proper for apostles to en-
tertain a feeling of elation in not being separated
from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our
Lord, that feeling will be entertained by them,
because neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor any of the things that follow,
can separate them from the love of God which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And therefore I do
not congratulate that believer in Christ whose
faith can be shaken by Celsus — who no longer
shares the common life of men, but has long
since departed — or by any apparent plausibility


' I Rom. viii. 35-37.

2 Rom. viii. 38, 39.

3 Rom. viii. 37, uTrepvi/ciju.ei'.


of argument.* For I do not know in what rank
to place him who has need of arguments written
in books in answer to the charges of Celsus
against the Christians, in order to prevent him
from being shaken in his faith, and confirm him
in it. But nevertheless, since in the multitude
of those who are considered believers some such
persons might be found as would have their faith
shaken and overthrown by the writings of Cel-
sus, but who might be preserved by a reply to
them of such a nature as to refute his statements
and to exhibit the truth, we have deemed it
right to yield to your injunction, and to furnish
an answer to the treatise which you sent us, but
which I do not think that any one, although only
a short way advanced in philosophy, will allow to
be a " True Discourse," as Celsus has entitled it.

5. Paul, indeed, observing that there are in
Greek philosophy certain things not to be lightly
esteemed, which are plausible in the eyes of the
many, but which represent falsehood as truth,
says with regard to such : " Beware lest any man
spoil you through philosophy and Vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments
of the world, and not after Christ." 5 And see-
ing that there was a kind of greatness manifest
in the words of the world's wisdom, he said that
the words of the philosophers were " according
to the rudiments of the world." No man of
sense, however, would say that those of Celsus
were " according to the rudiments of the world."
Now those words, which contained some element
of deceitfulness, the apostle named " vain de-
ceit," probably by way of distinction from a
deceit that was not " vain ; " and the prophet
Jeremiah observing this, ventured to say to God,
" O Lord, Thou hast deceived me, and I was
deceived ; Thou art stronger than I, and hast
prevailed." ^ But in the language of Celsus
there seems to me to be no deceitfulness at all,
not even that which is " vain ; " such deceitful-
ness, viz., as is found in the language of those
who have founded philosophical sects, and who
have been endowed with no ordinary talent for
such pursuits. And as no one Avould say that
any ordinary error in geometrical demonstra-
tions was intended to deceive, or would describe
it for the sake of exercise in such matters ;7 so
those opinions which are to be styled " vain de-
ceit," and the " tradition of men," and " accord-
ing to the rudiments of the world," must have
some resemblance to the views of those who
have been the founders of philosophical sects,
(if such titles are to be appropriately applied to
them).


4 r) Tiros TTtflavonjTOS Aoyou.

5 Col. ii. 8.

6 Cf. Jer. XX. 7._

7 Kal wo-jrep ov to tv)(OV tu>v xl/evSofiev
Ltaat \l/evSoypa4)OV[J.€i'6p Tts ay At'yot, 77 kc

iKiV ToO alTO TOtOUTtOl'. Cf. nOtC of RuSt


)V €V yetofiCTpiKoU fleu-
oi'a7Da(/>0L yvixvaaLOV
i in loc.


Chap. II.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


397


6. After proceeding with this work as far as
the place where Celsus introduces the Jew dis-''
puting with Jesus, I resolved to prefix this pref-
ace to the beginning (of the treatise), in order
that the reader of our reply to Celsus might fall
in with it first, and see that this book has been
composed not for those who are thorough be-
lievers, but for such as are either wholly unac-
quainted with the Christian faith, or for those
who, as the apostle terms them, are " weak in
the faith ; " regarding whom he says, " Him that
is weak in the faith receive ye." ' And this pref-
ace must be my apology for beginning my an-
swer to Celsus on one plan, and carrying it on
on another. For my first mtention was to in-
dicate his principal objections, and then briefly
the answers that were returned to them, and sub-
sequently to make a systematic treatise of the
whole discourse.^ But afterwards, circumstances
themselves suggested to me that I should be
economical of my time, and that, satisfied with
what I had already stated at the commencement,
I should in the following part grapple closely, to
the best of my ability, with the charges of Cel-
sus. I have therefore to ask indulgence for
those portions which follow the preface towards
the beginning of the book. And if you are not
impressed by the powerful arguments which suc-
ceed, then, asking similar indulgence also with
respect to them, I refer you, if you still desire
an argumentati\'e solution of the objections of
Celsus, to those men who are wiser than myself,
and who are able by words and treatises to over-
throw the charges which he brings against us.
But better is the man who, although meeting
with the work of Celsus, needs no answer to it
at all, but who despises all its contents, since
they are contemned, and with good reason, by
every believer in Christ, through the Spirit that
is in him.


The first point which Celsus brings forward, in
his desire to throw discredit upon Christianity,
is, that the Chrisdans entered into secret asso-
ciations with each other contrary to law, saying,
that " of associations some are public, and that
these are in accordance with the laws ; others,
again, secret, and maintained in violation of the
laws." And his wish is to bring into disrepute
I what are termed the " love-feasts " ^ of the Chris-
tians, as if they had their origin in the common
danger, and were more binding than any oaths.
Since, then, he babbles about the public law,
alleging that the associations of the Christians
are in violation of it, we have to reply, that if a
man were placed among Scythians, whose laws


* <ru)/iaT07roi))(roi,

' TTjv KaKov/j-ivriv ayanriv.


were unholy,-* and having no opportunity of
escape, were compelled to live among them,
such an one would with good reason, for the
sake of the law of truth, which the Scythians
would regard as wickedness, 5 enter into associa-
tions contrary to their laws, with those like-
minded with himself; so, if truth is to decide,
the laws of the heathens which relate to images,
and an atheistical polytheism, are "Scythian"
laws, or more impious even than these, if there
be any such. It is not irrational, then, to form
associations in opposition to existing laws, if
done for the sake of the truth. For as those
persons would do well who should enter into a
secret association in order to put to death a ty-
rant who had seized upon the liberties of a state,
so Christians also, when tyrannized over by him
who is called the devil, and by falsehood, form
leagues contrary to the laws of the devil, against
his power, and for the safety of those others
whom they may succeed in persuading to revolt
from a government which is, as it were, " Scyth-
ian," and despotic.


Celsus next proceeds to say, that the system
of doctrine, viz., Judaism, upon which Christi-
anity depends, was barbarous in its origin. And
with an appearance of fairness, he does not re-
proach Christianity^ because of its origin among
barbarians, but gives the latter credit for their
ability in discovering (such) doctrines. To this,
however, he adds the statement, that the Greeks
are more skilful than any others in judging, es-
tablishing, and reducing to practice the discov-
eries of barbarous nations. Now this is our
answer to his allegadons, and our defence of the
truths contained in Christianity, that if any one
were to come from the study of Grecian opinions
and usages to the Gospel, he would not only
decide that its doctrines were true, but would
by practice establish their truth, and supply
whatever seemed wanting, from a Grecian point
of view, to their demonstration, and thus con-
firm the truth of Christianity. We have to say,
moreover, that the Gospel has a demonstration
of its own, more divine than any established by
Grecian dialectics. And this diviner method is
called by the apostle the " manifestation of the
Spirit and of power : " of " the Spirit," on ac-
count of the prophecies, which are sufficient to
produce faith in any one who reads them, espe-
cially in those things which relate to Christ ; and
of " power," because of the signs and wonders
which we must believe to have been performed,
both on many other grounds, and on this, that
traces of them are still preserved among those


* a$e(rfjiOVi.

5 irapavofiiav,

6 T(p Koyif,


398


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


who regulate their Hves by the precepts of the
Gospel.

CHAP. III.

After this, Celsus proceeding to speak of the
Christians teaching and practising their favourite
doctrines in secret, and saying that they do this
to some purpose, seeing they escape the penalty
of death which is imminent, he compares their
dangers with those which were encountered by
such men as Socrates for the sake of philosophy ;
and here he might have mentioned Pythagoras
as well, and other philosophers. But our answer
to this is, that in the case of Socrates the Athe-
nians immediately afterwards repented ; and no
feeling of bitterness remained in their minds
regarding him, as also happened in the history
of Pythagoras. The followers of the latter, in-
deed, for a considerable time established their
schools in that part of Italy called Magna
Grsecia ; but in the case of the Christians, the
Roman Senate, and the princes of the time, and
the soldiery, and the people, and the relatives of
those who had become converts to the faith,
made war upon their doctrine, and would have
prevented (its progress), overcoming it by a
confederacy of so powerful a nature, had it not,
by the help of God, escaped the danger, and
risen above it, so as (finally) to defeat the whole
world in its conspiracy against it.


Let us notice also how he thinks to cast dis-
credit upon our system of morals,' alleging that
it is only common to us with other philosophers,
and no venerable or new branch of instruction.
In reply to which we have to say, that unless all
men had naturally impressed upon their minds
sound ideas of morality, the doctrine of the
punishment of sinners would have been ex-
cluded by those who bring upon themselves the
righteous judgments of God. It is not therefore
matter of surprise that the same God should
have sown in the hearts of all men those truths
which He taught by the prophets and the Sav-
iour, in order that at the divine judgment every
man may be without excuse, having the " require-
ments^ of the law written upon his heart," — a
truth obscurely alluded to by the Bible ^ in what
the Greeks regard as a myth, where it represents
God as having with His own finger written down
the commandments, and given them to Moses,
and which the wickedness of the worshippers of
the calf made him break in pieces, as if the flood
of wickedness, so to speak, had swept them away.
But Moses having again hewn tables of stone,
God wrote the commandments a second time,


' to;' i79iKb>' TOTTOV.

2 TO (SoOArj^ia toO vd/aov.

3 6 Adyos.


and gave them to him ; the prophetic word pre-
paring the soul, as it were, after the first trans-
gression, for the writing of God a second time.


Treating of the regulations respecting idolatry
as being peculiar to Christianity, Celsus estab-
lishes their correctness, saying that the Chris-
tians do not consider those to be gods that are
made with hands, on the ground that it is not in
conformity with right reason (to suppose) that
images, fashioned by the most worthless and de-
praved of workmen, and in many instances also
provided by wicked men, can be (regarded as)
gods. In what follows, however, wishing to
show that this is a common opinion, and one
not first discovered by Christianity, he quotes a
saying of Heraclitus to this effect : " That those
who draw near to lifeless images, as if they were
gods, act in a similar manner to those who would
enter into conversation with houses." Respect-
ing this, then, we have to say, that ideas were
implanted in the minds of men like the princi-
ples of morality, from which not only Heracli-
tus, but any other Greek or barbarian, might by
reflection have deduced the same conclusion ;
for he states that the Persians also were of the
same opinion, quoting Herodotus as his author-
ity. We also can add to these Zeno of Citium,
who in his Polity says : " And there will be no
need to build temples, for nothing ought to be
regarded as sacred, or of much value, or holy,
which is the work of builders and of mean men."
It is evident, then, with respect to this opinion
(as well as others), that there has been en-
graven upon the hearts of men by the finger of
God a sense of the duty that is required.


After this, through the influence of some mo-
tive which is unknown to me, Celsus asserts that
it is by the names of certain demons, and by the
use of incantations, that the Christians appear
to be possessed of (miraculous) power ; hint-
ing, I suppose, at the practices of those who ex-
pel evil spirits by incantations. And here he
manifestly appears to malign the Gospel. For
it is not by incantations that Christians seem
to prevail (over evil spirits), but by the name
of Jesus, accompanied by the announcement
of the narratives which relate to Him ; for the
repetition of these has frequendy been the
means of driving demons out of men, espe-
cially when those who repeated them did so
in a sound and genuinely believing spirit. Such
power, indeed, does the name of Jesus possess
over evil spirits, that there have been instances
where it was effectual, when it was pronounced
even by bad men, which Jesus Himself taught


Chap. IX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


;99


(would be the case), when He said: "Many
shall say to Me in that day, In Thy name we
have cast out devils, and done many wonderful
works." ' Whether Celsus omitted this from in-
tentional malignity, or from ignorance, I do not
know. And he next proceeds to bring a charge
against the Saviour Himself, alleging that it was
by means of sorcery that He was able to ac-
complish the wonders which He performed ; and
that foreseeing that others would attain the same
knowledge, and do the same things, making a
boast of doing them by help of the power of
God, He excludes such from His kingdom.
And his accusation is, that if they are jusdy ex-
cluded, while He Himself is guilty of the same
practices, He is a wicked man ; but if He is not
guilty of wickedness in doing such things, nei-
ther are they who do the same as He. But even
if it be impossible to show by what power Jesus
wrought these miracles, it is clear that Christians
employ no spells or incantations, but the simple
name of Jesus, and certain other words in which
they repose faith, according to the holy Scrip-
tures.


Moreover, since he frequently calls the Chris-
tian doctrine a secret system (of belief), we must
confute him on this point also, since almost the
entire world is better acquainted with what Chris-
tians preach than with the favourite opinions of
philosophers. For who is ignorant of the state-
ment that Jesus was born of a virgin, and that
He was crucified, and that His resurrecdon is an
article of faith among many, and that a general
judgment is announced to come, in which the
wicked are to be punished according to their
deserts, and the righteous to be duly rewarded ?
And yet the mystery of the resurrection, not being
understood," is made a subject of ridicule among
unbelievers. In these circumstances, to speak
of the Christian doctrine as a secret system, is
altogether absurd. But that there should be
certain doctrines, not made known to the multi-
tude, which are (revealed) after the exoteric
ones have been taught, is not a peculiarity of
Christianity alone, but also of philosophic sys-
tems, in which certain truths are exoteric and
others esoteric. Some of the hearers of Pythag-
oras were content with his ipse dixit; while
others were taught in secret those doctrines
which were not deemed fit to be communi-
cated to profane and insufficiently prepared
ears. Moreover, all the mysteries that are cele-
brated everywhere throughout Greece and bar-
barous countries, although held in secret, have


I


' Cf. Matt. vii. 22.

* The words, as they stand in the text of Lommatzsch, are, oAAa
icai ^Tjc voy\9iv to n-epi ttjt ai/atrToafujf \i.v<jti\pi.ov . Ruaeus would
read fi^ instead of ti-r^v. This emendation has been adopted in the
translation.


no discredit thrown upon them, so that it is in
vain that he endeavours to calumniate the secret
doctrines of Christianity, seeing he does not cor-
rectly understand its nature.


It is with a certain eloquence,^ indeed, that
he appears to advocate the cause of those who
bear witness to the truth of Christianity by their
death, in the following words: "And I do not
maintain that if a man, who has adopted a sys-
tem of good doctrine, is to incur danger from
men on that account, he should either apostatize,
or feign apostasy, or openly deny his opinions."
And he condemns those who, while holding the
Christian views, either pretend that they do not,
or deny them, saying that " he who holds a cer-
tain opinion ought not to feign recantation, or
publicly disown it." And here Celsus must be
convicted of self-contradiction. For from other
treatises of his it is ascertained that he was an
Epicurean ; but here, because he thought that
he could assail Christianity with better effect by
not professing the opinions of Epicurus, he pre-
tends that there is a something better in man
than the earthly part of his nature, which is akin
to God, and says that " they in whom this ele-
ment, viz., the soul, is in a healthy condition,
are ever seeking after their kindred nature, mean-
ing God, and are ever desiring to hear something
about Him, and to call it to remembrance."
Observe now the insincerity of his character !
Having said a little before, that " the man who
had embraced a system of good doctrine ought
not, even if exposed to danger on that account
from men, to disavow it, or pretend that he had
done so, nor yet openly disown it," he now in-
volves himself in all manner of contradictions.
For he knew that if he acknowledged himself an
Epicurean, he would not obtain any credit when
accusing those who, in any degree, introduce the
doctrine of Providence, and who place a God
over the world. And we have heard that there
were two individuals of the name of Celsus, both
of whom were Epicureans ; the earlier of the
two having lived in the time of Nero, but this
one in that of Adrian, and later.


He next proceeds to recommend, that in
adopting opinions we should follow reason and
a rational guide,-* since he who assents to opin-
ions without following this course is very liable
to be deceived. And he compares inconsiderate
believers to Metragyrtre, and soothsa>-ers, and
Mithrce, and Sabbadians, and to anything else


3 Setl'OTTJTO?.

* A6y<j) itai Aoyiicui 66>)y<f).


400


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


that one may fall in with, and to the phantoms
of Hecate, or any other demon or demons. For
as amongst such persons are frequently to be
found wicked men, who, taking advantage of the
ignorance of those who are easily deceived, lead
them away whither they will, so also, he says, is
the case among Christians. And he asserts that
certain persons who do not wish either to give
or receive a reason for their belief, keep repeat-
ing, "Do not examine, but believe !" and, "Your
faith will save you ! " And he alleges that such
also say, "The wisdom of this life is bad, but
that foolishness is a good thing ! " To which
we have to answer, that if it were possible for
all to leave the business of life, and devote them-
selves to philosophy, no other method ought to
be adopted by any one, but this alone. For in
the Christian system also it will be found that
there is, not to speak at all arrogantly, at least
as much of investigation into articles of belief,
and of explanation of dark sayings, occurring
in the prophetical writings, and of the parables in
the Gospels, and of countless other things, which
either were narrated or enacted with a symboli-
cal signification," (as is the case with other
systems). But since the course alluded to is
impossible, partly on account of the necessities
of life, partly on account of the weakness of
men, as only a very few individuals devote them-
selves earnestly to study,^ what better method
could be devised with a view of assisting the
multitude, than that which was delivered by
Jesus to the heathen? And let us inquire, with
respect to the great multitude of believers, who
have washed away the mire of wickedness in
which they formerly wallowed, whether it were
better for them to believe without a reason, and
(so) to have become reformed and improved in
their habits, through the belief that men are
chastised for sins, and honoured for good works ;
or not to have allowed themselves to be con-
verted on the strength of mere faith, but (to
have waited) until they could give themselves to
a thorough examination of the (necessary) rea-
sons. For it is manifest that, (on such a plan),
all men, with very few exceptions, would not
obtain this (amehoration of conduct) which they
have obtained through a simple faith, but would
continue to remain in the practice of a wicked
life. Now, whatever other evidence can be fur-
nished of the fact, that it was not without divine
intervention that the philanthropic scheme of
Christianity was introduced among men, this also
must be added. For a pious man will not be-
lieve that even a physician of the body, who
restores the sick to better health, could take up
his abode in any city or country without divine


crvixPoKiicioi yeyeviqixiviav, i) i'e;'o/iio96TT)jneVwv.
a<)>6Spa oKiyatv iiri Toc Adyoi' tfTTOVTtDV,


permission, since no good happens to men with-
out the help of God. And if he who has cured
the bodies of many, or restored them to better
health, does not effect his cures without the help
of God, how much more He who has healed the
souls of many, and has turned them (to virtue),
and improved their nature, and attached them
to God who is over all things, and taught them
to refer every action to His good pleasure, and to
shun all that is displeasing to Him, even to
the least of their words or deeds, or even of the
thoughts of their hearts?


In the next place, since our opponents keep
repeating those statements about faith, we must
say that, considering it as a useful thing for the
multitude, we admit that we teach those men to
believe without reasons, who are unable to aban-
don all other employments, and give themselves
to an examination of arguments ; and our oppo-
nents, although they do not acknowledge it, yet
practically do the same. For who is there that,
on betaking himself to the study of philosophy,
and throwing himself into the ranks of some
sect, either by chance,^ or because he is provided
with a teacher of that school, adopts such a
course for any other reason, except that he be-
lieves his particular sect to be superior to any
other? For, not waiting to hear the arguments
of all the other philosophers, and of all the dif-
ferent sects, and the reasons for condemning one
system and for supporting another, he in this
way elects to become a Stoic, e.g., or a Platonist,
or a Peripatetic, or an Epicurean, or a follower
of some other school, and is thus borne, although m
they will not admit it, by a kind of irrational ||
impulse to the practice, say of Stoicism, to the ;(
disregard of the others ; despising either Plato- |
nism, as being marked by greater humility than
the others ; or Peripateticism, as more human,
and as admitting with more fairness ^ than other
systems the blessings of human life. And some
also, alarmed at first sight s about the doctrine
of providence, from seeing what happens in the
world to the vicious and to the virtuous, have
rashly concluded that there is no divine provi-
dence at all, and have adopted the views of
Epicurus and Celsus.

CHAP. XI.

Since, then, as reason teaches, we must repose
faith in some one of those who have been the
introducers of sects among the Greeks or Bar-
barians, why should we not rather believe in God
who is over all things, and in Him who teaches


an-o»cAi9p(i)Tnt(OS.
\i.a.KKov evyvoifi6vtDi,
anb TrpiuTTjs Trpocr^oA^s,


Chap. XIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


401


that worship is due to God alone, and ^hat other
things are to be passed by, either as non-exist-
ent, or as existing indeed, and worthy of hon-
our, but not of worship and reverence? And
respecting these things, he who not only believes,
but who contemplates things with the eye of
reason, will state the demonstrations that occur
to him, and which are the result of careful inves-
tigation. And why should it not be more rea-
sonable, seeing all human things are dependent
upon faith, to believe God rather than them?
For who enters on a voyage, or contracts a mar-
riage, or becomes the father of children, or casts
seed into the ground, without believing that bet-
ter things will result from so doing, although the
contrary might and sometimes does happen?
And yet the belief that better things, even agree-
ably to their wishes, will follow, makes all men
venture upon uncertain enterprises, which may j
turn out differently from what they expect. And
if the hope and belief of a better future be the
support of life in every uncertain enterprise, why
shall not this faith rather be rationally accepted
by him who believes on better grounds than he
who sails the sea, or tills the ground, or marries
a wife, or engages in any other human pursuit, in
the existence of a God who was the Creator of
all these things, and in Him who with surpassing
wisdom and divine greatness of mind dared to
make known this doctrine to men in every part
of the world, at the cost of great danger, and
of a death considered infamous, which He under-
went for the sake of the human race ; having
also taught those who were persuaded to embrace
His doctrine at the first, to proceed, under the
peril of every danger, and of ever nnpending
death, to all quarters of the world to ensure the
salvation of men ?

CH.\P. XII.

In the next place, when Celsus says in express
words, " If they would answer me, not as if I
were asking for information, for I am acquainted
with all their opinions, but because I take an
equal interest in them all, it would be well. And
if they will not, but will keep reiterating, as they
generally do, ' Do not investigate,' etc., they
must, he continues, explain to me at least of
what nature these things are of which they speak,
and whence they are derived," etc. Now, with
regard to his statement that he " is acquainted
with all our doctrines," we have to say that this
is a boastful and daring assertion ; for if he had
read the prophets in particular, which are full of
acknowledged difficulties, and of declarations
that are obscure to the multitude, and if he had
perused the parables of the Gospels, and the
other writings of the law and of the Jewish his-
tory, and the utterances of the apostles, and had
read them candidly, with a desire to enter into


their meaning, he would not have expressed him-
self with such boldness, nor said that he "was
acquainted with all their doctrines." Even we
ourselves, who have devoted much study to these
writings, would not say that " we were acquainted
with everything," for we have a regard for truth.
Not one of us will assert, " I know all the doc-
trines of Epicurus," or will be confident that he
knows all those 'of Plato, in the knowledge of
the fact that so many differences of opinion exist
among the expositors of these systems. For
who is so daring as to say that he knows all the
opinions of the Stoics or of the Peripatetics?
Unless, indeed, it should be the case that he has
heard this boast, " I know them all," from some
ignorant and senseless individuals, who do not
perceive their own ignorance, and should thus
imagine, from having had such persons as his
teachers, that he was acquainted with them all.
Such an one appears to me to act very much as
a person would do who had visited Egypt (where
the Egyptian savans, learned in their country's
literature, are. greatly given to philosophizing
about those things which are regarded among
them as divine, but where the vulgar, hearing
certain myths, the reasons of which they do not
understand, are greatly elated because of their
fancied knowledge), and who should imagine
that he is acquainted with the whole circle of
Egyptian knowledge, after having been a disciple
of the ignorant alone, and without having asso-
ciated with any of the priests, or having learned
the mysteries of the Egyptians from any other
source. And what I have said regarding the
learned and ignorant among the Egyptians, I
might have said also of the Persians ; among
whom there are mysteries, conducted on ra-
tional principles by the learned among them, but
understood in a symbolical sense by the more
superficial of the multitude.' And the same
remark applies to the Syrians, and Indians, and
to all those who have a literature and a mythol-
ogy-


But since Celsus has declared it to be a say-
ing of many Christians, that " the wisdom of
this life is a bad thing, but that foolishness is
good," we have to answer that he slanders the
Gospel, not giving the words as they actually
occur in the writings of Paul, where they run as
follow : " If any one among you seemeth to be
wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he
may become wise. For the wisdom of this world
is foolishness with God." ^ The apostle, there-
fore, does not say simply that " wisdom is fool-


1 nap' 015 eio-i TcAfTol, irpedfitvoiievai ix.ey XoyiicuK; iin'o Tuiy
■nap avToU Aoyi'wi', tTViJ.fioKiKui<; &i yiidfiti'at vit'o rCiv Trap' avrois
iToWiov Kal iTnwo\aLOTepMV. For yiroueiai Ruxus prefers yiVu)(T-
KOiJ-evai, which is adopted in the translation.

2 I Cor. iii. 18, 19.


402


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


ishness with God," but " the wisdom of this
worlds And again, not, " If any one among
you seemeth to be wise, let him become a fool
universally;" but, "let him become a fool in
this luorld, that he may become wise." We
term, then, " the wisdom of this world," every
false system of philosophy, which, according to
the Scriptures, is brought to nought ; and we
call foolishness good, not without restriction, but
when a man becomes foolish as to this zvorld.
As if we were to say that the Platonist, who be-
heves in the immortality of the soul, and in
the doctrine of its metempsychosis,' incurs the
charge of folly with the Stoics, who discard this
opinion ; and with the Peripatetics, who babble
about the subtleties of Plato ; and with the Epi-
cureans, who call it superstition to introduce a
providence, and to place a God over all things.
Moreover, that it is in agreement with the spirit
of Christianity, of much more importance to
give our assent to doctrines upon grounds of
reason and wisdom than on that of faith merely,
and that it was only in certain circumstances
that the latter course was desired by Christianity,
in order not to leave men altogether without
help, is shown by that genuine disciple of Jesus,
Paul, when he says : " For after that, in the wis-
dom of God, the world by wisdom knew not
God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preach-
ing to save them that believe." ^ Now by these
words it is clearly shown that it is by the wisdom
of God that God ought to be known. But as
this result did not follov/, it pleased God a sec-
ond time to save them that believe, not by
" folly " universally, but by such foolishness as
depended on preaching. For the preaching of
Jesus Christ as crucified is the "foolishness"
of preaching, as Paul also perceived, when he
said, " But we preach Christ crucified, to the
Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks fool-
ishness ; but to them who are called, both Jews
and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and wis-
dom of God." 3

CHAP. XIV.

Celsus, being of opinion that there is to be
found among many nations a general relation-
ship of doctrine, enumerates all the nations
which gave rise to such and such opinions ;
but for some reason, unknown to me, he casts
a slight upon the Jews, not including them
amongst the others, as having either laboured
along with them, and arrived at the same con-
clusions, or as having entertained similar opin-
ions on many subjects. It is proper, therefore.


^ /Lierei'crtOjUaTaKreto?.

Adyou K(xi ao(^ia<; avyKa
T^S nicTeuii- Kal oTi Kai
Lva ;u.r) iravrr) dv(Ocf>6Aecs
yi-^o-ios /ixa9r)T>)s, etc.
3 1 Cor. i. 23, 24.


rb Ttu Adyu apeaKov, no\Kw Siarjy^pei fjLeTa
aridea-OaL T015 S6yfj.aa{.f, iJTTcp ^""01 i^iA))?
i irepiaTaaLV Ka\ tout* efiov\ri9rf 6 Aoyo?,
ida-j] ToOs avdpunrov^, SrjKol b ToO 'Irjuov


to ask him why he gives credence to the his-
tories of Barbarians and Greeks respecting the
antiquity of those nations of whom he speaks,
but stamps the histories of this nation alone as
false. For if the respective writers related the
events which are found in these works in the
spirit of truth, why should we distrust the proph-
ets of the Jews alone ? And if Moses and the
prophets have recorded many things in their
history from a desire to favour their own system,
why should we not say the same of the historians
of other countries ? Or, when the Egyptians or
their histories speak evil of the Jews, are they to
be believed on that point ; but the Jews, when
saying the same things of the Egyptians, and
declaring that they had suffered great injustice
at their hands, and that on this account they
had been punished by God, are to be charged
with falsehood? And this applies not to the
Egyptians alone, but to others ; for we shall find
that there was a connection between the Assy-
rians and the Jews, and that this is recorded in
the ancient histories of the Assyrians. And so
also the Jewish historians (I avoid using the
word " prophets," that I may not appear to pre-
judge the case) have related that the Assyrians
were enemies of the Jews. Observe at once,
then, the arbitrary procedure of this individual,
who believes the histories of these nations on
the ground of their being learned, and condemns
others as being wholly ignorant. For listen to
the statement of Celsus : " There is," he says,
" an authoritative account from the very begin-
ning, respecting which there is a constant agree-
ment among all the most learned nations, and
cities, and men." And yet he will not call the
Jews a learned nation in the same way in which
he does the Egyptians, and Assyrians, and In-
dians, and Persians, and Odrysians, and Samo-
thracians, and Eleusinians.

CHAP. XV.

How much more impartial than Celsus is Nu-
menius the Pythagorean, who has given many
proofs of being a very eloquent man, and who
has carefully tested many opinions, and collected
together from many sources what had the ap-
pearance of truth ; for, in the first book of his
treatise On the Good, speaking of those nations
who have adopted the opinion that God is in-
corporeal, he enumerates the Jews also among
those who hold this view ; not showing any re-
luctance to use even the language of their proph-
ets in his treatise, and to give it a metaphorical
signification. It is said, moreover, that Her-
mippus has recorded in his first book. On Law-
givers, that it was from the Jewish people that
Pythagoras derived the philosophy which he
introduced among the Greeks. And there is
extant a work by the historian HecatKus, treat-


Chap. XVIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


403


ing of the Jews, in which so high a character is
bestowed upon that nation for its learning, that
Herennius Philo, in his treatise on the Jews, has
doubts in the first place, whether it is really
the composition of the historian ; and says, in the
second place, that if really his, it is probable
that he was carried away by the plausible nature
of the Jewish history, and so yielded his assent
to their system.


I must express my surprise that Celsus should
class the Odrysians, and Samothracians, and
Eleusinians, and Hyperboreans among the most
ancient and learned nations, and should not
deem the Jews worthy of a place among such,
either for their learning or their antiquity, al-
though there are many treatises in circulation
among the Egyptians, and Phoenicians, and
Greeks, which testify to their existence as an
ancient people, but which I have considered it
unnecessary to quote. For any one who chooses
may read what Flavins Josephus has recorded
in his two books, On the Antiquity of the Jews,
where he brings together a great collection of
writers, who bear witness to the antiquity of the
Jewish people ; and there exists the Discourse
to the Greeks of Tatian the younger,^ in which
with very great learning he enumerates those
historians who have treated of the antiquity of
the Jewish nation and of Moses. It seems, then,
to be not from a love of truth, but from a spirit
of hatred, that Celsus makes these statements,
his object being to asperse the origin of Chris-
tianity, which is connected with Judaism. Nay,
he styles the Galactophagi of Homer, and the
Druids of the Gauls, and the Getae, most learned
and ancient tribes, on account of the resem-
blance between their traditions and those of the
Jews, although I know not whether any of their
histories survive ; but the Hebrews alone, as far
as in him lies, he deprives of the honour both
of antiquity and learning. And again, when
making a list of ancient and learned men who
have conferred benefits upon their contempora-
ries (by their deeds), and upon posterity by
their writings, he excluded Moses from the num-
ber ; while of Linus, to whom Celsus assigns a
foremost place in his list, there exists neither
laws nor discourses which produced a change
for the better among any tribes ; whereas a whole
nation, dispersed throughout the entire world,
obey the laws of Moses. Consider, then, whether
it is not from open malevolence that he has ex-
pelled Moses from his catalogue of learned men,
while asserting tl;iat Linus, and Musaeus, and
Orpheus, and Pherecydes, and the Persian Zo-


[apjfatoxrjTo?. See Josephus's U'orks, for the treatise
s usually designated, as written, Against Aiion. S.J
LSee vol. ii. pp. 80, 81. S.]


roaster, and Pythagoras, discussed these topics,
and that their opinions were deposited in books,
and have thus been preserved down to the pres-
ent time. And it is intentionally also that he
has omitted to take notice of the myth, embel-
lished chiefly by Orpheus, in which the gods are
described as affected by human weaknesses and
passions.

CHAP. XVII.

In what follows, Celsus, assailing the Mosaic
history, finds lault with those who give it a trop-
ical and allegorical signification. And here one
might say to this great man, who inscribed upon
his own work the tide of a True Discourse,
" Why, good sir, do you make it a boast to have
it recorded that the gods should engage in such
adventures as are described by your learned
poets and philosophers, and be guilty of abom-
inable intrigues, and of engaging in wars against
their own fathers, and of cutting off their secret
parts, and should dare to commit and to suffer
such enormities ; while Moses, who gives no
such accounts respecting God, nor even regard-
ing the holy angels, and who relates deeds of
far less atrocity regarding men (for in his writ-
ings no one ever ventured to commit such
crimes as Kronos did against Uranus, or Zeus
against his father, or that of the father of men
and gods, who had intercourse with his own
daughter), should be considered as having de-
ceived those who were placed under his laws,
and to have led them into error?" And here
Celsus seems to me to act somewhat as Thrasy-
machus the Platonic philosopher did, when he
would not allow Socrates to answer regarding
justice, as he wished, but said, " Take care not
to say that utility is justice, or duty, or anything
of that kind." For in like manner Celsus as-
sails (as he thinks) the Mosaic histories, and
finds fault with those who understand them alle-
gorically, at the same time bestowing also some
praise upon those who do so, to the effect that
they are more impartial (than those who do
not) ; and thus, as it were, he prevents by his
cavils those who are able to show the true state
of the case from offering such a defence as they
would wish to offer.3

CHAP. XVIII.

And challenging a comparison of book with
book, I would say, " Come now, good sir, take
down the poems of Linus, and of Musaeus, and
of Orpheus, and the writings of Pherec\des,
and carefully compare these with the laws of
Moses — histories with histories, and ethical dis-
courses with laws and commandments — and see


3 Oiovei KiaKverai, Karrjyoprjcra^ lus jSouAerai, ajroAoycicrSot
Tov^ &vuafj.ii'Ov; <u? weivKev exew to. TrpayixaTa.. We have taken
KuikvtTai. as middle. Some propose KioAOei. And we have read
/JoiiAoi'Tai, a lection which is given by a second hand in one .vis.


404


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


which of the two are the better fitted to change
the character of the hearer on the very spot, and
which to harden ' him in his wickedness ; and
observe that your series of writers display Httle
concern for those readers who are to peruse them
at once unaided,- but have composed their phil-
osophy (as you term it) for those who are able
to comprehend its metaphorical and allegorical
signification ; whereas Moses, like a distinguished
orator who meditates some figure of Rhetoric,
and who carefully introduces in every part lan-
guage of twofold meaning, has done this in his
five books : neither affording, in the portion
which relates to morals, any handle to his Jewish
subjects for committing evil ; nor yet giving to
the few individuals who were endowed with
greater wisdom, and who were capable of in-
vestigating his meaning, a treatise devoid of
material for speculation. But of your learned
poets the very writings would seem no longer
to be preserved, although they would have been
carefully treasured up if the readers had per-
ceived any benefit (likely to be derived from
them) ; whereas the works of Moses have stirred
up many, who were even aliens to the manners
of the Jews, to the belief that, as these writings
testify, the first who enacted these laws and de-
livered them to Moses, was the God who was
the Creator of the world. For it became the
Creator of the universe, after laying down laws
for its government, to confer upon His words a
power which might subdue all men in every part
of the earth.3 And this I maintain, having as
yet entered into no investigation regarding Jesus,
but still demonstrating that Moses, who is far
inferior to the Lord, is, as the Discourse will
show, greatly superior to your wise poets and
philosophers."

CHAP. XIX.

After these statements, Celsus, from a secret
desire to cast discredit upon the Mosaic account
of the creation, which teaches that the world is
not yet ten thousand years old, but very much
under that, while concealing his wish, intimates
his agreement with those who hold that the world
is uncreated. For, maintaining that there have
been, from all eternity, many conflagrations and
many deluges, and that the flood which lately
took place in the time of Deucalion is com-
paratively modern, he clearly demonstrates to
those who are able to understand him, that, in
his opinion, the world was uncreated. But let
this assailant of the Christian faitnt;ell us by
what arguments he was compelled to accept the
statement that there have been many conflagra-


1 'En-tTpi'i/iat. Other readings are inKTTpiipai. and a7rotrTpei//at,
which convey the opposite meaning.

2 avToOfv,

3 [See Dr. Waterland's charge to the clergy, on " The Wisdom of
the Ancients borrowed from Divine Revelation," Works, vol. v. pp.
lo, 24. S.J


tions and many cataclysms, and that the flood
which occurred in the time of Deucalion, and
the conflagration in that of Phaethon, were more
recent than any others. And if he should put
forward the dialogues of Plato (as evidence) on
these subjects, we shall say to him that it is
allowable for us also to believe that there re-
sided in the pure and pious soul of Moses, who
ascended above all created things, and united
himself to the Creator of the universe, and who
made known divine things with far greater clear-
ness than Plato, or those other wise men (who
lived) among the Greeks and Romans, a spirit
which was divine. And if he demands of us our
reasons for such a belief, let him first give grounds
for his own unsupported assertions, and then we
shall show that this view of ours is the correct
one.

CHAP. XX.

And yet, against his will, Celsus is entangled
into testifying that the world is comparatively
modern, and not )'et ten thousand years old,
when he says that the Greeks consider those
things as ancient, because, owing to the deluges
and conflagrations, they have not beheld or re-
ceived any memorials of older events. But let
Celsus have, as his authorities for the myth re-
garding the conflagrations and inundations, those
persons who, in his opinion, are the most learned
of the Egyptians, traces of whose wisdom are to
be found in the worship of irrational animals, and
in arguments which prove that such a worship of
God is in conformity with reason, and of a secret
and mysterious character. The Egyptians, then,
when they boastfully give their own account of
the divinity of animals, are to be considered
wise ; but if any Jew, who has signified his ad-
herence to the law and the lawgiver, refer every-
thing to the Creator of the universe, and the
only God, he is, in the opinion of Celsus and
those Hke him, deemed inferior to him • who
degrades the Divinity not only to the level of
rational and mortal animals, but even to that of
irrational also ! — a view which goes far beyond
the mythical doctrine of transmigration, accord-
ing to which the soul falls down from the summit
of heaven, and enters into the body of brute
beasts, both tame and savage ! And if the
Egyptians related fables of this kind, they are
believed to convey a philosophical meaning by
their enigmas and mysteries ; but if Moses com-
pose and leave behind him histories and laws for
an entire nation, they are to be considered as
empty fables, the language of which admits of no
allegorical meaning !

CHAP. XXI.

The following is the view of Celsus and the

Epicureans : " Moses having," he says, "learned

i the doctrine which is to be found existing among


J


Chap. XXIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


405


wise nations and eloquent men, obtained the
reputation of divinity." Now, in answer to tliis
we have to say, that it may be allowed him that
Moses did indeed hear a somewhat ancient doc-
trine, and transmitted the same to the Hebrews ;
that if the doctrine which he heard was false,
and neither pious nor venerable, and if notwith-
standing, he received it and handed it down to
those under his authority, he is liable to censure ;
but if, as you assert, he gave his adherence to
opinions that were wise and true, and educated
his people by means of them, what, pray, has he
done deserving of condemnation? Would, in-
deed, that not only Epicurus, but Aristotle, whose
sentiments regarding providence are not so im-
pious (as those of the former), and the Stoics,
who assert that God is a body, had heard such a
doctrine ! Then the world would not have been
filled with opinions which either disallow or en-
feeble the action of providence, or introduce a
corrupt corporeal principle, according to which
the god of the Stoics is a body, with respect to
whom they are not afraid to say that he is ca-
pable of change, and may be altered and trans-
formed in all his parts, and, generally, that he is
capable of corruption, if there be any one to
corrupt him, but that he has the good fortune
to escape corruption, because there is none to
corrupt. Whereas the doctrine of the Jews and
Christians, which preserves the immutability and
unalterableness of the divine nature, is stigma-
tized as impious, because it does not partake of
the profanity of those whose notions of God are
marked by impiety, but because it says in the
supplication addressed to the Divinity, " Thou
art the same," ' it being, moreover, an article of
faith that God has said, " I change not," ^

CHAP. XXII.

After this, Celsus, without condemning cir-
cumcision as practised by the Jews, asserts that
this usage was derived from the Egyptians ;
thus believing the Egyptians rather than Moses,
who says that Abraham was the first among men
who practised the rite. And it is not Moses
alone who mentions the name of Abraham, as-
signing to him great intimacy with God ; but
many also of those who give themselves to the
practice of the conjuration of evil spirits, employ
in their spells the expression " God of Abraham,"
pointing out by the very name the friendship
(that existed) between that just man and God.
And yet, while making use of the phrase " God
of Abraham," they do not know who Abraham
is ! And the same remark applies to Isaac, and
Jacob, and Israel ; which names, although con-
1 fessedly Hebrew, are frecjuently introduced by


' Ps. cii.
2 Mai. iii


those Egyptians who profess to produce some
wonderful result by means of their knowledge.
The rite of circumcision, however, which began
with Abraham, and was discontinued by Jesus,
who desired that His disciples should not prac-
tise it, is not before us for explanation ; for the
present occasion does not lead us to speak of
such things, but to make an effort to refute the
charges brought against the doctrine of the Jews
by Celsus, who thinks that he will be able the
more easily to establish the falsity of Christianity,
if, by assailing its origin in Judaism, he can show
that the latter also is untrue,

CHAP. XXIII.

After this, Celsus next asserts that "Those
herdsmen and shepherds who followed Moses as
their leader, had their minds deluded by vulgar
deceits, and so supposed that there was one
God." Let him show, then, how, after this
irrational departure, as he regards it, of the
herdsmen and shepherds from the worship of
many gods, he himself is able to establish the
multiplicity of deities that are found amongst
the Greeks, or among those other nations that
are called Barbarian. Let him establish, there-
fore, the existence of Mnemosyne, the mother
of the Muses by Zeus ; or of Themis, the parent
of the Hours ; or let him prove that the ever
naked Graces can have a real, substantial exist-
ence. But he will not be able to show, from
any actions of theirs, that these fictitious repre-
sentations ^ of the Greeks, which have the ap-
pearance of being invested with bodies, are
(really) gods. And why should the fables of the
Greeks regarding the gods be true, any more
than those of the Egyptians for example, who in
their language know nothing of a Mnemosyne,
mother of the nine Muses ; nor of a Themis,
parent of the Hours ; nor of a Euphrosyne,
one of the Graces ; nor of any other of these
names? How much more manifest (and how
much better than all these inventions !) is it
that, convinced by what we see, in the admirable
order of the world, we should worship the INLaker
of it as the one Author of one effect, and which,
as being wholly in harmony with itself, cannot
on that account have been the work of many
makers ; and that we should believe that the
whole heaven is not held together by the move-
ments of many souls, for one is enough, which
bears the whole of the non-wandering* sphere
from east to west, and embraces within it all
things which the world requires, and which are
not self-existing ! For all are parts of the world,
while God is no part of the whole. But God
cannot be imperfect, as a part is imperfect. And


ayanX.do'fxaTa.


4o6


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


perhaps profounder consideration will show, that
as God is not a part, so neither is He properly
the whole, since the whole is composed of parts ;
and reason will not allow us to believe that the
God who is over all is composed of parts, each
one of which cannot do what all the other parts
can.

CHAP. XXIV.

After this he continues : " These herdsmen
and shepherds concluded that there was but one \
God, named either the Highest, or Adonai, or '
the Heavenly, or Sabaoth, or called by some
other of those names which they delight to give
this world ; and they knew nothing beyond that."
And in a subsequent part of his work he says,
that " It makes no difference whether the God
who is over all things be called by the name of
Zeus, which is current among the Greeks, or by
that, e.g., which is in use among the Indians or
Egyptians." Now, in answer to this, we have
to remark that this involves a deep and myste-
rious subject — that, viz., respecting the nature
of names : it being a question whether, as Aris-
totle thinks, names were bestowed by arrange-
ment, or, as the Stoics hold, by nature ; the first
words being imitations of things, agreeably to
which the names were formed, and in conformity
with which they introduce certain principles of
etymology ; or whether, as Epicurus teaches
(differing in this from the Stoics), names were
given by nature, — the first men having uttered
certain words varying with the circumstances in
which they found themselves. If, then, we shall
be able to establish, in reference to the preced-
ing statement, the nature of powerful names,
some of which are used by the learned amongst
the Egyptians, or by the Magi among the Per-
sians, and by the Indian philosophers called
Brahmans, or by the Samangeans, and others in
different countries ; and shall be able to make
out that the so-called magic is not, as the fol-
lowers of Epicurus and Aristotle suppose, an
altogether uncertain thing, but is, as those skilled
in it prove, a consistent system, having words
which are known to exceedingly few ; then we
say that the name Sabaoth, and Adonai, and the
other names treated with so much reverence
among the Hebrews, are not applicable to any
ordinary created things, but belong to a secret
theology which refers to the Framer of all things.
These names, accordingly, when pronounced with
that attendant train of circumstances which is
appropriate to their nature, are possessed of great
power ; and other names, again, current in the
Egyptian tongue, are efficacious against certain
demons who can only do certain things ; and
other names in the Persian language have corre-
sponding power over other spirits ; and so on in
every individual nation, for different purposes.


And thus it will be found that, of the various
demons upon the earth, to whom different local-
ities have been assigned, each one bears a name
appropriate to the several dialects of place and
country. He, therefore, who has a nobler idea,
however small, of these matters, will be careful
not to apply differing names to different things ;
lest he should resemble those who mistakenly
apply the name of God to lifeless matter, or who
drag down the title of " the Good " from the
First Cause, or from virtue and excellence, and
apply it to blind Plutus, and to a healthy and
well-proportioned mixture of flesh and blood
and bones, or to what is considered to be noble
birth."

CHAP. XXV.

And perhaps there is a danger as great as
that which degrades the name of " God," or of
" the Good," to improper objects, in changing the
name of God according to a secret system, and
applying those which belong to inferior beings to
greater, and mr versa. And I do not dwell on
this, that when the name of Zeus is uttered, there
is heard at the same time that of the son of
Kronos and Rhea, and the husband of Hera, and
brother of Poseidon, and father of Athene, and
Artemis, who was guilty of incest with his own
daughter Persephone ; or that Apollo immedi-
ately suggests the son of Leto and Zeus, and the
brother of Artemis, and half-brother of Hermes ;
and so with all the other names invented by these
wise men of Celsus, who are the parents of these
opinions, and the ancient theologians of the
Greeks. For what are the grounds for deciding
that he should on the one hand be properly called
Zeus, and yet on the other should not have
Kronos for his father and Rhea for his mother ?
And the same argument applies to all the others
that are called gods. But this charge does not
at all apply to those who, for some mysterious
reason, refer the word Sabaoth, or Adonai, or
any of the other names to the (true) God. And
when one is able to philosophize about the mys-
tery of names, he will find much to say respect-
ing the titles of the angels of God, of whom one
is called Michael, and another Gabriel, and an-
other Raphael, appropriately to the duties which
they discharge in the world, according to the
will of the God of all things. And a similar
philosophy of names applies also to our Jesus,
whose name has already been seen, in an unmis-
takeable manner, to have expelled myriads of
evil spirits from the souls and bodies (of men),
so great was the power which it exerted upon
those from whom the spirits were driven out.
And while still upon the subject of names, we
have to mention that those who are skilled in


oo'T£a>i' fjvfXfx^TpCaw e


.^a,,,


Chap. XXVIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


407


the use of incantations, relate that the utterance
of the same incantation in its proper language
can accomplish what the spell professes to do ;
but when translated into any other tongue, it is
observed to become inefficacious and feeble.
And thus it is not the things signified, but the
qualities and pecuharities of words, which pos-
sess a certain power for this or that purpose.
And so on such grounds as these we defend the
conduct of the Christians, when they struggle
even to death to avoid calling God by the name
of Zeus, or to give Him a name from any other
language. For they either use the common
name — God — indefinitely, or with some such
addition as that of the " Maker of all things,"
" the Creator of heaven and earth " — He who
sent down to the human race those good men,
to whose names that of God being added, cer-
tain mighty works are wrought among men.
And much more besides might be said on the
subject of names, against those who think that
we ought to be indifferent as to our use of them.
And if the remark of Plato in the Philebus
should surprise us, when he says, " My fear, O
Protagoras, about the names of the gods is no
small one," seeing Philebus in his discussion
with Socrates had called pleasure a " god," how
shall we not rather approve the piety of the
Christians, who apply none of the names used
in the mythologies to the Creator of the world?
And now enough on this subject for the present.

CHAP. XXVI.

But let us see the manner in which this Cel-
sus, who professes to know everything, brings a
false accusation against the Jews, when he alleges
that " they worship angels, and are addicted to
sorcery, in which Moses was their instructor."
Now, in what part of the writings of Moses he
found the lawgiver laying down the worship of
angels, let him tell, who professes to know all
about Christianity and Judaism ; and let him
show also how sorcery can exist among those
who have accepted the Mosaic law, and read
the injunction, " Neither seek after wizards, to
be defiled by them." ' IMoreover, he promises
to show afterwards " how it was through igno-
rance that the Jews were deceived and led into
error." Now, if he had discovered that the
ignorance of the Jews regarding Christ was the
effect of their not having heard the prophecies
about Him, he would show with truth how the
Jews fell into error. But without any wish what-
ever that this should appear, he views as Jewish
errors what are no errors at all. And Celsus

I having promised to make us acquainted, in a
subsequent part of his work, with the doctrines

I of Judaism, proceeds in the first place to speak


of our Saviour as having been the leader of our
generation, in so far as we are Christians,^ and
says that " a few years ago he began to teach
this doctrine, being regarded by Christians as
the Son of God." Now, with respect to this
point — His prior existence a few years ago —
we have to remark as follows. Could it have
come to pass without divine assistance, that
Jesus, desiring during these years to spread
abroad His words and teaching, should have
been so successful, that everywhere throughout
the world, not a few persons, Greeks as well as
Barbarians, learned as well as ignorant, adopted
His doctrine, so that they struggled even to
death in its defence, rather than deny it, which
no one is ever related to have done for any
other system? I indeed, from no wish to flat-
ter ^ Christianity, but from a desire thoroughly
to examine the facts, would say that even those
who are engaged in the healing of numbers of
sick persons, do not attain their object — the
cure of the body — without divine help; and if
one were to succeed in delivering souls from a
flood of vvickedness, and excesses, and acts of
injustice, and from a contempt of God, and were
to show, as evidence of such a result, one hun-
dred persons improved in their natures (let us
suppose the number to be so large), no one
would reasonably say that it was without divine
assistance that he had implanted in those hun-
dred individuals a doctrine capable of removing
so many evils. And if any one, on a candid
consideration of these things, shall admit that
no improvement ever takes place among men
without divine help, how much more confidently
shall he make the same assertion regarding Jesus,
when he compares the former lives of many
converts to His doctrine with their after con-
duct, and reflects in what acts of licentiousness
and injustice and covetousness they formerly in-
dulged, until, as Celsus, and they who think with
him, allege, " they were deceived," and accepted
a doctrine which, as these individuals assert, is
destructive of the life of men ; but who, from
the time that they adopted it, have become in
some way meeker, and more religious, and more
consistent, so that certain among them, from a
desire of exceeding chastity^ and a wish to wor-
ship God with greater purity, abstain even from
the permitted indulgences of (lawful) love.

CHAP. XXVII.

Any one who examines the subject will see
that Jesus attempted and successfully accom-
plished works beyond the reach of human power.
For although, from the very beginning, all things
opposed the spread of His doctrine in the world,


iSo Xpi<j-Tia»'Oi eo-ficf ytveertt jjfiuji'


4o8


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


— both the princes of the times, and their chief
captains and generals, and all, to speak gener-
ally, who were possessed of the smallest influ-
ence, and in addition to these, the rulers of the
different cities, and the soldiers, and the people,

— yet it proved victorious, as being the Word
of God, the nature of which is such that it can-
not be hindered ; and becoming more powerful
than all such adversaries, it made itself master
of the whole of Greece, ajid a considerable por-
tion of Barbarian lands, and converted countless
numbers of souls to His religion. And although,
among the multitude of converts to Christianity,
the simple and ignorant necessarily outnumbered
the more intelligent, as the former class always
does the latter, yet Celsus, unwilling to take note
of this, thinks that this philanthropic doctrine,
which reaches to every soul under the sun, is
vulgar,' and on account of its vulgarity and its
want of reasoning power, obtained a hold only
over the ignorant. And yet he himself admits
that it was not the simple alone who were led
by the doctrine of Jesus to adopt His religion ;
for he acknowledges that there were amongst
them some persons of moderate intelligence, and
gentle disposition, and possessed of understand-
ing, and capable of comprehending allegories.

CHAP. XXVIII.

And since, in imitation of a rhetorician train-
ing a pupil, he introduces a Jew, who enters into
a personal discussion with Jesus, and speaks in a
very childish manner, altogether unworthy of the
grey hairs of a philosopher, let me endeavour,
to the best of my ability, to examine his state-
ments, and show that he does not maintain,
throughout the discussion, the consistency due
to the character of a Jew. For he represents
him disputing with Jesus, and confuting Him, as
he thinks, on many points ; and in the first place,
he accuses Him of having " invented his birth
from a virgin," and upbraids Him with being
" born in a certain Jewish village, of a poor
woman of the country, who gained her subsist-
ence by spinning, and who was turned out of
doors by her husband, a carpenter by trade, be-
cause she was convicted of adultery ; that after
being driven away by her husband, and wander-
ing about for a time, she disgracefully gave birth
to Jesus, an illegitimate child, who having hired
himself out as a servant in Egypt on account of
his poverty, and having there acquired some
miraculous powers, on which the Egyptians
greatly pride themselves, returned to his own
country, highly elated on account of them, and
by means of these proclaimed himself a God."
Now, as I cannot allow anything said by unbe-


lievers to remain unexamined, but must inves-
tigate everything from the beginning, I give it as
my opinion that all these things worthily harmo-
nize with the predictions that Jesus is the Son
of God.

CHAP. XXIX.

For birth is an aid towards an individual's be-
coming famous, and distinguished, and talked
about ; viz., when a man's parents happen to be
in a position of raiak and influence, and are pos-
sessed of wealth, and are able to spend it upon
the education of their son, and when the coun-
try of one's birth is great and illustrious ; but
when a man having all these things against
him is able, notwithstanding these hindrances, to
make himself known, and to produce an impres-
sion on those who hear of him, and to become
distinguished and visible to the whole world,
which speaks of him as it did not do before, how
can we help admiring such a nature as being both
noble in itself, and devoting itself to great deeds,
and possessing a courage which is not by any
means to be despised? And if one were to ex-
amine more fully the history of such an indi-
vidual, why should he not seek to know in what
manner, after being reared up in frugality and
poverty, and without receiving any complete
education, and without having studied systems
and opinions by means of which he might have
acquired confidence to associate with multitudes,
and play the demagogue, and attract to himself
many hearers, he nevertheless devoted himself to
the teaching of new opinions, introducing among
men a doctrine which not only subverted the
customs of the Jews, while preserving due re-
spect for their prophets, but which especially
overturned the established observances of the
Greeks regarding the Divinity ? And how could
such a person — one who had been so brought
up, and who, as his calumniators admit, had
learned nothing great from men — have been
able to teach, in a manner not at all to be
despised, such doctrines as he did regarding the
divine judgment, and the punishments that are
to overtake wickedness, and the rewards that are
to be conferred upon virtue ; so that not only
rustic and ignorant individuals were won by his
words, but also not a few of those who were dis-
tinguished by their wisdom, and who were able
to discern the hidden meaning in those more
common doctrines, as they were considered,
which were in circulation, and which secret
meaning enwrapped, so to speak, some more
recondite signification still ? The Seriphian, in
Plato, who reproaches Themistocles after he had
become celebrated for his military skill, saying
that his reputation was due not to his own merits,
but to his good fortune in having been born in
the most illustrious country in Greece, received


Chap. XXXI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


409


from the good-natured Athenian, who saw that
his native country did contribute to his renown,
the following reply : " Neither would I, had I
been a Seriphian, have been so distinguished as
I am, nor would you have been a Themistocles,
even if you had had the good fortune to be an
Athenian ! " And now, our Jesus, who is re-
proached with being born in a village, and that
not a Greek one, nor belonging to any nation
widely esteemed, and being despised as the son
of a poor labouring woman, and as having on
account of his poverty left his native country and
hired himself out in Egypt, and being, to use the
instance already quoted, not only a Seriphian,
as it were, a native of a very small and undis-
tinguished island, but even, so to speak, the
meanest of the Seriphians, has yet been able to
shake ' the whole inhabited world not only to a
degree far above what Themistocles the Athenian
ever did, but beyond what even Pythagoras, or
Plato, or any other wise man in any part of the
world whatever, or any prince or general, ever
succeeded in doing.^


CHAP. XXX.

Now, would not any one who investigated with
ordinary care the nature of these facts, be struck
with amazement at this man's victory? — with
his complete success in surmounting by his repu-
tation all causes that tended to bring him into
disrepute, and with his superiority over all other
illustrious individuals in the world ? And yet it
is a rare thing for distinguished men to succeed
in acquiring a reputation for several things at
once. For one man is admired on account of
his wisdom, another for his military skill, and
some of the Barbarians for their marvellous
powers of incantation, and some for one quality,
and others for another ; but not many have been
admired and acquired a reputation for many
things at the same time ; whereas this man, in
addition to his other merits, is an object of ad-
miration both for his wisdom, and for his mira-
cles, and for his power of government. Eor he
persuaded some to withdraw themselves'from
their laws, and to secede to him, not as a tyrant
would do, nor as a robber, who arms ^ his fol-
lowers against men ; nor as a rich man, who
bestows help upon those who come to him ; nor
as one of those who confessedly are deserving of

1 censure ; but as a teacher of the doctrine regard-
ing the God of all things, and of the worship
which belongs to Him, and of all moral pre-

1 cepts which are able to secure the favour of the


I


' (Teio-at.

^ [This striking chapter is cited, as a specimen, of Christian elo-
quence, in the important work of Guillon, Cours d' Eloquence Sacrce,
Bruxelles, 1828].

3 Gelenius reads o-rrKi^iav (instead of aA«i(#)<o;'), which has been
adopted in the translation.


Supreme God to him who orders his life in con-
formity therewith. Now, to Themistocles, or to
any other man of distinction, nothing happened
to prove a hindrance to their reputation ; where-
as to this man, besides what we have already
enumerated, and which are enough to cover with
dishonour the soul of a man even of the most
noble nature, there was that apparently infamous
death of crucifixion, which was enough to efface
his previously acquired glory, and to lead those
who, as they who disavow his doctrine assert,
were formerly deluded by him to abandon their
delusion, and to pass condemnation upon their
deceiver.

CHAP. XXXI.

And besides this, one may well wonder how it
happened that the disciples — if, as the calum-
niators of Jesus say, they did not see Him after
His resurrection from the dead, and were not
persuaded of His divinity — were not afraid to
endure the same sufferings with their Master, and
to expose themselves to danger, and to leave
their native country to teach, according to the
desire of Jesus, the doctrine delivered to them
by Him. For I think that no one who candidly
examines the facts would say that these men
devoted themselves to a life of danger for the
sake of the doctrine of Jesus, without a profound
belief which He had wrought in their minds of
its truth, not only teaching them to conform to
His precepts, but others also, and to conform,
moreover, when manifest destruction to life im-
pended over him who ventured to introduce
these new opinions into all places and before all
audiences, and who could retain as his friend no
human being who adhered to the former opin-
ions and usages. For did not the disciples of
Jesus see, when they ventured to prove not only
to the Jews from their prophetic Scriptures that
this is He who was spoken of by the prophets,
but also to the other heathen nations, that He
who was crucified yesterday or the day before
underwent this death voluntarily on behalf of
the human race, — that this was analogous to
the case of those who have died for their country
in order to remove pestilence, or barrenness, or
tempests? For it is probable that there is in
the nature of things, for certain mysterious rea-
sons which are difficult to be understood by the
multitude, such a virtue that one just man, dying
a voluntary de^th for the common good, might
be the means of removing wicked spirits, which
are the cause of plagues, or barrenness, or tem-
pests, or similar calamities. Let those, there-
fore, who would disbelieve the statement that
Jesus died on the cross on behalf of men, say
whether they also refuse to accept the many
accounts current both among Greeks and Bar-
barians, of persons who have laid down their


4IO


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


lives for the public advantage, in order to remove
those evils which had fallen upon cities and
countries? Or will they say that such events
actually happened, but that no credit is to be
attached to that account which makes this so-
called man to have died to ensure the destruc-
tion of a mighty evil spirit, the ruler of evil
spirits, who had held in subjection the souls of
all men upon earth ? And the disciples of Jesus,
seeing this and much more (which, it is proba-
ble, they learned from Jesus in private), and
being filled, moreover, with a divine power (since
it was no mere poetical virgin that endowed them
with strength and courage, but the true wisdom
and understanding of God), exerted all their
efforts " to become distinguished among all
men," not only among the Argives, but among
all the Greeks and Barbarians alike, and " so
bear away for themselves a glorious renown." '

CHAP. XXXII.

But let us now return to where the Jew is in-
troduced, speaking of the mother of Jesus, and
saying that "when she was pregnant she was
turned out of doors by the carpenter to whom
she had been betrothed, as having been guilty
of adultery, and that she bore a child to a cer-
tain soldier named Panthera ; " and let us see
whether those who have blindly concocted these
fables about the adultery of the Virgin with Pan-
thera, and her rejection by the carpenter, did not
invent these stories to overturn His miraculous
conception by the Holy Ghost : for they could
have falsified the history in a different manner,
on account of its extremely miraculous charac-
ter, and not have admitted, as it were against
their will, that Jesus was born of no ordinary
human marriage. It was to be expected, in-
deed, that those who would not believe the mi-
raculous birth of Jesus would invent some
falsehood. And their not doing this in a credi-
ble manner, but (their) preserving the fact that
it was not by Joseph that the Virgin conceived
Jesus, rendered the falsehood very palpable to
those who can understand and detect such in-
ventions. Is it at all agreeable to reason, that he
who dared to do so much for the human race,
in order that, as far as in him lay, all the Greeks
and Barbarians, who were looking for divine con-
demnation, might depart from evil, and regulate
their entire conduct in a manner pleasing to the
Creator of the world, should fiot have had a
miraculous birth, but one the vilest and most
disgraceful of all? And I will ask of them as
Greeks, and particularly of Celsus, who either
holds or not the sentiments of Plato, and at any
rate quotes them, whether He who sends souls
down into the bodies of men, degraded Him


who was to dare such mighty acts, and to teach
so many men, and to reform so many from the
mass of wickedness in the world, to a birth more
disgraceful than any other, and did not rather
introduce Him into the world through a lawful
marriage? Or is it not more in conformity with
reason, that every soul, for certain mysterious
reasons (I speak now according to the opinion
of Pythagoras, and Plato, and Empedocles, whom
Celsus frequently names), is introduced into a
body, and introduced according to its deserts i
and former actions? It is probable, therefore,
that this soul also, which conferred more benefit Ij
by its residence in the flesh than that of many |
men (to avoid prejudice, I do not say "all"), |
stood in need of a body not only superior to j
others, but invested with all excellent qualities.

CHAP. XXXIII.

Now if a particular soul, for certain mysteri-
ous reasons, is not deserving of being placed in
the body of a wholly irrational being, nor yet in
that of one purely rational, but is clothed with a
monstrous body, so that reason cannot discharge
its functions in one so fashioned, which has the
head disproportioned to the other parts, and
altogether too short ; and another receives such
a body that the soul is a little more rational than
the other ; and another still more so, the nature
of the body counteracting to a greater or less
degree the reception of the reasoning principle ;
why should there not be also some soul which
receives an altogether miraculous body, possess-
ing some qualities common to those of other
men, so that it may be able to pass through life
with them, but possessing also some quality of
superiority, so that the soul may be able to re-
main untainted by sin? And if there be any
truth in the doctrine of the physiognomists,
whether Zopyrus, or Loxus, or Polemon, or any
other who wrote on such a subject, and who
profess to know in some wonderful way that all
bodies are adapted to the habits of the souls,
must there have been for that soul which was to
dwelijj with miraculous power among men, and
work mighty deeds, a body produced, as Celsus
thinks, by an act of adultery between Panthera
and the Virgin? ! Why, from such unhallowed
intercourse there must rather have been brought
forth some fool to do injury to mankind, — a
teacher of hcentiousness and wickedness, and
other evils ; and not of temperance, and right-
eousness, and the other virtues !

CHAP, xxxrv.
But it was, as the prophets also predicted,
from a virgin that there was to be born, accord-
ing to the promised sign, one who was to give
His name to the fact, showing that at His birth


Chap. XXXVI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


411


God was to be with man. Now it seems to me 1
appropriate to the character of a Jew to have '
quoted the prophecy of Isaiah, which says that
Immanuel was to be born of a virgin. This, '
however, Celsus, who professes to know every-
thing, has not done, either from ignorance or !
from an unvviUingness (if he had read it and
vokmtarily passed it by in silence) to furnish an
argument which might defeat his purpose. And
the prediction runs thus : " And the Lord spake '
again unto Ahaz, saying. Ask thee a sign of the
Lord thy God ; ask it either in the depth or in
the height above. But Ahaz said, I will not ask,
neither will I tempt the Lord. And he said.
Hear ye now, O house of David ; is it a small ^
thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary j
my God also? Therefore the Lord Himself
shall giv^e you a sign. Behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call His
name Immanuel, which is, being interpreted,
God with us." ' And that it was from inten-
tional malice that Celsus did not quote this
prophecy, is clear to me from this, that although
he makes numerous quotations from the Gospel
according to Matthew, as of the star that ap-
peared at the birth of Christ, and other miracu-
lous occurrences, he has made no mention at
all of this. Now, if a Jew should split words,
and say that the words are not, " Lo, a virgin,"
but, " Lo, a young woman," - we reply that the
word " Olmah " — which the Septuagint have
rendered by " a virgin," and others by " a young
woman " — occurs, as they say, in Deuteronomy,
as applied to a "virgin," in the following con-
nection : " If a damsel that is a virgin be be-
trothed unto an husband, and a man find her
in the city, and lie with her ; then ye shall bring
them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye
shall stone them with stones that they die ; the
damsel,^ because she cried not, being in the
city ; and the man, because he humbled his
neighbour's wife."+ And again : " But if a man
find a betrothed damsel in a field, and the man
force her, and lie with her : then the man only
that lay with her shall die : but unto the dam-
sel 5 ye shall do nothing ; there is in her no sin
worthy of death."

CHAP. XXXV.

But that we may not seem, because of a
Hebrew word, to endeavour to persuade those
I who are unable to determine whether they ought
1 to believe it or not, that the prophet spoke of
I this man being born of a virgin, l)ecause at his
1 birth these words, " God with us," were uttered,
let us make good our point from the words


' Cr Isa. vii. 10-14 with Matt. i. 23.

* Cf. Deut. xxii. 23, 24.
5 Tn ve6.vi.6i..


themselves. The Lord is related to have
spoken to Ahaz thus : " Ask a sign for thyself
from the Lord thy God, either in the depth
or height above ; " ^ and afterwards the sign is
given, " Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and
bear a son." ? What kind of sign, then, would
that have been — a young woman who was not
a virgin giving birth to a child ? And which of
the two is the more appropriate as the mother
of Immanuel (i.e., " God with us "), — whether
a woman who has had intercourse with a man,
and who has conceived after the manner of
women, or one who is still a pure and holy vir-
gin? Surely it is appropriate only to the latter
to produce a being at whose birth it is said,
" God with us." And should he be so captious
as to say that it is to Ahaz that the command is
addressed, "Ask for thyself a sign from the
Lord thy God," we shall ask in return, who in
the times of Ahaz bore a son at whose birth the
expression is made use of, " Immanuel," i.e.,
" God with us? " And if no one can be found,
then manifestly what was said to Ahaz was said
to the house of David, because it is written that
the Saviour was born of the house of David ac-
cording to the flesh ; and this sign is said to be
" in the depth or in the height," since " He
that descended is the same also that ascended
up far above all heavens, that He might fill all
things."^ And these arguments I employ as
against a Jew who believes in prophecy. Let
Celsus now tell me, or any of those who think
with him, with what meaning the prophet utters
either these statements about the future, or the
others which are contained in the prophecies?
Is it with any foresight of the fiiture or not?
If with a foresight of the future, then the proph-
ets were divinely inspired ; if with no foresight
of the future, let him explain the meaning of
one who speaks thus boldly regarding the fu-
ture, and who is an object of admiration among
the Jews because of his prophetic powers.

CHAP, xxxvi.
And now, since we have touched upon the
subject of the prophets, what we are about to
advance will be useful not only to the Jews, who
believe that they spake by divine inspiration, but
also to the more candid among the Greeks. To
these we say that we must necessarily admit that
the Jews had prophets, if they were to be kept
together under that system of law which had
been given them, ancl were to believe in the
Creator of the world, as they had learned, and
to be without pretexts, so far as the law was
concerned, for apostatizing to the polytheism of
the heathen. And we establish this necessity in


6 Cf. Isa. vii. II.

7 Isa. vii. 14.

8 Cf. Eph. iv. 10.


412


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book 1.


the following manner. " For the nations," as it
is written in the law of the Jews itself, " shall
hearken unto observers of times, and diviners ; " '
but to that people it is said : " But as for thee,
the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee so to
do." • And to this is subjoined the promise :
"A prophet shall the Lord thy God raise up
unto thee from among thy brethren." ^ Since,
therefore, the heathen employ modes of divina-
tion either by oracles or by omens, or by birds,
or by ventriloquists, or by those who profess the
art of sacrifice, or by Chaldean genealogists —
all which practices were forbidden to the Jews
— this people, if they had no means of attaining
a knowledge of futurity, being led by the passion
common to humanity of ascertaining the future,
would have despised their own prophets, as not
having in them any particle of divinity ; and
would not have accepted any prophet after
Moses, nor committed their words to writing,
but would have spontaneously betaken them-
selves to the divining usages of the heathen,
or attempted to establish some such practices
amongst themselves. There is therefore no ab-
surdity in their prophets having uttered predic-
tions even about events of no importance, to
soothe those who desire such things, as when
Samuel prophesies regarding three she-asses
which were lost,3 or when mention is made in
the third book of Kings respecting the sickness
of a king's son.-* And why should not those
who desired to obtain auguries from idols be
severely rebuked by the administrators of the
law among the Jews? — as Elijah is found re-
buking Ahaziah, and saying, " Is it because there
is not a God in Israel that ye go to inquire of
Baalzebub, god of Ekron?"

CHAP. XXXVII.

I think, then, that it has been pretty well
established not only that our Saviour was to be
born of a virgin, but also that there were proph-
ets among the Jews who uttered not merely
general predictions about the future, — as, e.g.,
regarding Christ and the kingdoms of the world,
and the events that were to happen to Israel,
and those nations which were to believe on the
Saviour, and many other things concerning
Him, — but also prophecies respecting particular
events ; as, for instance, how the asses of Kish,
which were lost, were to be discovered, and re-
garding the sickness which had fallen upon the
son of the king of Israel,, and any other recorded
circumstance of a similar kind. But as a further
answer to the Greeks, who do not believe in the


* Cf. Deut. xviii. 14.

2 Cf. Deut. xyiii. 15.

3 Cf. I Sam. ix. 10.

* Cf. I Kings xiv. 12.
S Cf. 2 Kings i. 3.


[See note 3, supra, p. 362. S.]


Ijirth of Jesus from a virgin, we have to say that
the Creator has shown, by the generation of
several kinds of animals, that what He has done
in the instance of one animal, He could do, if
it pleased Him, in that of others, and also of
man himself. P'or it is ascertained that there is
a certain female animal which has no intercourse
with the male (as writers on animals say is the
case with vultures), and that this animal, with-
out sexual intercourse, preserves the succession
of race. What incredibility, therefore, is there
in supposing that, if God wished to send a divine
teacher to the human race. He caused Him to
be born in some manner different from the
common ! ^ Nay, according to the Greeks them-
selves, all men were not born of a man and
woman. For if the world has been created, as
many even of the Greeks are pleased to admit,
then the first men must have been produced not
from sexual intercourse, but from the earth, in
which spermatic elements existed ; which, how-
ever, I consider more incredible than that Jesus
was born like other men, so far as regards tha
half of his birth. And there is no absurdity \x\
employing Grecian histories to answer Greeks, |
with the view of showing that we are not the '
only persons who have recourse to miraculous
narratives of this kind. For some have thought
fit, not in regard to ancient and heroic narra-
tives, but in regard to events of very recent
occurrence, to relate as a possible thing that
Plato was the son of Amphictione, Ariston being
prevented from having marital intercourse with
his wife until she had given birth to him with
whom she was pregnant by Apollo. And yet
these are veritable fables, which have led to the
invention of such stories concerning a man whom
they regarded as possessing greater wisdom and
power than the multitude, and as having re-
ceived the beginning of his corporeal substance
from better and diviner elements than others,
because they thought that this was appropriate
to persons who were too great to be human
beings. And since Celsus has introduced the
Jew disputing with Jesus, and tearing in pieces,
as he imagines, the fiction of His birth from a
virgin, comparing the Greek fables about Danae,
and Melanippe, and Auge, and Antiope, our
answer is, that such language becomes a buffoon,
and not one who is writing in a serious tone.

CHAP. XXXVIII. I

But, moreover, taking the history, contained ;

in the Gospel according to Matthew, of our i

Lord's descent into Egypt, he refuses to believe <

the miraculous circumstances attending it, viz., '

either that the angel gave the divine intimation, ;


Tali yvnai^i., dAAio rpoTrcij yeviaBat. Toi' koyov Tov TexOrjcrofiivov,


Chap. XLT.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


41,


or that our Lord's quitting Judea and residing in
Egypt was an event of any significance ; but he
invents something altogether different, admitting
somehow the miraculous works done by Jesus,
by means of which He induced the multitude to
follow Him as the Christ. And yet he desires
to throw discredit on them, as being done by
help of magic and not by divine power ; for he
asserts "that he (Jesus), having been brought
up as an illegitimate child, and having served for
hire in Egypt, and then coming to the knowl-
edge of certain miraculous powers, returned from
thence to his own country, and by means of those
powers proclaimed himself a god." Now I do
not understand how a magician should exert
himself to teach a doctrine which persuades us
always to act as if God were to judge every man
for his deeds ; and should have trained his dis-
ciples, whom he was to employ as the ministers
of his doctrine, in the same belief. For did the
latter make an impression upon their hearers,
after they had been so taught to work miracles ;
or was it without the aid of these ? The asser-
tion, therefore, that they did no miracles at all,
but that, after yielding their belief to arguments
which were not at all convincing, like the wis-
dom of Grecian dialectics,' they gave themselves
up to the task of teaching the new doctrine to
those persons among whom they happened to
take up their abode, is altogether absurd. For
in what did they place their confidence when
they taught the doctrine and disseminated the
new opinions? But if they indeed wrought
miracles, then how can it be believed that magi-
cians exposed themselves to such hazards to
introduce a doctrine which forbade the practice
of magic?

CHAP. XXXIX.

I do not think it necessary to grapple \\^ith an
argument advanced not in a serious but in a
scoffing spirit, such as the following : " If the
mother of Jesus was beautiful, then the god
whose nature is not to love a corruptible body,
had intercourse with her because she was beau-
tiful ; " or, " It was improbable that the god
would entertain a passion for her, because she
was neither rich nor of royal rank, seeing no
one, even of her neighbours, knew her." And
it is in the same scoffing spirit that he adds :
" When hated by her husband, and turned out
of doors, she was not saved by divine power, nor
was her story believed. Such things, he says,
have no connection with the kingdom of heaven."
In what respect does such language differ from
that of those who pour abuse on others on the


' This difTicult passage is rendered in the Latin translation: " but
that, after they had believed (in Christ), they with no adequate supply
of arguments, such as is furnished by the Greek dialectics, gave them-
selves up," etc.


public streets, and whose words are unworthy of
any serious attention?


After these assertions, he takes from the Gos-
pel of Matthew, and perhaps also from the other

I Gospels, the account of the dove alighting upon
our Saviour at His baptism by John, and desires

I to throw discredit upon the statement, alleging
that the narrative is a fiction. Having com-
pletely disposed, as he imagined, of the story of
our Lord's birth from a virgin, he does not pro-

j ceed to deal in an orderly manner with the ac-
counts that follow it ; since passion and hatred
observe no order, but angry and vindictive men
slander those whom they hate, as the feeling
comes upon them, being prevented by their pas-
sion from arranging their accusations on a care-
ful and orderly plan. For if he had observed a

I proper arrangement, he would have taken up the

j Gospel, and, with the view of assailing it, would
have objected to the first narrative, then passed
on to the second, and so on to the others. But
now, after the birth from a virgin, this Celsus,
who professes to be acquainted with all our his-
tory, attacks the account of the appearance of
the Holy Spirit in the form of a dove at the

I baptism. He then, after that, tries to throw dis-
credit upon the prediction that our Lord was to
come into the world. In the next place, he runs

j away to what immediately follows the narrative

I of the birth of Jesus — the account of the star,
and of the wise men who came from the east to

I worship the child. And you yourself may find,

I if you take the trouble, many confused state-
ments made by Celsus throughout his whole
book ; so that even in this account he may, by
those who know how to observe and require an
orderly method of arrangement, be convicted of
great rashness and boasting, in having inscribed
upon his work the title of A True Discourse, —
a thing which is never done by a learned phil-
osopher. For Plato says, that it is not an indi-

j cation of an intelligent man to make strong
assertions respecting those matters which are
somewhat uncertain ; and the celebrated Chry-
sippus even, who frequently states the reasons
by which he is decided, refers us to those whom
we shall find to be abler speakers than himself.
This man, however, who is wiser than those al-
ready named, and than all the other Greeks,
agreeably to his assertion of being acquainted
with everything, inscribed upon his book the
words, A True Discourse I

CHAP. XLI.

But, that we may not have the appearance of
intentionally passing by his charges through ina-
bility to refute them, we have resolved to answer


414


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


each one of them separately according to our
ability, attending not to the connection and
sequence of the nature of the things themselves,


cipation respecting the whole history related in
the Gospels concerning Jesus, not as inviting
men of acuteness to a simple and unreasoning


but to the arrangement of the subjects as they faith, but wishing to show that there is need of
occur in this book. Let us therefore notice candour in those who are to read, and of much

investigation, and, so to speak, of insight into
the meaning of the writers, that the object with
which each event has been recorded may be


what he has to say by way of impugning the
bodily appearance of the Holy Spirit to our Sav-
iour in the form of a dove. And it is a Jew who
addresses the following language to Him whom
we acknowledge to be our Lord Jesus : " When
you were bathing," says the Jew, " beside John,
you say that what had the appearance of a bird


discovered.


CHAP. XLIII.


We shall therefore say, in the first place, that
i if he who disbelieves the appearance of the Holy


^^.T. ^Jll.'''!/^i$^!'^.]!?„°!!-.?'°'',:l A"l?i?.-il''.' I Spint in the form of a dove had been described

as an Epicurean, or a follower of Democritus, or
a Peripatetic, the statement would have been


same Jew of his, continuing his interrogations,
asks, " What credible witness beheld this appear-
ance ? or who heard a voice from heaven declar-
ing you to be the Son of God ? What proof is
there of it, save your own assertion, and the state-
ment of another of those individuals who have
been punished along with you? "

CHAP. XLII.

Before we begin our reply, we have to remark
that the endeavour to show, with regard to
almost any history, however true, that it actually
occurred, and to produce an intelligent concep


in keeping with the character of such an ob-
jector. But now even this Celsus, wisest of all
men, did not perceive that it is to a Jew, who
believes more incredible things contained in the
writings of the prophets than the narrative of
the appearance of the dove, that he attributes
such an objection ! For one might say to the
Jew, when expressing his disbelief of the appear-
ance, and thinking to assail it as a fiction, " How
are you able to prove, sir, that the Lord spake
to Adam, or to Eve, or to Cain, or to Noah, or to


tion regarding it, is one of the most difficult 1^^^^..^!^^^^;^ ^^ ^^ ^^^^^^ ^^ to jLcob, those words


undertakings that can be attempted, and is in
some instances an impossibility. For suppose


which He is recorded to have spoken to these

, , ,men?" And, to compare history with history,

that some one were to assert that there never 1,^0^1^ g^y to the Jew, " Even your own Eze-

kiel writes, saying, 'The heavens were opened,
and I saw a vision of God.' ' After relating
which, he adds, 'This was the appearance of
the likeness of the glory of the Lord ; and He
etc. Now, if what is related of


had been any Trojan war, chiefly on account of
the impossible narrative interwoven therewith
about a certain Achilles being the son of a sea-
goddess Thetis and of a man Peleus, or Sarpe-
don being the son of Zeus, or Ascalaphus and ! g'^}(^"jQ j^g

lalmenus the sons of Ares, or ^neas that of | j^g^^^ ^^ ^^^^^^ ^-^^^ ^^^ ^^^^^^^ ^s suppose,

Aphrodite, how should we prove that such was ^^^, ^^^^^ -^ ^^ ^^ ^^^^^ -^ ^^- g^^j, ^^ h^ard
the case, especially under the weight of the fie- , ^-^^^^^^^ ^j^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^ ^^ h^^^^ o^,.

— attached, I know not how, to the universally ^^^^^ ^j^^ , ^^^ ^f th^^g ^^^ ^^^^^ punished


prevalent opinion that there was really
in Ilium between Greeks and Trojans? And
suppose, also, that some one disbelieved the story
of Qidipus and Jocasta, and of their two sons
Eteocles and Polynices, because the sphinx, a
kind of half-virgin, was introduced into the nar-
rative, how should we demonstrate the reality of
such a thing? And in like manner also with the
history of the Epigoni, although there is no such
marvellous event interwoven with it, or with the
return of the Heracleidse, or countless other
historical events. But he who deals candidly
with histories, and would wish to keep himself
also from being imposed upon by them, will ex-
ercise his judgment as to what statements he
will give his assent to, and what he will accept
figuratively, seeking to discover the meaning of
the authors of such inventions, and from what
statements he will withhold his belief, as having
been written for the gratification of certain indi-
viduals. And we have said this by way of anti-


^^^^ why should we not rather say that Ezekiel also
was dealing in the mar\'ellous when he said,
"The heavens were opened," etc.? Nay, even
Isaiah asserts, " I saw the Lord of hosts sitting
on a throne, high and lifted up ; and the sera-
phim stood round about it : the one had six
wings, and the other had six wings." ^ How can
we tell whether he really saw them or not ? Now,
O Jew, you have believed these visions to be
true, and to have been not only shown to the
prophet by a diviner Spirit, but also to have been
both spoken and recorded by the same. And
who is the more worthy of belief, when declaring
that the heavens were opened before him, and that
he heard a voice, or beheld the Lord of Sabaoth
sitting upon a throne high and lifted up, —
whether Isaiah and Ezekiel or Jesus ? Of the
former, indeed, no work has been found equal


■ Cf. Ezek.

2 Cf Ezek.

3 Cf. Isa. V


1


Chap. XLVI;


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


415


to those of :he latter ; whereas the good deeds
of Jesus have not been confined solely to the
period of His tabernacling in the flesh, but up to
the present time His power still produces con-
version and amelioration of life in those who
beUeve in God through Him. And a manifest
proof that these things are done by His power,
is the fact that, although, as He Himself said,
and as is admitted, there are not labourers
enough to gather in the harvest of souls, there
really is ne\-ertheless such a great harvest of
those who are gathered together and conveyed
into the everywhere existing threshing-floors and
Churches of God.

CHAP. XLIV.

And with these arguments I answer the Jew,
not disbelieving, I who am a Christian, Ezekiel
and Isaiah, but being very desirous to show, on
the footing of our common belief, that this man
is far more worthy of credit than they are when
He says that He beheld such a sight, and, as is
probable, related to His disciples the vision which
He saw, and told them of the voice which He
heard. But another party might object, that not
all those who have narrated the appearance of
the dove and the voice from heaven heard the
accounts of these things from Jesus, but that
that Spirit which taught Moses the history of
events before his own time, beginning with the
creation, and descending down to Abraham his
father, taught also the writers of the Gospel the
miraculous occurrence which took place at the
time of Jesus' baptism. And he who is adorned
with the spiritual gift,' called the "word of wis-
dom," will explain also the reason of the heavens
opening, and the dove appearing, and why the
Holy Spirit appeared to Jesus in the form of no
other living thing than that of a dove. But our
present subject does not require us to explain
this, our purpose being to show that Celsus dis-
played no sound judgment in representing a
Jew as disbelieving, on such grounds, a fact
which has greater probability in its favour than
many events in which he firmly reposes confi-
dence.


And I remember on one occasion, at a dispu-
tation held with certain Jews who were reputed
learned men, having employed the following argu-
ment in the presence of many judges : " Tell me,
I sirs," I said, " since there are two individuals who
have visited the human race, regarding whom are
I related marvellous works surpassing human power
I — Moses, viz., your own legislator, who wrote
j about himself, and Jesus our teacher, who has
left no writings regarding Himself, but to whom
I testimony is borne by the disciples in the Gos-


pels— what are the grounds for deciding that
Moses is to be believed as speaking the truth,
although the Egyptians slander him as a sorcerer,
and as appearing to have wrought his mighty
works by jugglery, while Jesus is not to be be-
lieved because you are His accusers? And yet
there are nations which bear testimony in favour
of both : the Jews to Moses ; and the Christians,
who do not deny the prophetic mission of Moses,
but proving from that very source the truth of
the statement regarding Jesus, accept as true the
miraculous circumstances related of Him by His
disciples. Now, if ye ask us for the reasons of
our faith in Jesus, give yours first for believing
in Moses, who lived before Him, and then we
shall give you ours for accepting the latter. But
if you draw back, and shirk a demonstration,
then we, following your own example, decline
for the present to offer any demonstration like-
wise. Nevertheless, admit that ye have no proof
to offer for Moses, and then listen to our defence
of Jesus derived from the law and the prophets.
And now observe what is almost incredible ! It
is shown from the declarations concerning Jesus,
contained in the law and the prophets, that both
Moses and the prophets were truly prophets of
God."

CHAP. XLVI.

For the law and the prophets are full of mar-
vels similar to those recorded of Jesus at His
baptism, viz., regarding the dove and the voice
from heaven. And I think the wonders wrought
by Jesus are a proof of the Holy Spirit's having
then appeared in the form of a dove, although
Celsus, from a desire to cast discredit upon
them, alleges that He performed only what He
had learned among the Egyptians. And I shall
refer not only to His miracles, but, as is proper,
to those also of the apostles of Jesus. For they
could not without the help of miracles and won-
ders have prevailed on those who heard their new
doctrines and new teachings to abandon their
national usages, and to accept their instructions
at the danger to themselves even of death. And
there are still preserved among Christians traces
of that Holy Spirit which appeared in the form
of a dove. They expel evil spirits, and perform
niany cures, and foresee certain events, accord-
ing to the will of the Logos. And although
Celsus, or the Jew whom he has introduced, may
treat with mockery what I am going to say, I
shall say it nevertheless, — that many have been
converted to Christianity as if against their will,
some sort of spirit having suddenly transformed
their minds from a hatred of the doctrine to a
readiness to die in its defence, and having ap-
peared to them either in a waking vision or a
dream of the night. Many such instances have
we known, which, if we were to commit to writ-


4i6


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


ing, although they were seen and witnessed by
ourselves, we should afford great occasion for
ridicule to unbelievers, who would imagine that
we, like those whom they suppose to have in-
vented such things, had ourselves also done the
same. But God is witness of our conscientious
desire, not by false statements, but by testimo-
nies of different kinds, to establish the divinity
of the doctrine of Jesus. And as it is a Jew who
is perplexed about the account of the Holy
Spirit having descended upon Jesus in the form
of a dove, we would say to him, " Sir, who is it
that says in Isaiah, 'And now the Lord hath
sent me and His Spirit ? ' " ' In which sentence,
as the meaning is doubtful — viz., whether
the Father and the Holy Spirit sent Jesus, or the
Father sent both Christ and the Holy Spirit —
the latter is correct. For, because the Saviour
was sent, afterwards the Holy Spirit was sent
also, that the prediction of the prophet might be
fulfilled ; and as it was necessary that the fulfil-
ment of the prophecy should be known to pos-
terity, the disciples of Jesus for that reason
committed the result to writing.

CHAP. XLVir,

I would like to say to Celsus, who represents
the Jew as accepting somehow John as a Bap-
tist, who baptized Jesus, that the existence of
John the Baptist, baptizing for the remission of
sins, is related by one who lived no great length
of time after John and Jesus. For in the i8th
book of his Antiquities^ of the Jezus, Josephus
bears witness to John as having been a Baptist,
and as promising purification to those who un- |
derwent the rite. Now this writer, although not
believing in Jesus as the Christ, in seeking after
the cause of the fall of Jerusalem and the de-
struction of the temple, whereas he ought to
have said that the conspiracy against Jesus was
the cause of these calamities befalling the peo-
ple, since they put to death Christ, who was a
prophet, says nevertheless — being, although
against his will, not far from the truth — that
these disasters happened to the Jews as a pun-
ishment for the death of James the Just, who
was a brother of Jesus (called Christ), — the
Jews having put him to death, although he was
a man most distinguished for his justice.^ Paul,
a genuine disciple of Jesus, says that he re-
garded this James as a brother of the Lord, not
so much on account of their relationship by
blood, or of their being brought up together, as
because of his virtue and doctrine.^ If, then,
he says that it was on account of James that the
desolation of Jerusalem was made to overtake


1 Cf. Isa. xlvlii. i6.

2 [apYaioAovias. S.] Cf. Joseph., Anii'g., book xviii. c. v. sec. 2.

3 \jl>id.,h.xx.c. ix. § I. S.f

4 Cf. Gal. i. 19.


the Jews, how should it not be more in accord-
ance with reason to say that it happened on ac-
count (of the death) of Jesus Christ, of whose
divinity so many Churches are witnesses, com-
posed of those who have been converted from a
flood of sins, and who have joined themselves
to the Creator, and who refer all their actions to
His good pleasure.

CHAP. XLVIII.

Although the Jew, then, may offer no defence
for himself in the instances of Ezekiel and Isaiah,
when we compare the opening of the heavens
to Jesus, and the voice that was heard by Him,
to the similar cases which we find recorded in
Ezekiel and Isaiah, or any other of the prophets,
we nevertheless, so far as we can, shall support
our position, maintaining that, as it is a matter
of belief that in a dream impressions have been
brought before the minds of many, some relat-
ing to divine things, and others to future events
of this life, and this either with clearness or in
an enigmatic manner, — a fact which is mani-
fest to all who accept the doctrine of provi-
dence ; so how is it absurd to say that the mind
which could receive impressions in a dream
should be impressed also in a waking vision, for
the benefit either of him on whom the impres-
sions are made, or of those who are to hear the
account of them from him ? And as in a dream
we fancy that we hear, and that the organs of
hearing are actually impressed, and that we see
with our eyes — although neither the bodily or-
gans of sight nor hearing are affected, but it is
the mind alone which has these sensations — so
there is no absurdity in believing that similar
things occurred to the prophets, when it is re-
corded that they witnessed occurrences of a
rather wonderful kind, as when they either heard
the words of the Lord or beheld the heavens
opened. For I do not suppose that the visible
heaven was actually opened, and its physical
structure divided, in order that Ezekiel might
be able to record such an occurrence. Should
not, therefore, the same be believed of the Sav-
ioui" by every intelligent hearer of the Gospels?
— although such an occurrence may be a stum-
bling-block to the simple, who in their simplicity
would set the whole world in movement, and
split in sunder the compact and mighty body of
the whole heavens. But he who examines such
matters more profoundly will say, that there be-
ing, as the Scripture calls it, a kind of general
divine perception which the blessed man alone
knows how to discover, according to the saying
of Solomon, " Thou shalt find the knowledge of
God ; " 5 and as there are various forms of this
perceptive power, such as a faculty of vision


5 Cf. Prov. ii. 5.


Chap. XLIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


417


which can naturally see things that are better
than bodies, among which are ranked the cheru-
bim and seraphim ; and a faculty of hearing which
can perceive voices which have not their being
in the air ; and a sense of taste which can make
use of living bread that has come down from
heaven, and that giveth life unto the world ; and
so also a sense of smelling, which scents such
things as leads Paul to say that he is a sweet
savour of Christ unto God ; ' and a sense of
touch, by which John says that he " handled with
his hands of the Word of life ; " ^ — the blessed
•prophets having discovered this divine percep-
tion, and seeing and hearing in this divine man-
ner, and tasting likewise, and smelling, so to
speak, with no sensible organs of perception,
and laying hold on the Logos by faith, so that
a healing effluence from it comes upon them,
saw in this manner what they record as having
seen, and heard what they say they heard, and
were affected in a similar manner to what they
describe when eating the roll of a book that was
given them.^ And so also Isaac sraelled the
savour of his son's divine garments,'* and added
to the spiritual blessing these words : " See, the
savour of my son is as the savour of a full field
which the Lord blessed." s And similarly to
this, and more as a matter to be understood by
j the mind than to be perceived by the senses,
Jesus touched the leper,^ to cleanse him, as I
think, in a twofold sense, — freeing him not
only, as the multitude heard, from the visible
leprosy by visible contact, but also from that
other leprosy, by His truly divine touch. It is in
j this way, accordingly, that John testifies when
j he says, " I beheld the Spirit descending from
heaven like a dove, and it abode upon Him.
And I knew Him not ; but He that sent me to
baptize with water, the same said to me, Upon
whom you will see the Spirit descending, and
abiding on Him, the same is He that baptizeth
\vith the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bear wit-
ness, that this is the Son of God."? Now it was
to Jesus that the heavens were opened ; and on
that occasion no one except John is recorded
to have seen them opened. But with respect to
this opening of the heavens, the Saviour, fore-
;elling to His disciples that it would happen, and
;hat they would see it, says, " Verily, verily, I
;ay unto you, Ye shall see the heavens opened,
md the angels of God ascending and descending
upon the Son of man." ^ And so Paul was car-
ped away into the third heaven, having previ-
ously seen it opened, since he was a disciple of


' Cf. 2 Cor. ii. 15.

2 Cf. I John i. I.

3 Cf. Ezek. iii. 2, 3.

* 'ilaboouvOi) TJ)? 6crn>j? rati' ToO 1
5 Cf. Gen. xxvii. 27.

* Cf. Matt. viii. 3.

' Cf. John i, 32-34.

* Cf. John i. 51.


' flciOTepwv i/.iaTiu


Jesus. It does not, however, belong to our pres-
ent object to explain why Paul says, " Whether
in the body, I know not ; or whether out of
the body, I know not : God knoweth." 9 But I
shall add to my argument even those very points
which Celsus imagines, viz., that Jesus Himself
related the account of the opening of the heav-
ens, and the descent of the Holy Spirit upon
Him at the Jordan in the form of a dove, although
the Scripture does not assert that He said that
He saw it. For this great man did not perceive
that it was not in keeping with Him who com-
manded His disciples on the occasion of the
vision on the mount, " Tell what ye have seen
to no man, until the Son of man be risen from
the dead," '° to have related to His disciples what
was seen and heard by John at the Jordan. For
it may be observed as a trait of the character of
Jesus, that He on all occasions avoided unneces-
sary talk about Himself; and on that account
said, " If I speak of Myself, My witness is not
true." " Ancl since He avoided unnecessary talk
about Himself, and preferred to show by acts
rather than words that He was the Christ, the
Jews for that reason said to Him, " If Thou art
the Christ, tell us plainly." '^ And as it is a Jew
who, in the work of Celsus, uses the language to
Jesus regarding the appearance of the Holy
Spirit in the form of a dove, "This is your own
testimony, unsupported save by one of those who
were sharers of your punishment, whom you ad-
duce," it is necessary for us to show him that
such a statement is not appropriately placed in
the mouth of a Jew. For the Jews do not con-
nect John with Jesus, nor the punishment of
John with that of Christ. And by this instance,
this man who boasts of universal knowledge is
convicted of not knowing what words he ought
to ascribe to a Jew engaged in a disputation with
Jesus.

CH.A.P. XLIX.

After this he wilfully sets aside, I know not
why, the strongest evidence in confirmation of
the claims of Jesus, viz., that His coming was
predicted by the Jewish prophets — Moses, and
those who succeeded as well as preceded that
legislator — from inability, as I think, to meet
the argument that neither the Jews nor any other
heretical sect refuse to believe that Christ was
the subject of prophecy. But perhaps he was
unacquainted with the prophecies relating to
Christ. For no one who was acquainted with
the statements of the Christians, that many
prophets foretold the advent of the Saviour,
would have ascribed to a Jew sentiments which


9 Cf. 2 Cor. xii. 2.
10 Cf. Matt. xvii. 9.
" John V. 31.
12 John X. 24.


4i8


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


it would have better befitted a Samaritan or a
Sadducee to utter ; nor would the Jew in the
dialogue have expressed himself in language like
the following : " But my prophet once declared
in Jerusalem, that the Son of God will come as
the Judge of the righteous and the Punisher of
the wicked." Now it is not one of the prophets
merely who predicted the advent of Christ. But
although the Samaritans and Sadducees, who
receive the books of Moses alone, would say
that there were contained in them predictions
regarding Christ, yet certainly not in Jerusalem,
which is not even mentioned in the times of
Moses, was the prophecy uttered. It were in-
deed to be desired, that all the accusers of Chris-
tianity were equally ignorant with Celsus, not
only of the facts, but of the bare letter of Scrip-
ture, and would so direct their assaults against
it, that their arguments might not have the least
available influence in shaking, I do not say the
faith, but the little faith of unstable and tempo-
rary believers. A Jew, however, would not ad-
mit that any prophet used the expression, " The
' Son of God ' will come ; " for the term which
they employ is, "The 'Christ of God' will
come." And many a time indeed do they
directly interrogate us about the " Son of God,"
saying that no such being exists, or was made
the subject of prophecy. We do not of course
assert that the " Son of God " is not the subject
of prophecy ; but we assert that he most map-
propriately attributes to the Jewish disputant,
who would not allow that He was, such language
as, " My prophet once declared in Jerusalem
that the ' Son of God ' will come."


In the next place, as if the only event pre-
dicted were this, that He was to be '' the Judge
of the righteous and the Punisher of the wicked,"
and as if neither the place of His birth, nor the
sufferings which He was to endure at the hands
of the Jews, nor His resurrection, nor the won-
derful works which He was to perform, had been
made the subject of prophecy, he continues :
" Why should it be you alone, rather than innu-
meralDle others, who existed after the prophecies
were pubhshed, to whom these predictions are
applicable ? " And desiring, I know not how, to
suggest to others the possibility of the notion
that they themselves were the persons referred
to by the prophets, he says that " some, carried
away by enthusiasm, and others having gathered
a multitude of followers, give out that the Son
of God is come down from heaven." Now we
have not ascertained that such occurrences are
admitted to have taken place among the Jews.
We have to remark then, in the first place, that
many of the prophets have uttered predictions


in all kinds of ways ' regarding Christ ; some by
means of dark sayings, others in allegories or in
some other manner, and some also in express
words. And as in what follows he says, in the
character of the Jew addressing the converts
from his own nation, and repeating emphatically
and malevolently, that " the prophecies referred
to the events of his life may also suit other events
as well," vv'e shall state a few of them out of a
greater number ; and with respect to these, any
one who chooses may say what he thinks fitted
to ensure a refutation of them, and which may
turn away intelligent believers from the faith.


Now the Scripture speaks, respecting the place
of the Saviour's birth — that the Ruler was to
come forth from Bethlehem — in the follow-
ing manner : " And thou Bethlehem, house of
Ephrata, art not the least among the thousands
of Judah : for out of thee shall He come forth
unto Me who is to be Ruler in Israel ; and His
goings forth have been of old, from everlasting."^
Now this prophecy could not suit any one of
those who, as Celsus' Jew says, were fanatics
and mob-leaders, and who gave out that they
had come from heaven, unless it were clearly
shown that He had been born in Bethlehem, or,
as another might say, had come forth from Beth-
lehem to be the leader of the people. With
respect to the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem, if any
one desires, after the prophecy of Micah and
after the history recorded in the Gospels by the
disciples of Jesus, to have additional evidence
from other sources, let him know that, in con-
formity with the narrative in the Gospel regard-
ing His birth, there is shown at Bethlehem the
cave 3 where He was born, and the manger in
the cave where He was wrapped in swaddling-
clothes. And this sight is greatly talked of in
surrounding places, even among the enemies of
the faith, it being said that in this cave was bom
that Jesus who is worshipped and reverenced by
the Christians.^ Moreover, I am of opinion that,
before the advent of Christ, the chief priests and
scribes of the people, on account of the distinct-
ness and clearness of this prophecy, taught that
in Bethlehem the Christ was to be born. And
this opinion had prevailed also extensively among
the Jews ; for which reason it is related that
Herod, on inquiring at the chief priests and
scribes of the people, heard from them that the
Christ was to be born in Bethlehem of Judea,


1 TTai'ToSan-ws Trpoeiiroi'.

2 Cf. Mic. V. 2 and Matt. ii. 6.

3 [See Dr. Spencer's T/ie East: Sketches of Travel in Egypt
and the Holy Land, pp. 362-365, London, Murray, 1850, an inter-
esting work by my esteemed collaborator ]

■• [Concerning this, besides Dr. Robinson (ii. 159), consult Dean
Stanley, Sinai and Palestine, p. 433. But compare Van Lennep,
Bible Lands, p. 804; Roberts' Holy Land, capp. 85, 87, vol. "■>
London.]


Chap. LIII.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


419


"whence David was." It is stated also in the
Gospel according to John, that the Jews de-
clared that the Christ was to be born in Bethle-
hem, "whence David was."' But after our
Lord's coming, those who busied themselves
with overthrowing the belief that the place of
His birth had been the subject of prophecy from
the beginning, withheld such teaching from the
people ; acting in a similar manner to those in-
dividuals who won over those soldiers of the
guard stationed around the tomb who had seen
Him arise from the dead, and who instructed
these eye-witnesses to report as follows : " Say
that His disciples, while we slept, came and stole
Him away. And if this come to the governor's
ears, we shall persuade him, and secure you." ^


Strife and prejudice are powerful instruments
in leading men to disregard even those things
which are abundantly clear ; so that they who
have somehow become familiar with certain
opinions, which have deeply imbued their minds,
and stamped them with a certain character, will
not give them up. For a man will abandon his
habits in respect to other things, although it may
be difficult for him to tear himself from them,
more easily than he will surrender his opinions.
Nay, even the former are not easily put aside by
those who have become accustomed to them ;
and so neither houses, nor cities, nor villages,
nor intimate acquaintances, are willingly for-
saken when we are prejudiced in their favour.
This, therefore, was a reason why many of the
Jews at that time disregarded the clear testi-
mony of the prophecies, and miracles which
Jesus wrought, and of the sufferings which He
is related to have endured. And that human
nature is thus affected, will be manifest to those
who observe that those who have once been
prejudiced in favour of the most contemptible
and paltry traditions of their ancestors and fel-
low-citizens, with difficulty lay them aside. For
example, no one could easily persuade an Egyp-
tian to despise what he had learned from his
fathers, so as no longer to consider this or that
irrational animal as a god, or not to guard against
eating, even under the penalty of death, of the
flesh of such an animal. Now, if in carrying our
examination of this subject to a considerable
length, we have enumerated the points respect-
ing Bethlehem, and the prophecy regarding it,
we consider that we were obliged to do this, by
way of defence against those who would assert
that if the prophecies current among the Jews
regarding Jesus were so clear as we represent
them, why did they not at His coming give in


' Cf. John vii. ^■z.

' Cf. Matt, xxviii. 13, 14.


their adhesion to His doctrine, and betake them-
selves to the better life pointed out by Him?
Let no one, however, bring such a reproach
against believers, since he may see that reasons
of no light weight are assigned by those who
have learned to state them, for their faith in
Jesus.

CHAP. LIII.

And if we should ask for a second prophecy,
which may appear to us to have a clear reference
to Jesus, we would quote that which was written
by Moses very many years before the advent of
Christ, when he makes Jacob, on his departure
from this life, to have uttered predictions regard-
ing each of his sons, and to have said of Judah
along with the others : " The ruler will not fail
from Judah, and the governor from his loins,
until that which is reserved for him come." ^
Now, any one meeting with this prophecy, which
is in reality much older than Moses, so that one
who was not a believer might suspect that it was
not written by him, would be surprised that
Moses should be able to predict that the princes
of the Jews, seeing there are among them twelve
tribes, should be born of the tribe of Judah, and
should be the rulers of the people ] for which
reason also the whole nation are called Jews, de-
riving their name from the ruling tribe. And, in
the second place, one who candidly considers
the prophecy, would be surprised how, after de-
claring that the rulers and governors of the peo-
ple were to proceed from the tribe of Judah, he
should determine also the limit of their rule, say-
ing that " the ruler should not fail from Judah,
nor the governor from his loins, until there
should come that which .was reserved for him,
and that He is the expectation of the Gentiles." *
For He came for whom these things were re-
served, viz., the Christ of God, the ruler of the
promises of God. And manifestly He is the
only one among those who preceded, and, I
might make bold to say, among those also who
followed Him, who was the expectation of the
Gentiles ; for converts from among all the Cien-
tile nations have believed on God through Him,
and that in conformity with the prediction of
Isaiah, that in His name the Gentiles had hoped :
" In Thy name shall the Gentiles hope." 5 And
this man said also to those who are in prison, as
every man is a captive to the chains of his sins,
" Come forth ; " and to the ignorant, " Come
into the light : " these things also having been
thus foretold : " I have given Thee for a cove-
nant of the people, to establish the earth, to


3 Cf. Gen. xlix. lo, f(i>s av e\.9jl ra anoKfiiifya avrw. This is
one of the passages of the Septuagint which Justin Martyr charges
the Jews with corrupting; the true re.iding, according to him, being
eoi? av iKOj] (i an-oKtiTat. Cf. Justin Martyr, Dialogic ■with Trypho,

♦ Cf. Oen. xhx. lo.
s Isa. xlii 4. (Sept.)


420


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


cause to inherit the desolate heritage ; saying to
the prisoners, Go forth ; and to them that are in
darkness, Show yourselves." ' And we may see
at the appearing of this man, by means of those
who everywhere throughout the world have re-
posed a simple faith in Him, the fulfilment of
this prediction : " They shall feed in the ways,
and their pastures shall be in all the beaten
tracks."^

CHAP. LIV.

And since Celsus, although professing to know
all about the Gospel, reproaches the Saviour be-
cause of His sufferings, saying that He received
no assistance from the Father, or was unable to
aid Himself; we have to state that His sufferings
were the subject of prophecy, along with the
cause of them ; because it was for the benefit of
mankind that He should die on their account,^
and should suffer stripes because of His con-
demnation. It was predicted, moreover, that
some from among the Gentiles would come to
the knowledge of Him (among whom the proph-
ets are not included) ; and it had been declared
that He would be seen in a form which is
deemed dishonourable among men. The words
of prophecy run thus : " Lo, my Ser\'ant shall
have understanding, and shall be exalted and
glorified, and raised exceedingly high. In hke
manner, many shall be astonished at Thee ; so
Thy form shall be in no reputation among men,
and Thy glory among the sons of men. Lo,
many nations shall marvel because of Him ; and
kings shall close their mouths : because they, to
whom no message about Him was sent, shall see
Him ; and they who have not heard of Him,
shall have knowledge of Him." ■♦ " Lord, who
hath believed our report ? and to whom was the
arm of the Lord revealed ? We have reported,
as a child before Him, as a root in a thirsty
ground. He has no form nor glory ; and we be-
held Him, and He had not any form nor beauty :
but His appearance was without honour, and de-
ficient more than that of all men. He was a
man under suffering, and who knew how to bear
sickness : because His countenance was averted.
He was treated with disrespect, and was made !
of no account. This man bears our sins, and
suffers pain on our behalf ; and we regarded Him
as in trouble, and in suffering, and as ill-treated.
But He was wounded for our sins, and bruised
for our iniquities. The chastisement of our
peace was upon Him ; by His stripes we were
healed. We all, like sheep, wandered from the
way. A man wandered in his way, and the Lord
delivered Him on account of our sins ; and He,
because of His evil treatment, opens not His


1 Cf. Isa. xlix. 8, 9.

2 Isa. xlix. 9.

3 uirep avTtav.

* Cf. Isa. Hi. 13-15 in the Septuagint version (Roman text).


mouth. As a sheep was He led to slaughter ;
and as a lamb before her shearer is dumb, so He
opens not His mouth. In His humiliation His
judgment was taken away. And who shall de-
scribe His generation ? because His life is taken
away from the earth ; because of the iniquities
of My people was He led unto death." s


Now I remember that, on one occasion, at a
disputation held with certain Jews, who were
reckoned wise men, I quoted these prophecies ;
to which my Jewish opponent replied, thiit these
predictions bore reference to the whole people,
regarded as one individual, and as being in a
state of dispersion and suffering, in order that
many proselytes might be gained, on account of
the dispersion of the Jews among numerous
heathen nations. And in this way he explained
the words, " Thy form shall be of no reputation
among men;" and then, "They to whom no
message was sent respecting him shall see ;" and
the expression, "A man under suffering." Many
arguments were employed on that occasion during
the discussion to prove that these predictions
regarding one particular person were not rightly
applied by them to the whole nadon. And I
asked to what character the expression would
be appropriate, " This man bears our sins, and
suffers pain on our behalf; " and this, " But He
was wounded for our sins, and bruised for our
iniquities ; " and to whom the expression properly
belonged, " By His stripes were we healed."
For it is manifest that it is they who had been
sinners, and had been healed by the Saviour's
sufferings (whether belonging to the Jewish na-
tion or converts from the Gentiles), who use
such language in the writings of the prophet
who foresaw these events, and who, under the
influence of the Holy Spirit, applied these words
to a person. But we seemed to press them
hardest with the expression, " Because of the
iniquities of My people was He led away unto
death." For if the people, according to them,
are the subject of the prophecy, how is the man
said to be led away to death because of the in-
iquities of the people of God, unless he be a
different person from that people of God ? And
who is this person save Jesus Christ, by whose
stripes they who believe on Him are healed,
when " He had spoiled the principalities and
powers (that were over us), and had made a
show of them openly on His cross? "^ At an-
other time we may explain the several parts of
the prophecy, leaving none of them unexamined.
But these matters have been treated at greater
length, necessarily as I think, on account of the


5 Cf. Isa. liii. 1-8 in the Septuagint version (Roman text).

6 [Col. ii. 15. S.]


Chap. LVIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


421


language of the Jew, as quoted in the work of
Celsus.


Now it escaped the notice of Celsus, and of
the Jew whom he has introduced, and of all
who are not believers in Jesus, that the prophe-
cies speak of two advents of Christ : the former
characterized by human suffering and humility,
in order that Christ, being with men, might make
known the way that leads to God, and might
leave no man in this life a ground of excuse, in
saying that he knew not of the judgment to
come;- and the latter, distinguished only by
glory and divinity, having no element of human
infirmity intermingled with its divine greatness.
To quote the prophecies at length would be
tedious ; and I deem it sufficient for the present
to quote a part of the forty-fifth Psalm, which
has this inscription, in addition to others, "A
Psalm for the Beloved," where God is evidently
addressed in these words : " Grace is poured
into Thy lips : therefore God will bless Thee
for ever and ever. Gird Thy sword on Thy
thigh, O mighty One, with Thy beauty and
Thy majesty. And stretch forth, and ride pros-
perously, and reign, because of Thy truth, and
meekness, and righteousness ; and Thy right
hand shall lead Thee marvellously. Thine ar-
rows are pointed, O mighty One ; the people
will fall under Thee in the heart of the enemies
of the King." ' But attend carefully to what
follows, where He is called God : " For Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever : a sceptre
of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy kingdom.
Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated ini-
quity : therefore God, even Thy God, hath
anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above
Thy fellows." ^ And observe that the prophet,
speaking familiarly to God, whose " throne is for
ever and ever," and " a sceptre of righteousness
the sceptre of His kingdom," says that this God
has been anointed by a God who was His God,
and anointed, because more than His fellows He
had loved righteousness and hated iniquity. And
I remember that I pressed the Jew, who was
deem*l a learned man, very hard with this pas-
sage ; and he, being perplexed about it, gave
such an answer as was in keeping with his Juda-
istic views, saying that the words, " Thy throne,
O God, is for ever and ever : a sceptre of right-
eousness is the sceptre of Thy kingdom," are
I spoken of the God of all things ; and these,
I " Thou hast loved righteousness and hated ini-
I quity, therefore Thy God hath anointed Thee,"
I etc., refer to the Messiah.^


The Jew, moreover, in the treatise, addresses
the Saviour thus : " If you say that every man,
born according to the decree of Divine Provi-
dence, is a son of God, in what respect should
you differ from another? " In reply to whom we
say, that every man who, as Paul expresses it, is
no longer under fear, as a schoolmaster, but who
chooses good for its own sake, is " a son of God ; "
but this man is distinguished far and wide above
every man who is called, on account of his vir-
tues, a son of God, seeing He is, as it were, a
kind of source and beginning of all such. The
words of Paul are as follow : " For ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear ;
but ye have received the Spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father." •♦ But, accord-
ing to the Jew of Celsus, " countless individuals
will convict Jesus of falsehood, alleging that
those predictions which were spoken of him
were intended of them." We are not aware,
indeed, whether Celsus knew of any who, after
coming into this world, and having desired to
act as Jesus did, declared themselves to be also
the "sons of God," or the "power" of God.
But since it is in the spirit of truth that we ex-
amine each passage, we shall mention that there
was a certain Theudas among the Jews before
the birth of Christ, who gave himself out as
some great one, after whose death his deluded
followers were completely dispersed. And after
him, in the days of the census, when Jesus
appears to have been bom, one Judas, a Gali-
lean, gathered around him many of the Jewish
people, saying he was a wise man, and a teacher
of certain new doctrines. And when he also
had paid the penalty of his rebellion, his doc-
trine was overturned, having taken hold of very
few persons indeed, and these of the very hum-
blest condition. And after the times of Jesus,
Dositheus the Samaritan also wished to persuade
the Samaritans that he was the Christ predicted
by Moses ; and he appears to have gained over
some to his views. But it is not al)surd, in
quoting the extremely wise observation of that
Gamaliel named in the book of Acts, to show
how those persons above mentioned were stran-
gers to the promise, being neither "sons of
God " nor " powers " of God, whereas Christ
Jesus was truly the Son of God. Now Gamaliel,
in the passage referred to, said : " If this coun-
sel or this work be of men, it will come to
nought " (as also did the designs of those men
already mentioned after their death) ; "but if it
be of God, ye cannot overthrow this doctrine,
lest haply ye be found even to fight against
God." 5 There was also Simon the Samaritan


I


' Ps. xlv. 2-5.
== Ps. xlv. 6, 7.

3 Trpos TOU XpiUTOV.


* Rom. viii. 15.
5 Cf. Acts V. 38, 39.


422


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book 1.


magician, who wished to draw away certain by
his magical arts. And on that occasion he was
successful ; but now-a-days it is impossible to
find, I suppose, thirty of his followers in the
entire world, and probably I have even over-
stated the number. There are exceedingly few
in Palestine ; vv^hile in the rest of the world,
through which he desired to spread the glory of
his name, you find it nowhere mentioned. And
where it is found, it is found quoted from the
Acts of the Apostles ; so that it is to Christians
that he owes this mention of himself, the unmis-
takeable result having proved that Simon was in
no respect divine.

CHAP. LVIII.

After these matters this Jew of Celsus, instead
of the Magi mentioned in the Gospel, says that
" Chaldeans are spoken of by Jesus as having
been induced to come to him at his birth, and to
worship him while yet an infant as a God, and
to have made this known to Herod the tetrarch ;
and that the latter sent and slew all the infants
that had been born about the same time, think-
ing that in this way he would ensure his death
among the others ; and that he was led to do
this through fear that, if Jesus lived to a suf-
ficient age, he would obtain the throne." See
now in this instance the blunder of one who
cannot distinguish between Magi and Chaldeans,
nor perceive that what they profess is different,
and so has falsified the Gospel narrative. I know
not, moreover, why he has passed by in silence
the cause which led the Magi to come, and why
he has not stated, according to the scriptural
account, that it was a star seen by them in the
east. Let us see now what answer we have to
make to these statements. The star that was
seen in the east we consider to have been a new
star, unlike any of the other well-known plane-
tary bodies, either those in the firmament above
or those among the lower orbs, but partaking of
the nature of those celestial bodies which appear
at times, such as comets, or those meteors which
resemble beams of wood, or beards, or wine jars,
or any of those other names by which the Greeks
are accustomed to describe their varying appear-
ances. And we establish our position in the fol-
lowing manner.


It has been observed that, on the occurrence
of great events, and of mighty changes in terres-
trial things, such stars are wont to appear, indi-
(;ating either the removal of dynasties or the
breaking out of wars, or the happening of such
circumstances as may cause commotions upon
the earth. But we have read in the Treatise o7i
Comets by Chaeremon the Stoic, that on some
occasions also, when good was to happen, comets


made their appearance ; and he gives an account
of such instances. If, then, at the commence-
ment of new dynasties, or on the occasion of
other important events, there arises a comet so
called, or any similar celestial body, why should
it be matter of wonder that at the birth of Him
who was to introduce a new doctrine to the
human race, and to make known His teaching
not only to Jews, but also to Greeks, and to
many of the barbarous nations besides, a star
should have arisen? Now I would say, that with
respect to comets there is no prophecy in circu-
lation to the effect that such and such a comet
was to arise in connection with a particular king-
dom or a particular time ; but with respect to
the appearance of a star at the birth of Jesus
there is a prophecy of Balaam recorded by Moses
to this effect : " There shall arise a star out of
Jacob, and a man shall rise up out of Israel." '
And now, if it shall be deemed necessary to ex-
amine . the narrative about the Magi, and the
appearance of the star at the birth of Jesus, the
following is what we have to say, partly in answer
to the Greeks, and partly to the Jews.


To the Greeks, then, I have to say that the
Magi, being on familiar terms with evil spirits,
and invoking them for such purposes as their
knowledge and wishes extend to, bring about
such results only as do not appear to exceed
the superhuman power and strength of the evil
spirits, and of the spells which invoke them, to
accomplish ; but should some greater manifesta-
tion of divinity be made, then the powers of the
evil spirits are overthrown, being unable to resist
the light of divinity. It is probable, therefore,
that since at the birth of Jesus " a multitude of
the heavenly host," as Luke records, and as I
believe, " praised God, saying. Glory to God
in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will
towards men," the evil spirits on that account
became feeble, and lost their strength, the falsity
of their sorcery being manifested, and their power
being broken ; this overthrow being brought about
not only by the angels having visited the, terres-
trial regions on account of the birth oF Jesus,
but also by the power of Jesus Himself, and
His innate divinity. The Magi, accordingly,
wishing to produce the customary results, which
formerly they used to perform by means of cer-
tain spells and sorceries, sought to know the
reason of their failure, conjecturing the cause to
be a great one ; and beholding a divine sign in
the heaven, they desired to learn its signification.
I am therefore of opinion that, possessing as they
did the prophecies of Balaam, which Moses also
records, inasmuch as Balaam was celebrated for


' Cf. Num. xxiv. 17 (Septuag.).


i


Chap. LXIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


423


such predictions, and finding among them the j
prophecy about the star, and the words, " I shall |
show him to him, but not now ; I deem him
happy, although he will not be near," ' they i
conjectured that the man whose appearance |
had been foretold along with that of the star, had ^
actually come into the world ; and having pre- j
determined that he was superior in power to all
demons, and to all common appearances and
powers, they resolved to offer him homage, j
They came, accordingly, to Judea, persuaded
that some king had been born ; but not know-
ing over what kingdom he was to reign, and
being ignorant also of the place of his birth,
bringing gifts, which they offered to him as one
whose nature partook, if I may so speak, both
of God and of a mortal man, — gold, viz., as
to a king ; myrrh, as to one who was mortal ;
and incense, as to a God ; and they brought
these offerings after they had learned the place
of His birth. But since He was a God, the
Saviour of the human race, raised far above all
those angels which minister to men, an angel
rewarded the piety of the Magi for their worship
of Him, by making known to them that they
were not to go back to Herod, but to return to
their own homes by another way.


That Herod conspired against the Child (al-
though the Jew of Celsus does not believe that
this really happened), is not to be wondered at.
For wickedness is in a certain sense blind, and
would desire to defeat fate, as if it were stronger
than it. And this being Herod's condition, he
both believed that a king of the Jews had been
born, and yet cherished a purpose contradictory
of such a belief; not seeing that the Child is
assuredly either a king and will come to the
throne, or that he is not to be a king, and that
his death, therefore, will be to no purpose. He
desired accordingly to kill Him, his mind being
agitated by contending passions on account of
his wickedness, and being instigated by the blind
and wicked devil who from the very beginning
plotted against the Saviour, imagining that He
was and would become some mighty one. An
angel, however, perceiving the course of events,
intimated to Joseph, although Celsus may not
believe it, that he was to withdraw with the
Child and His mother into Egypt, while Herod
slew all the infants that were in Bethlehem and
the surrounding borders, in the hope that he
would thus destroy Him also who had been
born King of the Jews. For he saw not the
sleepless guardian power that is around those
who deserve to be protected and preserved for
the salvation of men, of whom Jesus is the first,


i


Cf. Num. xxiv. 17 (Septuag.).


superior to all others in honour and excellence,
who was to be a King indeed, but not in the
sense that Herod supposed, but in that in which
it became God to bestow a kingdom, — for the
benefit, viz., of those who were to be under His
sway, who was to confer no ordinary and unim-
portant blessings, so to speak, upon His subjects,
but who was to train them and to subject them
to laws that were truly from God. And Jesus,
knowing this well, and denying that He was a
king in the sense that the multitude expected,
but declaring the superiority of His kingdom,
says : " If My kingdom were of this world, then
would My servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews : but now is My kingdom
not of this world." ^ Now, if Celsus had seen
this, he would not have said : " But if, then, this
was done in order that you might not reign in
his stead when you had grown to man's estate ;
why, after you did reach that estate, do you not
become a king, instead of you, the Son of God,
wandering about in so mean a condition, hiding
yourself through fear, and leading a miserable
life up and down?" Now, it is not dishonour-
able to avoid exposing one's self to dangers, but
to guard carefully against them, when this is
done, not through fear of death, but from a
desire to benefit others by remaining in life,
until the proper time come for one who has
assumed human nature to die a death that will
be useful to mankind. And this is plain to him
who reflects that Jesus died for the sake of men,
— a point of which we have spoken to the best
of our ability in the preceding pages.

CHAP. LXII.

And after such statements, showing his igno-
rance even of the number of the apostles, he
proceeds thus : " Jesus having gathered around
him ten or eleven persons of notorious charac-
ter, the very wickedest of tax-gatherers and sail-
ors, fled in company with them from place to
place, and obtained his living in a shameful and
importunate manner." Let us to the best of
our power see what truth there is in such a state-
ment. It is manifest to us all who possess the
Gospel narratives, which Celsus does not aj^jpear
even to have read, that Jesus selected twelve
apostles, and that of these Matthew alone was a
tax-gatherer ; that when he calls them indiscrim-
inately sailors, he probably means James and
John, because they left their ship and their father
Zebedee, and followed Jesus ; for Peter and his
brother -Andrew, who employed a net to gain
their necessary subsistence, must be classed not
as sailors, but as the Scripture describes them, as
fishermen. The Lebes ^ also, who was a follower


2 Cf. John xviii. 36.

3 Aeflns.


424


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


of Jesus, may have been a tax-gatherer ; but he
was not of the number of the apostles, except
according to a statement in one of the copies of
Mark's Gospel.' And we have not ascertained
the employments of the remaining disciples, by
which they earned their livelihood before be-
coming disciples of Jesus. I assert, therefore,
in answer to such statements as the above, that
it is clear to all who are able to institute an intel-
ligent and candid examination into the history
of the apostles of Jesus, that it was by help of
a divine power that these men taught Christian-
ity, and succeeded in leading others to embrace
the word of God. For it was not any power of
speaking, or any orderly arrangement of their
message, according to the arts of Grecian dia-
lectics or rhetoric, which was in them the effec-
tive cause of converting their hearers. Nay, I
am of opinion that if Jesus had selected some
individuals who were wise according to the ap-
prehension of the multitude, and who were fitted
both to think and speak so as to please them,
and had used such as the ministers of His doc-
trine. He would most jusdy have been suspected
of employing artifices, like those philosophers
who are the leaders of certain sects, and conse-
quently the promise respecting the divinity of
His doctrine would not have manifested itself;
for had the doctrine and the preaching consisted
in the persuasive utterance and arrangement of
words, then faith also, like that of the philos-
ophers of the world in their opinions, would
have been through the wisdom of men, and not
through the power of God. Now, who is there,
on seeing fishermen and tax-gatherers, who had
not acquired even the merest elements of learn-
ing (as the Gospel relates of them, and in re-
spect to which Celsus believes that they speak
the truth, inasmuch as it is their own ignorance
which they record), discoursing boldly not only
among the Jews of faith in Jesus, but also preach-
ing Him with success among other nations, would
not inquire whence they derived this power of
persuasion, as theirs was certainly not the com-
mon method followed by the multitude? And
who would not say that the promise, " Follow
Me, and I will make you fishers of men," ^ had
been accomplished by Jesus in the history of
His apostles by a sort of divine power? And to
this also, Paul, referring in terms of commenda-
tion, as we have stated a little above, says : " And
my speech and my preaching was not with en-
ticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstra-
tion of the Spirit and of power ; that your faith
should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in
the power of God." ^ For, according to the pre-
dictions in the prophets, foretelling the preach-


' Cf. Mark iii. i8 with Matt.

2 Matt. iv. 19.

3 Cf. I Cor. li. 4, 5.


ing of the Gospel, " the Lord gave the word in
great power to them who preached it, even the
King of the powers of the Beloved," ■* in order
that the prophecy might be fulfilled which said,
" His words shall run very swiftly." 5 And we
see that " the voice of the apostles of Jesus has
gone forth into all the earth, and their words to
the end of the world." ^ On this account are
they who hear the word powerfully proclaimed
filled with power, which they manifest both by
their dispositions and their lives, and by strug-
gling even to death on behalf of the truth ; while
some are altogether empty, although they profess
to believe in God through Jesus, inasmuch as,
not possessing any divine power, they have the
appearance only of being converted to the
word of God. And although I have previously
mentioned a Gospel declaration uttered by the
Saviour, I shall nevertheless quote it again, as
appropriate to the present occasion, as it confirms
both the divine manifestation of our Saviour's
foreknowledge regarding the preaching of His
Gospel, and the power of His word, which with-
out the aid of teachers gains the mastery over
those who yield their assent to persuasion accom-
panied with divine power ; and the words of
Jesus referred to are, " The harvest is plenteous,
but the labourers are few ; pray ye therefore the
Lord of the harvest, that He will send forth la-
bourers into His harvest." ? .

CHAP. LXIII.

And since Celsus has termed the apostles of
Jesus men of infamous notoriety, saying that
they were tax-gatherers and sailors of the vilest
character, we have to remark, with respect to
this charge, that he seems, in order to bring an
accusation against Christianity, to believe the
Gospel accounts only where he pleases, and to
express his disbelief of them, in order that he
may not be forced to admit the manifestations
of Divinity related in these same books ; where-
as one who sees the spirit of truth by which the
writers are influenced, ought, from their narration
of things of inferior importance, to believe also
the account of divine things. Now in the gen-
eral Epistle of Barnabas, from which perhaps
Celsus took the statement that the aposdes were
notoriously wicked men, it is recorded that
"Jesus selected His own apostles, as persons
who were more guilty of sin than all other evil-
doers," ^ And in the Gospel according to Luke,
Peter says to Jesus, " Depart from me, O Lord,
for I am a sinful man." 9 Moreover, Paul, who
himself also at a later time became an apostle


-i Cf. Ps. kviii. II (Septuag.).

5 Ps. c.xlvii. 15.

6 Ps. xix. 4.

7 Matt. ix. 37, 38.

8 Epistle 0/ Barnabas, chap. v. vol.

9 Luke V. 8.


Chap. LXV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


425


of Jesus, says in his Epistle to Timothy, " This
is a faithful saying, that Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners, of whom I am the
chief." ' And I do not know how Celsus should
have forgotten or not have thought of saying
something about Paul, the founder, after Jesus,
of the Churches that are in Christ. He saw,
probably, that anything he might say about that
apostle would retjuire to be explained, in consist-
ency with the fact that, after being a persecutor
of the Church of God, and a bitter opponent
of believers, who went so far even as to deliver
over the disciples of Jesus to death, so great a
change afterwards passed over him, that he
preached the Gospel of Jesus from Jerusalem
round about to Illyricum, and was ambitious
to carry the glad tidings where he needed not to
build upon another man's foundation, but to
places where the Gospel of God in Christ had
not been proclaimed at all. What absurdity,
therefore, is there, if Jesus, desiring to manifest
to the human race the power which He possesses
to heal souls, should have selected notorious and
wicked men, and should have raised them to
such a degree of moral excellence, that they
became a pattern of the purest virtue to all who
were converted by their instrumentality to the
Gospel of Christ ?

CH.\P. LXIV.

But if we were to reproach those who have
been converted with their former lives, then we
would have occasion to accuse Phaedo also, even
after he became a philosopher ; since, as the
history relates, he was drawn away by Socrates
from a house of bad fame^ to the pursuits of
I philosophy. Nay, even the licentious life of
Polemo, the successor of Xenocrates, will be a
subject of reproach to philosophy ; whereas even
in these instances we ought to regard it as a
ground of praise, that reasoning was enabled, by
the persuasive power of these men, to convert
from the practice of such vices those who had
been formerly entangled by them. Now among
the Greeks there was only one Phsedo, I know
not if there were a second, and one Polemo, who
betook themselves to philosophy, after a licen-
tious and most wicked life ; while with Jesus
there were not only at the time we speak of, the
twelve disciples, but many more at all times,
who, becoming a band of temperate men, speak
in the following terms of their former lives :
[" For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and
(pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful,
[and hating one another. But after that the kind-
Iness and love of God our Saviour towards man


appeared, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, which He shed
[ upon us richly," ^ we became such as we are.
j For " God sent forth His Word and healed them,
and delivered them from their destructions,"-* as
I the prophet taught in the book of Psalms. And
j in addition to what has been already said, I would
. add the following : that Chrysippus, in his trea-
j tise on the Cure of the Passions, in his endeav-
ours to restrain the passions of the human soul,
not pretending to determine what opinions are
the true ones, says that according to the princi-
ples of the different sects are those to be cured
who have been brought under the dominion of
the passions, and continues : " And if pleasure
be an end, then by it must the passions be
healed ; and if there be three kinds of chief
blessings, still, according to this doctrine, it is in
the same way that those are to be freed from
their passions who are under their dominion ; "
whereas the assailants of Christianity do not see
in how many persons the passions have been
brought under restraint, and the ilood of wicked-
ness checked, and savage manners softened, by
means of the Gospel. So that it well became
those who are ever boasting of their zeal for the
public good, to make a public acknowledgement
of their thanks to that doctrine which by a new
method led men to abandon many vices, and to
bear their testimony at least to it, that even
though not the truth, it has at all events been
productive of benefit to the human race.


And since Jesus, in teaching His disciples not
to be guilty of rashness, gave them the precept,
" If they persecute you in this city, flee ye into
another ; and if they persecute you in the other,
flee again into a third," s to which teaching He
added the example of a consistent life, acting so
as not to expose Himself to danger rashly, or
unseasonably, or without good grounds ; from
this Celsus takes occasion to bring a malicious
and slanderous accusation, — the Jew whom he
brings forward saying to Jesus, " In company
with jour disciples you go and hide yourself in
different places." Now similar to what has thus
been made the ground of a slanderous 'charge
against Jesus and His disciples, do we say was
the conduct recorded of Aristotle. This phil-
osopher, seeing that a court was about to be
summoned to try him, on the ground of his
being guilty of impiety on account of certain of
his philosophical tenets which the Athenians re-
garded as impious, withdrew from Alliens, and
fixed his school in Chalcis, defending his course
of procedure to his friends by saying, " Let us


Cf. I Tim. I. 15.

airb oiitjjuaTo?. Such is the reading in the text of Lommatzsch.
Hoeschel and Spencer read 0.776 oiK>)/u.aTOf iniov, and Ku£us pro-
poses iraipiov.


3 Cf. Tit. iii. 3-6.

4 Cf. Ps. cvii. 20.

5 Cf. Matt. X. 23.


426


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[IJOOK I.


depart from Athens, that we may not give the
Athenians a handle for incurring guilt a second
time, as formerly in the case of Socrates, and so
prevent them from committing a second act of
impiety against philosophy." He further says,
" that Jesus went about with His disciples, and
obtained His livelihood in a disgraceful and im-
portunate manner." I^et him show wherein lay
the disgraceful and importunate element in their
manner of subsistence. For it is related in the
Gospels, that there were certain women who had
been healed of their diseases, among whom also
was Susanna, who from their own possessions i
afforded the disciples the means of support.
And who is there among philosophers, that, when
devoting himself to the service of his acquaint-
ances, is not in the habit of receiving from them
what is needful for his wants ? Or is it only in
them that such acts are proper and becoming ;
but when the disciples of Jesus do the same,
they are accused by Celsus of obtaining their
livehhood by disgraceful importunity?

CHAP. LXVI.

And in addition to the above, this Jew of
Celsus afterwards addresses Jesus : " What need,
moreover, was there that you, while still an infant,
should be conveyed into Egygt? Was it to
escape being murdered? But then it was not
likely that a God should be afraid of death ; and
yet an angel came down from heaven, com-
manding you and your friends to flee, lest ye
should be captured and put to death ! And was
not the great God, who had already sent two
angels on your account, able to keep you. His
only Son, there in safety?" From these words
Celsus seems to think that there was no element
of divinity in the human body and soul of Jesus,
but that His body was not even such as is de-
scribed in the fables of Homer ; and with a taunt
also at the blood of Jesus which was shed upon
the cross, he adds that it was not

" Ichor, such as flows in the veins of the blessed gods." '

We now, believing Jesus Himself, when He says
respecting His divinity, " I am the way, and the
truth, and the life," ^ and employs other terms
of similar import ; and when He says respecting
His being clothed with a human body, "And now
ye seek to kill Me, a man that hath told you the
truth," 3 conclude that He was a kind of com-
pound being. And so it became Him who was
making provision for His sojourning in the world
as a human being, not to expose Himself unsea-
sonably to the danger of death. And in like
manner it was necessary that He should be taken
away by His parents, acting under the instruc-


' Cf. Iliad, V. 340.

2 John xiv. 6.

3 Cf. John viii. 40.


tions of an angel from heaven, who communicated
to them the divine will, saying on the first occa-
sion, "Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to
take unto thee Mary thy wife ; for that which is
conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost ; " + and
on the second, "Arise, and take the young Child,
and His mother, and flee into Egypt ; and be
thou there until I bring thee word : for Herod
will seek the young Child to destroy Him." 5
Now, what is recorded in these words appears
to me to be not at all marvellous. For in either
passage of Scripture it is stated that it was in a
dream that the angel spoke these words ; and
that in a dream certain persons may have certain
things pointed out to them to do, is an event of
frequent occurrence to many individuals, — the
impression on the mind being produced either
by an angel or by some other thing. Where,
then, is the absurdity in believing that He who
had once become incarnate, should be led also
by l)uman guidance to keep out of the way of
dangers? Not indeed from any impossibility
that it should be otherwise, but from the moral
fitness that ways and means should be made use
of to ensure the safety of Jesus. And it was
certainly better that the Child Jesus should escape
the snare of Herod, and should reside with His
parents in Egypt until the death of the conspira-
tor, than that Divine Providence should hinder
the free-will of Herod in his wish to put the
Child to death, or that the fabled poetic helmet
of Hades should have been employed, or any-
thing of a similar kind done with respect tg Jesus,
or that they who came to destroy Him should
have been smitten with blindness like the people
of Sodom. For the sending of help to Him in
a very miraculous and unnecessarily public man-
ner, would not have been of any service to Him
who wished to show that as a man, to whom
witness was borne by God, He possessed within
that form which was seen by the eyes of men
some higher element of divinity, — that which
was properiy the Son of God — God the Word
— the power of God, and the wisdom of God —
He who is called the Christ. But this is not a
suitable occasion for discussing the composite
nature of the incarnate Jesus ; the investigation
into such a subject being for believers, so to
speak, a sort of private question.

CHAP. LXVII.

After the above, this Jew of Celsus, as if he
were a Greek who loved learning, and were well
instructed in Greek literature, continues: "The
old mythological fables, which attributed a divine
origin to Perseus, and Amphion, and yEacus, and
Minos, were not believed by us. Nevertheless,


4 Cf. Matt. i. 20.

5 Cf. Matt. ii. 13.


Chap. LXIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


427


that they might not appear unworthy of credit,
they represented the deeds of these personages
as great and wonderful, and truly beyond the
power of man ; but what hast thou done that is
noble or wonderful either in deed or in word ? j
Thou hast made no manifestation to us, although I
they challenged you in the temple to exhibit ,
some unmistakeable sign that you were the Son '
of God." In reply to which we have to say :
Let the Greeks show to us, among those who
have been enumerated, any one whose deeds
have been marked by a utility and splendour
extending to after generations, and which have
been so great as to produce a belief in the fables
which represented them as of divine descent.
But these Greeks can show us nothing regarding
those men of whom they speak, which is even
inferior by a great degree to what Jesus did ;
unless they take us back to their fables and his-
tories, wishing us to believe them without any
reasonable grounds, and to discredit the Gospel
accounts even after the clearest evidence. For
we assert that the whole habitable world contains
evidence of the works of Jesus, in the existence
of those Churches of God which have been
founded through Him by those who have been
converted from the practice of innumerable sins.'
And the name of Jesus can still remove distrac-
tions from the minds of men, and expel demons, 1
and also take away diseases ; and produce a
marvellous meekness of spirit and complete ,
change of character, and a humanity, and good-
ness, and gentleness in those individuals who do
not feign themselves to be Christians for the sake 1
of subsistence or the supply of any mortal wants,
but who have honestly accepted the doctrine
concerning God and Christ, and the judgment
to come.

CHAP. LXVIII.

But after this, Celsus, having a suspicion that
the great works performed by Jesus, of which
we have named a few out of a great number,
would be brought forward to view, affects to
grant that those statements may be true which
are made regarding His cures, or His resurrec-
tion, or the feeding of a multitude with a few
loaves, from which many fragments remained
over, or those other stories which Celsus thinks
the disciples have recorded as of a marvellous
nature ; and he adds : " Well, let us believe that
these were actually wrought by you." But then
he immediately compares them to the tricks of
jugglers, who profess to do more wonderful
things, and to the feats performed by those who
j have Ifben taught by Egyptians, who in the


' [Note the words, " The whole habitable world," and comp.
cap. ill., supra, " the defeat of the whole world." In cap. vii. is an-
other important testimony. " Countless numbers " is the phrase in
cap. xxvii. See cap. xxix< also, ad finem. Such evidence cannot
be explained away.]


middle of the market-place, in return for a few
obols, will impart the knowledge of their most
venerated arts, and will expel demons from men,
and dispel diseases, and invoke the souls of he-
roes, and exhibit expensive banquets, and tables,
and dishes, and dainties having no real existence,
and who will put in motion, as if alive, what are
not really living animals, but which have only the
appearance of life. And he asks, " Since, then,
these persons can perform such feats, shall we
of necessity conclude that they are ' sons of
God,' or must we admit that they are the pro-
ceedings of wicked men under the influence of
an evil spirit?" You see that by these expres-
sions he allows, as it were, the existence of magic.
I do not know, however, if he is the same who
wrote several books against it. But, as it helped
his purpose, he compares the (miracles) related
of Jesus to the results produced by magic.
There would indeed be a resemblance between
them, if Jesus, like the dealers in magical arts,
had performed His works only for show; but
now there is not a single juggler who, by means
of his proceedings, invites his spectators to re-
form their manners, or trains those to the fear
of God who are amazed at what they see, nor
who tries to persuade them so to live as men
who are to be justified^ by God. And jugglers
do none of these things, because they have
neither the power nor the will, nor any desire to
busy themselves about the reformation of men,
inasmuch as their own lives are full of the grossest
and most notorious sins. But how should not
He who, by the miracles which He did, induced
those who beheld the excellent results to under-
take the reformation of their characters, mani-
fest Himself not only to His genuine disciples,
but also to others, as a pattern of most virtuous
life, in order that His disciples might devote
themselves to the work of instructing men in
the will of God, and that the others, after being
more fully instructed by His word and character
than by His miracles, as to how they were to
direct their lives, might in all their conduct have
a constant reference to the good pleasure of the
universal God? And if such were the life of
Jesus, how could any one with reason compare
Him with the sect of impostors, and not, on the
contrary, believe, according to the promise, that
He was God, who appeared in human form to
do good to our race ?

CHAP. LXIX.

After this, Celsus, confusing together the Chris-
dan doctrine and the opinions of some heretical
sect, and bringing them forward as charges that
were applicable to all who believe in the divine
word, says : " Such a body as yours could not


105 £i(coiui6r)<ro;u.€Vous.


428


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book I.


have belonged to God." Now, in answer to
this, we have to say that Jesus, on entering into
the world, assumed, as one born of a woman, a
human body, and one which was capable of suf-
fering a natural death. For which reason, in
addition to others, we say that He was also a
great wrestler ; ' having, on account of His hu-
man body, been tempted in all respects like
other men, but no longer as men, with sin as a
consequence, but being altogether without sin.
For it is distinctly clear to us that " He did no
sin, neither was guile found in His mouth ; and
as one who knew no sin," ^ God delivered Him
up as pure for all who had sinned. Then Cel-
sus says : " The body of god would not have
been so generated as you, O Jesus, were." He
saw, besides, that if, as it is written, it had been
born, His body somehow might be even more
divine than that of the multitude, and in a cer-
tain sense a body of god. But he disbelieves
the accounts of His conception by the Holy
Ghost, and believes that He was begotten by
one Panthera, who corrupted the Virgin, "be-
cause a god's body would not have been so gen-
erated as you were." But we have spoken of
these matters at greater length in the preceding
pages.

CH-'^. LXX.

He asserts, moreover, that " the* body of a
god is not nourished with such food (as was
that of Jesus)," since he is able to prove from
the Gospel narratives both that He partook of
food, and food of a particular kind. Well,
be it so. Let him assert that He ate the
passover with His disciples, when He not only
used the words, " With desire have I desired to
eat this passover with you," but also actually
partook of the same. And let him say also,
that He experienced the sensation of thirst
beside the well of Jacob, and drank of the
water of the well. In what respect do these
facts militate against what we have said respect-
ing the nature of His body? Moreover, it ap-
pears indubitable that after His resurrection He
ate a piece of fish ; for, according to our view.
He assumed a (true) body, as one born of a
woman. " But," objects Celsus, " the body of
a god does not make use of such a voice as that
of Jesus, nor employ such a method of persua-
sion as he." These are, indeed, trifling and
altogether contemptible objections. For our


1 /lie-yaf ayMVKTTrjv.

2 [i Pet. ii. 22; 2 Cor.


I. S.]


reply to him will be, that he who is believed
among the Greeks to be a god, viz., the Pythian
and Didymean Apollo, makes use of such a
voice for his Pythian priestess at Delphi, and
for his prophetess at Miletus ; and yet neither
the Pythian nor Didymean is charged by the
Greeks with not being a god, nor any other
Grecian deity whose worship is established in
one place. And it was far better, surely, that a
god should employ a voice which, on account
of its being uttered with power, should produce
an indescribable sort of persuasion in the minds
of the hearers.

CHAP. LXXI,

Continuing to pour abuse upon Jesus as one
who, on account of his impiety and wicked
opinions, was, so to speak, hated by God, he
asserts that " these tenets of his were those of
a wicked and God-hated sorcerer." And yet, if
the name and the thing be properly examined,
it will be found an impossibility that man should
be hated by God, seeing God loves all existing
things, and " hateth nothing of what He has
made," for He created nothing in a spirit of
hatred. And if certain expressions in the proph-
ets convey such an impression, they are to be
interpreted in accordance with the general prin-
ciple by which Scripture employs such language
with regard to God as if He were subject to
human affections. But what reply need be
made to him who, while professing to bring
foreward credible statements, thinks himself
bound to make use of calumnies and slanders
against Jesus, as if He were a wicked sorcerer ?
Such is not the procedure of one who seeks to
make good his case, but of one who is in an
ignorant and unphilosophic state of mind, inas-
much as the proper course is to state the case,
and candidly to investigate it ; and, according
to the best of his ability, to bring forward what
occurs to him with regard to it. But as the Jew
of Celsus has, with the above remarks, brought
to a close his charges against Jesus, so we also
shall here bring to a termination the contents of
our first book in reply to him. And if God be-
stow the gift of that truth which destroys all
falsehood, agreeably to the words of the prayer,
"Cut them off in thy truth," 3 we shall begin,
in what follows, the consideration of the second
appearance of the Jew, in which he is repre-
sented by Celsus as addressing those who have
become converts to Jesus.


3 Ps. liv. 5.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.

BOOK II.


CHAP. I,

The first book of our answer to the treatise of
Celsus, entitled A True Discourse, which con-
cluded with the representation of the Jew
addressing Jesus, having now extended to a suf-
ficient length, we intend the present part as a
reply to the charges brought by him against those
who have been converted from Judaism to Chris-
tianity.' And we call attention, in the first place,
to this special question, viz., why Celsus, when
he had once resolved upon the introduction of
individuals upon the stage of his book, did not
represent the Jew as addressing the converts from
heathenism rather than those from Judaism, see-
ing that his discourse, if directed to us, would
have appeared more likely to produce an impres-
sion.^ But probably this claimant to universal
knowledge does not know what is appropriate
in the matter of such representations ; and there-
fore let us proceed to consider what he has to
say to the converts from Judaism. He asserts
that " they have forsaken the law of their fathers,
in consequence of their minds being led captive
by Jesus ; that they have been most ridiculously
deceived, and that they have become deserters
to another name and to another mode of life."
Here he has not observed that the Jewish con-
verts have not deserted the law of their fathers
inasmuch as they live according to its prescrip-
tions, receiving their very name from the poverty
of the law, according to the literal acceptation
of the word; for Ebion signifies " poor " among
the Jews,3 and those Jews who have received
Jesus as Christ are called by the name of Ebion-
ites. Nay, Peter himself seems to have observed
for a considerable time the Jewish observances
enjoined by the law of Moses, not having yet
learned from Jesus to ascend from the law that
IS regulated according to the letter, to that which
IS mterpreted according to the spirit, — a fact

.' [Comp. Justin, Dial, ■with
series.]

Trtdai'wTaToy,

3 jVDK.


Trypho {passim), _ vol.


which we learn from the Acts of the Apostles.
For on the day after the angel of God appeared
to Cornelius, suggesting to him "to send to
Joppa, to Simon surnamed Peter," Peter "went
up into the upper room to pray about the sixth
hour. And he became very hungry, and would
have eaten : but while they made ready he fell
into a trance, and saw heaven opened, and a
certain vessel descending unto him, as it had
been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and
let down to the earth ; wherein were all manner
of four-footed beasts, and creeping things of the
earth, and fowls of the air. And there came a
voice to him, Rise, Peter; kill, and eat. But
Peter said. Not so, Lord ; for I have never eaten
anything that is common or unclean. And the
voice spake unto him again the second time.
What God hath cleansed, that call thou not
common." '■ Now observe how, by this instance,
Peter is represented as still observing the Jewish
customs respecting clean and unclean animals.
And from the narrative that follows, it is manifest
that he, as being yet a Jew, and living according
to their traditions, and despising those who were
beyond the pale of Judaism, stood in need of a
vision to lead him to communicate to Cornelius
(who was not an Israelite according to the flesh),
and to those who were with him, the word of
faith. Moreover, in the Epistle to the Galatians,
Paul states that Peter, still from fear of the Jews,
ceased upon the arrival of James to eat with the
Gentiles, and "separated himself from them,
fearing them that were of the circumcision ; " s
and the rest of the Jews, and Barnabas also, fol-
lovyed the same course. And certainly it was
quite consistent that those should not abstain
from the obser\'ance of Jewish usages who were
sent to minister to the circumcision, when they
who " seemed to be pillars " gave the right hand
of fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, in order that,
while devoting themselves to the circumcision,
the latter might preach to the Gentiles. And


< Cf. Acts X. Q-15.
S Cf. Gal. h. 12.


430


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[EOOK 11.


why do I mention that they who preached to the ,
circumcision withdrew and separated themseh^es
from the heathen, when even Paul himself " be-
came as a Jew to the Jews, that he might gain
the Jews?" Wherefore also in the Acts of the
Apostles it is related that he even brought an
offering to the altar, that he might satisfy the
Jews that he was no apostate from their law.'
Now, if Celsus had been acquainted with all these
circumstances, he would not have represented j
the Jew holding such language as this to the i
converts from Judaism: "What induced you,
my fellow-citizens, to abandon the law of your
fathers, and to allow your minds to be led captive ,
by him with whom we have just conversed, and !
thus be most ridiculously deluded, so as to be- ,
come deserters from us to another name, and to
the practices of another life? "


Now, since we are upon the subject of Peter,
and of the teachers of Christianity to the cir-
cumcision, I do not deem it out of place to
quote a certain declaration of Jesus taken from ]
the Gospel according to John, and to give the
explanation of the same. For it is there related j
that Jesus said : " I have yet many things to say i
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. How-
beit when He, the Spirit of truth, is come. He
will guide you into all the truth : for He shall j
not speak of Himself; but whatsoever He shall
hear, that shall He speak." ^ And when we in- |
quire what were the " many things " referred to ,
in the passage which Jesus had to say to His 1
disciples, but which they were not then able to
bear, I have to observe that, probably because
the apostles were Jews, and had been trained up
according to the letter of the Mosaic law. He
was unable to tell them what was the true law,
and how the Jewish worship consisted in the
pattern and shadow of certain heavenly things,
and how future blessings were foreshadowed by
the injunctions regarding meats and drinks, and
festivals, and new moons, and sabbaths. These
were many of the subjects which He had to ex-
plain to them ; but as He saw that it was a work
of exceeding difficulty to root out of the mind
opinions that have been almost born with a man,
and amid which he has been brought up till he
reached the period of maturity, and which have
produced in those who have adopted them the
belief that they are divine, and that it is an act
of impiety to overthrow them ; and to demon-
strate by the superiority of Christian doctrine,
that is, by the truth, in a manner to convince
the hearers, that such opinions were but " loss
and dung," He postponed such a task to a future


1 Cf. Acts xxi 26.

2 John xvi. 12, 13.


season — to that, namely, which followed His
passion and resurrection. For the bringing of
aid unseasonably to those who were not yet
capable of receiving it, might have overturned
the idea which they had already formed of Jesus,
as the Christ,' and the Son of the living God.
And see if there is not some well-grounded rea-
son for such a statement as this, " I have many
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now ; " seeing there are many points in the law
which require to be explained and cleared up
in a spiritual sense, and these the disciples were in
a manner unable to bear, having been born and
brought up amongst Jews. I am of opinion,
moreover, that since these rites were typical,
and the truth was that which was to be taught
them by the Holy Spirit, these words were added,
" When He is come who is the Spirit of truth.
He will lead you into all the truth ; " as if He
had said, into all the truth about those things
which, being to you but types, ye believed to
constitute a true worship which ye rendered unto
God. And so, according to the promise of Jesus,
the Spirit of truth came to Peter, saying to him,
with regard to the four-footed beasts, and creep-
ing things of the earth, and fowls of the air :
"Arise, Peter; kill, and eat." And the Spirit
came to him while he was still in a state of super-
stitious ignorance ; for he said, in answer to the
divine command, " Not so, Lord ; for I have
never yet eaten anything common or unclean."
He instructed him, however, in the true- and
spiritual meaning of meats, by saying, " What
God hath cleansed, that call not thou common."
And so, after that vision, the Spirit of truth,
which conducted Peter into all the truth, told
him the many things which he was unable to
1 bear when Jesus was still with him in the flesh.
■ But I shall have another opportunity of explain-
ing those matters, which are connected with the
literal acceptation of the Mosaic law.


Our present object, however, is to expose the
ignorance of Celsus, who makes this Jew of his
address his fellow-citizen and the Israelitish con-
verts in the following manner : " What induced
you to abandon the law of your fathers ? " etc.
Now, how should they have abandoned the law
of their fathers, who are in the habit of rebuking
those who do not listen to its commands, saying,
" Tell me, ye who read the law, do ye not hear
the law? For it is written, that Abraham had
two sons ; " and so on, down to the place,
"which things are an allegory," 3 etc.? And
how have they abandoned the law of their fa-
thers, who are ever speaking of the usages of
their fathers in such words as these : " Or does

3 Gal. iv. 21, 22, 24.


d


Chap. V.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


431


not the law say these things also ? For it is
written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not '
muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out I
the corn. Doth God care for oxen ? or saith He -
it altogether for our sakes? for for our sakes it
was written," and so on?' Now, how confused [
is the reasoning of the Jew in regard to these
matters (although he had it i« his power to
speak with greater effect) when he says : " Cer-
tain among you have abandoned the usages of
our fathers under a pretence of explanations
and allegories ; and some of you, although, as ye
pretend, interpreting them in a spiritual manner,
nevertheless do observe the customs of our fa-
thers ; and some of you, without any such inter-
pretation, are willing to accept Jesus as the
subject of prophecy, and to keep the law of
Moses according to the customs of the fathers,
as having in the words the whole mind of the
Spirit." Now how was Celsus able to see these
things so clearly in this place, when in the sub-
sequent parts of his work he makes mention of
certain godless heresies altogether alien from the
doctrine of Jesus, and even of others which
leave the Creator out of account altogether, and
does not appear to know that there are Israelites
who are converts to Christianity, and who have
not abandoned the law of their fathers ? It was
not his object to investigate everything here in
the spirit of truth, and to accept whatever he
might find to be useful ; but he composed these
statements in the spirit of an enemy, and with a
desire to overthrow everything as soon as he
heard it.

CHAP. IV.

I The Jew, tlien, continues his address to con-
verts from his own nation thus : " Yesterday and
the day before, when we visited with punishment
the man who deluded you, ye became apostates
from the law of your fathers ; " showing by such
statements (as we have just demonstrated) any-
thing but an exact knowledge of the truth. But
what he advances afterwards seems to ha\'e some
force, when he says : " How is it that you take
the beginning of your system from our worship,
and when you have made some progress you
treat it with disrespect, although you have no
other foundation to show for your doctrines than
our law?" Now, certainly the introduction to
Christianity is through the Mosaic worship and
the prophetic writings ; and after the introduc-
1 tion, it is in the interpretation and explanation
j of these that progress takes place, while those
I who are introduced prosecute their investigations
1 into "the mystery according to revelation, which
I was kept secret since the world began, but now
j is made manifest in the Scriptures of the proph-
I ets," ^ and by the appearance of our Lord Jesus


' I Cor. ix. 8-ic
* Rom. xvi. 25,


Christ. But they who advance in the knowledge
of Christianity do not, as ye allege, treat the
things written in the law with disrespect. On
the contrary, they bestow upon them greater
honour, showing what a depth of wise and mys-
terious reasons is contained in these writings,
which are not fully comprehended by the Jews,
who treat them superficially, and as if they were
in some degree even fabulous. ^ And what ab-
surdity should there be in our system — that is,
the Gospel — having the law for its foundation,
when even the Lord Jesus Himself said to those
who would not believe upon Him : " If ye had
believed Moses, ye would have believed Me, for
he wrote of Me. But if ye do not believe his
writings, how shall ye believe My words?"*
Nay, even one of the evangelists — Mark —
says : " The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, as it is written in the prophet Isaiah, Be-
hold, I send My messenger before Thy face, who
shall prepare Thy way before Thee," 5 which
shows that the beginning of the Gospel is con-
nected with the Jewish writings. What force,
then, is there in the objection of the Jew of
Celsus, that " if any one predicted to us that the
Son of God was to visit mankind, he was one of
our prophets, and the prophet of our God?"
Or how is it a charge against Christianity, that
John, who baptized Jesus, was a Jew? For
although He was a Jew, it does not follow that
every believer, whether a convert from heathen-
ism or from Judaism, must yield a literal obe-
dience to the law of Moses.

CHAP. V.

After these matters, although Celsus becomes
tautological in his statements about Jesus, re-
peating for the second time that " he was pun-
ished by the Jews for his crimes," we shall not
again take up the defence, being satisfied with
what we have already said. But, in the next
place, as this Jew of his disparages the doctrine
regarding the resurrection of the dead, and the
divine judgment, and of the rewards to be be-
stowed upon the just, and of the fire which is to
devour the wicked, as being stale '^ opinions, and
thinks that he will overthrow Christianity by
asserting that there is nothing new in its teach-
ing upon these points, we have to say to him,
that our Lord, seeing the conduct of the Jews
not to be at all in keeping with the teaching of
the prophets, inculcated by a parable that the
kingdom of God would be taken from them, and
given to the converts from heathenism. For
which reason, now, we may also see of a truth
that all the doctrines of the Jews of the present


3 Til)v einTTo\ai.6repov icoi nvOtKiurepov oiiToij iyTvy\ay6yTuiv,
* John V. 46, 47-
5 Mark i. i, 2.


432


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


day are mere trifles and fables/ since they have
not the Hght that proceeds from the knowledge
of the Scriptures ; whereas those of the Chris-
tians are the truth, having power to raise and
elevate the soul and understanding of man, and
to persuade him to seek a citizenship, not like
the earthly 2 Jews here below, but in heaven.
And this result shows itself among those who are
able to see the grandeur of the ideas contained
in the law and the prophets, and who are able
to commend them to others.


But let it be granted that Jesus observed all
the Jewish usages, including even their sacrificial
observances, what does that avail to prevent our
recognising Him as the Son of God? Jesus,
then, is the Son of God, who gave the law and
the prophets ; and we, who belong to the Church,
do not transgress the law, but have escaped the
mythologizings^ of the Jews, and have our minds
chastened and educated by the mystical contem-
plation of the law and the prophets. For the
prophets themselves, as not resting the sense of
these words in the plain history which they re-
late, nor in the legal enactments taken accord-
ing to the word and letter, express themselves
somewhere, when about to relate histories, in
words like this, " I will open my mouth in para-
bles, I will utter hard sayings of old j " •* and in
another place, when offering up a prayer regard-
ing the law as being obscure, and needing divine
help for its comprehension, they offer up this
prayer, " Open Thou mine eyes, that I may be-
hold wondrous things out of Thy law." s


Moreover, let them show where there is to be
found even the appearance of language dictated
by arrogance,^ and proceeding from Jesus. For
how could an arrogant man thus express him-
self, " Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of
heart, and you shall find rest for your souls? " ^
or how can He be styled arrogant, who after
supper laid aside His garments in the presence
of His disciples, and, after girding Himself with
a towel, and pouring water into a basin, pro-
ceeded to wash the feet of each disciple, and
rebuked him who was unwilling to allow them
to be washed, with the words, " Except I wash
thee, thou hast no part with Me?"^ Or how
•could He be called such who said, " I was
amongst you, not as he that sitteth at meat, but


' /utv^ov? KaX A>ipous.
- Tois KotTio 'lovSaCoii.
3 avBoKoyiai.
^ Ps. Ixxviii. 2.
S Ps. cxix. i8.
f> aKaioveCa.
" Matt. xi. 29.
8 John xiii. 8.


as he that serveth?"^ And let any one show
what were the falsehoods which He uttered, and
let him point out what are great and what are
small falsehoods, that he may prove Jesus to
have been guilty of the former. And there is
yet another way in which we may confute him.
For as one falsehood is not less or more false
than another, s8 one truth is not less or more
true than another. And what charges of impiety
he has to bring against Jesus, let the Jew of
Celsus especially bring forward. Was it impious
to abstain from corporeal circumcision, and from
a literal Sabbath, and literal festivals, and literal
new moons, and from clean and unclean meats,
and to turn the mind to the good and true and
spiritual law of God, while at the same time he
who was an ambassador for Christ knew how to
become to the Jews as a Jew, that he might gain
the Jews, and to those who are under the law, as
under the law, that he might gain those who are
under the law?

CHAP. VIII.

He says, further, that "many other persons
would appear such as Jesus was, to those who
were willing to be deceived." Let this Jew of
Celsus then show us, not many persons, nor even
a few, but a single individual, such as Jesus was,
introducing among the human race, with the
power that was manifested in Him, a system of
doctrine and opinions beneficial to human life,
and which converts men from the practice of
wickedness. He says, moreover, that this charge
is brought against the Jews by the Christian con-
verts, that they have not believed in Jesus as in
God. Now on this point we have, in the preced-
ing pages, offered a preliminary defence, showing
at the same time in what respects we understand
Him to be God, and in what we take Him to be
man. "How should we," he continues, "who
have made known to all men that there is to
come from God one who is to punish the wicked,
treat him with disregard when he came ? " And
to this, as an exceedingly silly argument, it does
not seem to me reasonable to offer any answer.
It is as if some one were to say, " How could
we, who teach temperance, commit any act ' of
licentiousness ? or we, who are ambassadors for
righteousness, be guilty of any wickedness?"
For as these inconsistencies are found among
men, so, to say that they believed the prophets
when speaking of the future advent of Christ,
and yet refused their belief to Him when He
came, agreeably to prophetic statement, was
quite in keeping with human nature. And since
we must add another reason, we shall remark that
this very result was foretold by the prophets.
Isaiah distinctly declares : " Hearing ye shall
hear, and shall not understand ; and seeing ye


9 Luke xxii. 27.


Chap. IX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


433


shall see, and shall not perceive : for the heart
of this people has become fat," ' etc. And let
them explain why it was predicted to the Jews,
that although they both heard and saw, they
would not understand what was said, nor per-
ceive what was seen as they ought. For it is
indeed manifest, that when they beheld Jesus
they did not see who He was ; and when they
heard Him, they did not understand from His
words the divinity that was in Him, and which
transferred God's providential care, hitherto ex-
ercised over the Jews, to His converts from the
heathen. Therefore we may see, that after the
advent of Jesus the Jews were altogether aban-
doned, and possess now none of what were con-
sidered their ancient glories, so that there is no
indication of any Divinity abiding amongst them.
For they have no longer prophets nor miracles,
traces of which to a considerable extent are still
found among Christians, and some of them more
remarkable than any that existed among the
Jews ; and these we ourselves have witnessed, if
our testimony may be received.^ But the Jew of
Celsus exclaims : " Why did we treat him, whom
we announced beforehand, with dishonour? Was
it that we might be chastised more than others? "
To which we have to answer, that on account of
their unbelief, and the other insults which they
heaped upon Jesus, the Jews will not only suffer
more than others in that judgment which is be-
lieved to impend over the world, but have even
already endured such sufferings. For what na-
tion is an exile from their own metropolis, and
from the place sacred to the worship of their
fathers, save the Jews alone ? And these calami-
ties they have suffered, because they were a most
wicked nation, which, although guilty of many
other sins, yet has been punished so severely for
none, as for those that were committed against
our Jesus.


The Jew continues his discourse thus : " How
should we deem him to be a God, who not only
in other respects, as was currently reported, per-
formed none of his promises, but who also, after
we had convicted him, and condemned him as
deserving of punishment, was found attempting
to conceal himself, and endeavouring to escape
i in a most disgraceful manner, and who was be-
trayed by those whom he called disciples ? And
yet," he continues, " he who was a God could
neither flee nor be led away a prisoner ; and
least of all could he be deserted and delivered
up by those who had been his associates, and


had shared all things in common, and had had
him for their teacher, who was deemed to be a
Saviour, and a son of the greatest God, and an
angel." To which we reply, that even we do
not suppose the body of Jesus, which was then
an object of sight and perception, to have been
God. And why do I say His body? Nay, not
even His soul, of which it is related, " My soul
is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." ^ But
as, according to the Jewish manner of speaking,
" I am the Lord, the God of all flesh," and,
" Before Me there was no God formed, neither
shall there be after Me," God is beheved to be
He who employs the soul and body of the
prophet as an instrument ; and as, according to
the Greeks, he who says,

" I know both the number of the sand, and the measures
of the sea,
And I understand a dumb man, and hear him who
does not speak," ■*

is considered to be a god when speaking, and
making himself heard through the P\thian
priestess ; so, according to our view, it was the
i Logos God, and Son of the God of all things,
I who spake in Jesus these words, " I am the way,
I and the truth, and the life ; " and these, " I am
I the door ; " and these, " I am the living bread
1 that came down from heaven ; " and other ex-
j pressions similar to these. We therefore charge
I the Jews with not acknowledging Him to be
I God, to whom testimony was borne in many pas-
! sages by the prophets, to the effect that He Avas
I a mighty power, and a God next to s the God
i and Father of all things. For Ave assert that it
! was to Him the Father gave the command, when
in the Mosaic account of the creation He uttered
j the words, " Let there be light," and " Let there
! be a firmament," and gave the injunctions with
1 regard to those other creative acts which were
performed ; and that to Him also were addressed
the words, " Let Us make man in Our own image
and likeness ; " and that the Logos, when com-
manded, obeyed all the Father's will. And we
make these statements not from our own conjec-
tures, but because we believe the prophecies cir-
culated among the Jews, in which it is said of
God, and of the works of creation, in express
words, as follows : " He spake, and they were


I Isa. vi. 9.
I 2 [" The Fathers, while they refer to extraordinary divine agency

j going on in their own day, also with one consent represent miracles
I as having ceased since the apostolic era." — Mozley's Bampton Lec-
tures, Oil Miracles, p. 165. See also, Newman's Essay on the Mira-
cles of the Early Ages, quoted by Mozley. S.]


3 Matt. xxvi. 38.

* Herodot., i. cap. 47. _ _

5 KaX (diov Kara Tov rOiV oAioi' Qeov koX irarepa, " Ex mente
Origenis, inquit Boherelhis, vertendum ' Secundo post universi Deiim
atque parentem loco;" non cum interprete Gelenio, ' Ipsius rerum
universarum Dei atque Parentis tcstimonio.' Nam si hie esset sensus,
frustra post vn'o tmv 7rpoi|)7)T(o»', adderetur Kara toi" ©for. Pra;te-
rea, ha;c epilheta, r'ov tuiv oAio;/ &e'ov Kal narepa, manifestam con-
tinent antithesin ad ista, ixeyd\Tqv oi-ra Svvatiiv Kal Weoi/, ut Pater
supra Filium evehatur, quemadmodum evehitur, ab Origcne infra
libro octavo, num. 15. ToO, Kara, inferiorem ordinem denotantis ex-
empla afferre supersedeo; cum obvia sint." — Ru.EUS. [See also
Liddon's Bampton Lectures on T/ie Divinity of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, p. 414, where he says, " Origen maintains
Christ's true divinity against the contemptuous criticisms of Celsus "
(book ii. 9, 16, seq. ; vii. 53, etc.). S.J


434


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


made ; He commanded, and they were created." '
Now if God gave the command, and the creatures
were formed, who, according to the view of the
spirit of prophecy, could He be that was able to
carry out such commands of the Father, save
Him who, so to speak, is the living Logos and
the Truth ? And that the Gospels do not con-
sider him who in Jesus said these words, " I am
the way, and the truth, and the life," to have
been of so circumscribed a nature,^ as to have an
existence nowhere out of the soul and body of
Jesus, is evident both from many considerations,
and from a few instances of the following kind
which we shall quote. John the Baptist, when
predicting that the Son of God was to appear
immediately, not in that body and soul, but as
manifesting Himself everywhere, says regarding
Him : " There stands in the midst of you One
whom ye know not, who cometh after me." ^
For if he had thought that the Son of God was
only there, where was the visible body of Jesus,
how could he have said, " There stands in the
midst of you One whom ye know not?" And
Jesus Himself, in raising the minds of His disci-
ples to higher thoughts of the Son of God, says :
" Where two or three are gathered together in
My name, there am I in the midst of you." +
And of the same nature is His promise to His
disciples : " Lo, I am with you alway, even to
the end of the world." s And we quote these
passages, making no distinction between the Son
of God and Jesus. For the soul and body of
Jesus formed, after the oiKovofiLa, one being with
the Logos of God. Now if, according to Paul's
teaching, " he that is joined unto the Lord is one
spirit,"*' every one who understands what being
joined to the Lord is, and who has been actually
joined to Him, is one spirit with the Lord ; how
should not that being be one in a far greater and
more divine degree, which was once united with
the Logos of God? 7 He, indeed, manifested
Himself among the Jews as the power of God,
by the miracles which He performed, which Cel-
sus suspected were accomplished by sorcery, but
which by the Jews of that time were attributed,
I know not why, to Beelzebub, in the words :
" He casteth out devils through Beelzebub, the
prince of the devils." ^ But these our Saviour
convicted of uttering the greatest absurdities,
from the fact that the kingdom of evil was not
yet come to an end. And this will be evident


* Ps. cxlviii. s.

2 Treptye-ypafifie'i'Oi' Tti'a.

3 John i. 26.

■* Matt, xviii. 20.

5 Matt, xxviii. 20.

6 I Cor. vi. 17.

7 ci yap Kara Tr)v Xla.v\ov SiSatrxaXCav, AeyorTOS • " 6 koWm-
lievo^ T(u Kvpiw, ev nvev/jia. eVrt- " iras 6 co>)<ra5 ti to xoAAao-flat
TM Kvpiw, Kai Kok\r)6(\t avTiZ, (v tffTC nvevfia. n-pos Tov Kvpiov
mw; oil n-oAAoi fj.a\kov SeioTe'pw? KaX juei^di'ws iv idTi to jtotc
<Tvv6eTov Trpbs Toi' Aoyoi' ToO ©eov;

^ Matt. xii. 24.


to all intelligent readers of the Gospel narrative,
which it is not now the time to explain.


But what promise did Jesus make which He
did not perform ? Let Celsus produce any in-
stance of such, and make good his charge. But
he will be unable to do so, especially since it is
from mistakes, arising either from misapprehen-
sion of the Gospel narratives, or from Jewish
stories, that he thinks to derive the charges
which he brings against Jesus or against our-
selves. Moreover, again, when the Jew says,
" We both found him guilty, and condemned
him as deserving of death," let them show how
they who sought to concoct false witness against
Him proved Him to be guilty. Was not the
great charge against Jesus, which His accusers
brought forward, this, that He said, " I am able
to destroy the temple of God, and after three
days to raise it up again? "^ But in so saying,
He spake of the temple of His body ; while they
thought, not being able to understand the mean-
ing of the speaker, that His reference was to the
temple of stone, which was treated by the Jews
with greater respect than He was who ought to
have been honoured as the true Temple of God
— the Word, and the Wisdom, and the Truth.
And who can say that "Jesus attempted to make
His escape by disgracefully concealing Himself?"
Let any one point to an act deserving to be called
disgraceful. And when he adds, " he was taken
prisoner," I would say that, if to be taken pris-
oner implies an act done against one's will, then
Jesus was not taken prisoner ; for at the fitting
time He did not prevent Himself falling into the
hands of men, as the Lamb of God, that He
might take away the sin of the world. For,
knowing all things that were to come upon Him,
He went forth, and said to them, " Whom seek
ye ? " and they answered, "Jesus of Nazareth ; "
and He said unto them, "I am He." And Judas
also, who betrayed Him, was standing with them.
When, therefore, He had said to them, " I am
He," they went backwards and fell to tlie ground.
Again He asked them, " Whom seek ye?" and
they said again, "Jesus of Nazareth." Jesus said
to them, " I told you I am He ; if then ye seek
Me, let these go away." '° Nay, even to Him
who wished to help Him, and who smote the
high priest's servant, and cut off his ear. He
said : " Put up thy sword into its sheath : for all
they who draw the sword shall perish by the
sword. Thinkest thou that I cannot even now
pray to My Father, and He will presently give
Me more than twelve legions of angels? But
how then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, that


9 Matt. xxvi. 61.
1° John xviii. 4 sqq,


Chap. XL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


435


thus it must be?"' And if any one imagines
these statements to be inventions of the writers
of the Gospels, why should not those statements
rather be regarded as inventions which proceeded
from a spirit of hatred and hostility against Jesus
and the Christians? and these the truth, which
proceed from those who manifest the sincerity of
their feelings towards Jesus, by enduring every-
thing, whatever it may be, for the sake of His
words? For the reception by the disciples of
such power of endurance and resolution con-
tinued even to death, with a disposition of mind
that would not invent regarding their Teacher
what was not true, is a very evident proof to all
candid judges that they were fully persuaded of
the truth of what they wrote, seeing they sub-
mitted to trials so numerous and so severe, for
the sake of Him whom they believed to be the
Son of God.


In the next place, that He was betrayed by
those whom He called His disciples, is a circum-
stance which the Jew of Celsus learned from the
Gospels ; calling the one Judas, however, " many
disciples," that he might seem to add force to
the accusation. Nor did he trouble himself to
take note of all that is related concerning Judas ;
how this Judas, having come to entertain oppo-
site and conflicting opinions regarding his Master,
neither opposed Him with his whole soul, nor
yet with his whole soul preserved the respect
due by a pupil to his teacher. For he that be-
trayed Him gave to the multitude that came to '
apprehend Jesus, a sign, saying, " Whomsoever
I shall kiss, it is he; seize ye him," — retaining
still some element of respect for his Master : for
unless he had done so, he would have betrayed
Him, even publicly, without any pretence of affec-
tion. This circumstance, therefore, will saUsfy all
with regard to the purpose of Judas, that along
with his covetous disposition, and his wicked de-
sign to betray his Master, he had still a feeling of
a mixed character in his mind, produced in him
by the words of Jesus, which had the appearance
(so to speak) of some remnant of good. For it is
related that, "when Judas, who betrayed Him,
knew that He was condemned, he repented, and
brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the
high priest and elders, saying, I have sinned, in
that I have betrayed the innocent blood. But
they said, What is that to us ? see thou to that ; " ^
— and that, having thrown the money down in
the temple, he departed, and went and hanged
himself. But if this covetous Judas, who also
stole the money placed in the bag for the relief
of the poor, repented, and brought back the
thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and


elders, it is clear that the instructions of Jesus
had been able to produce some feeling of repent-
ance in his mind, and were not altogether de-
spised and loathed by this traitor. Nay, the
declaration, " I have sinned, in that I have be-
trayed the innocent blood," was a public ac-
knowledgment of his crime. Observe, also, how
exceedingly passionate 3 was the sorrow for his
sins that proceeded from that -repentance, and
which would not suffer him any longer to live ;
and how, after he had cast the money down in
the temple, he withdrew, and went away and
hanged himself: for he passed sentence upon
himself, showing what a power the teaching of
Jesus had over this sinner Judas, this thief
and traitor, who could not always treat with
contempt what he had learned from Jesus. "\M11
Celsus and his friends now say that those proofs
which show that the apostasy of Judas was not
a complete apostasy, even after his attempts
against his Master, are inventions, and that this
alone is true, viz., that one of His disciples be-
trayed Him ; and will they add to the Scriptural
account that he betrayed Him also with his
whole heart? To act in this spirit of hostility
with the same writings, both as to what we are
to believe and what we are not to believe, is ab-
surd.'^ And if we must make a statement regard-
ing Judas which may overwhelm our opponents
with shame, we would say that, in the book of
Psalms, the whole of the loSth contains a proph-
ecy about Judas, the beginning of which is this :
"O God, hold not Thy peace before my praise ;
for the mouth of the sinner, and the mouth of the
crafty man, are opened against me." 5 And it
is predicted in this psalm, both that Judas sepa-
rated himself from the number of the apostles
on account of his sins, and that another was
selected in his place ; and this is shown by the
words: "And his bishopric let another take." "^
But suppose now that He had been betrayed by
some one of His disciples, who was possessed
by a worse spirit than Judas, and who had com-
pletely poured out, as it were, all the words
which he had heard from Jesus, what would this
contribute to an accusation against Jesus or the
Christian religion? And how will this demon-
strate its doctrine to be false ? We have replied
in the preceding chapter to the statements which
follow this, showing that Jesus was not taken
prisoner when attempting to flee, but that He
gave Himself up voluntarily for the sake of us
all. Whence it follows, that even if He were
bound. He was bound agreeably to His own
will ; thus teaching us the lesson that we should
undertake similar things for the sake of religion
in no spirit of unwillingness.


' Matt. xxvi. 52-54.
* Matt, xxvii. 3-5.


3 fiiaTTupos <cai <7i/)d6po.


I, 2. [cviii. t, 2, Sept. S.]
8. [cviii. S, Sept. S.]


436


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


CHAP. XII.

And the following appear to me to be childish
assertions, viz., that " no good general and leader
of great multitudes was ever betrayed ; nor even
a wicked captain of robbers and commander of
very wicked men, who seemed to be of any use
to his associates ; but Jesus, having been be-
trayed by his subordinates, neither governed
like a good general, nor, after deceiving his
disciples, produced in the minds of the victims
of his deceit that feeling of good-will which, so
to speak, would be manifested towards a brigand
chief." Now one might find many accounts of
generals who were betrayed by their own soldiers,
and of robber chiefs who were captured through
the instrumentality of those who did not keep
their bargains with them. But grant that no
general or robber chief was ever betrayed, what
does that contribute to the establishment of the
fact as a charge against Jesus, that one of His
disciples became His betrayer? And since Cel-
sus makes an ostentatious exhibition of philoso-
phy, I would ask of him. If, then, it was a charge
against Plato, that Aristotle, after being his pupil
for twenty years, went away and assailed his
doctrine of the immortality of the soul, and
styled the ideas of Plato the merest trifling?'
And if I were still in doubt, I would continue
thus : Was Plato no longer mighty in dialectics,
nor able to defend his views, after Aristotle had
taken his departure ; and, on that account, are
the opinions of Plato false? Or may it not
be, that while Plato is true, as the pupils of
his philosophy would maintain, Aristotle was
guilty of wickedness and ingratitude towards his
teacher? Nay, Chrysippus also, in many places
of his writings, appears to assail Cleanthes, in-
troducing novel opinions opposed to his views,
although the latter had been his teacher when
he was a young man, and began the study of
philosophy. Aristotle, indeed, is said to have
been Plato's pupil for twenty years, and no
inconsiderable .period was spent by Chrysippus
in the school of Cleanthes ; while Judas did
not remain so much as three years with Jesus.^
But from the narratives of the lives of philos-
ophers we might take many instances similar to
those on which Celsus founds a charge against
Jesus on account of Judas. Even the Pytha-
goreans erected cenotaphs ^ to those who, after
betaking themselves to philosophy, fell back
again into their ignorant mode of life ; and yet
neither was Pythagoras nor his followers, on
that account, weak in argument and demonstra-
tion.


' TepeTio-juaTa.

^ [See De Princip., iv. i. 5, where Origen gives the length of our
Lord's ministry as " only a year and a few months." S.]

2 Cf. Clem. Alex., Strom., v. c. ix. [See vol. ii. pp. 457, 458. S.]


This Jew of Celsus continues, after the above,
in the following fashion : " Although he could
state many things regarding the events of the
life of Jesus which are true, and not like those
which are recorded by the disciples, he willingly
omits them." What, then, are those true state-
ments, unlike the accounts in the Gospels, which
the Jew of Celsus passes by without mention?
Or is he only employing what appears to be a
figure of speech,'* in pretending to have some-
thing to say, while in reality he had nothing
to produce beyond the Gospel narrative which
could impress the hearer with a feeling of its
truth, and furnish a clear ground of accusation
against Jesus and His doctrine ? And he charges
the disciples with having invented the statement
that Jesus foreknew and foretold all that hap-
pened to Him ; but the truth of this statement
we shall establish, although Celsus may not like
it, by means of many other predictions uttered
by the Saviour, in which He foretold what would
befall the Christians in after generations. And
who is there who would not be astonished at
this prediction : " Ye shall be brought before
governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony
against them and the Gentiles ; " s and at any
others which He may have delivered respecting
the future persecution of His disciples? For
what system of opinions ever existed among
men on account of which others are punished,
so that any one of the accusers of Jesus could
say that, foreseeing the impiety or falsity of his
opinions to be the ground of an accusation
against them, he thought that this would re-
dound to his credit, that he had so predicted
regarding it long before? Now if any deserve
to be brought, on account of their opinions,
before governors and kings, what others are they,
save the Epicureans, who altogether deny the
existence of providence? And also the Peri-
patetics, who say that prayers are of no avail,
and sacrifices offered as to the Divinity? But
some one will say that the Samaritans suffer per-
secution because of their religion. In answer
to whom we shall state that the Sicarians,'' on
account of the practice of circumcision, as muti-
lating tli^mselves contrary to the established
laws and the customs permitted to the Jews
alone, are put to death. And you never hear a
judge inquiring whether a Sicarian who strives to
live according to this established religion of his
will be released from punishment if he aposta-
tizes, but will be led away to death if he con-


4 hoKOV<Jf\ Seil'OTTJTt pifTOplKrj.

5 Matt. X. 18. ■

6 Modestinus, lib. vi. Regularttm, ad legem Corneltam de
Sicariis: " Circumcidere filios suos Judaeis tantum rescripto divi
Pii permittitur; in non ejusdem religionis qui hoc fecerit, castrantis
poena irrogatur."


Chap. XV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


437


tinues firm ; for the evidence of the circumcision
is sufficient to ensure the death of him who has
undergone it. But Christians alone, according
to the prediction of their Saviour, " Ye shall be
brought before governors and kings for My
sake," are urged up to their last breath by their
judges to deny Christianity, and to sacrifice ac-
cording to the public customs ; and after the
oath of abjuration, to return to their homes, and
to live in safety. And observe whether it is not
with great authority that this declaration is ut-
tered : " Whosoever therefore shall confess Me
before men, him will I confess also before My
Father who is in heaven. And whosoever shall
deny Me before men," ' etc. And go back with
me in thought to Jesus when He uttered these
words, and see His predictions not yet accom-
plished. Perhaps you will say, in a spirit of
incredulity, that he is talking folly, and speaking
to no purpose, for his words will have no fulfil-
ment ; or, being in doubt about assenting to his
words, you will say, that if these predictions be
fulfilled, and the doctrine of Jesus be established,
so that governors and kings think of destroying
those who acknowledge Jesus, then we shall
believe that he utters these prophecies as one
who has received great power from God to
implant this doctrine among the human race,
and as believing that it will prevail. And who
will not be filled with wonder, when he goes
back in thought to Him who then taught and
said, "This Gospel shall be preached through-
out the whole world, for a testimony against j
them and the Gentiles,"^ and beholds, agree-
ably to His words, the Gospel of Jesus Christ
preached in the whole world under heaven to
Greeks and Barbarians, wise and foolish alike ? '■
For the word, spoken with power, has gained j
the mastery over men of "all sorts of nature, and '
it is impossible to see any race of men which !
has escaped accepting the teaching of Jesus. |
But let this Jew of Celsus, who does not believe
that He foreknew all that happened to Him,
consider how, while Jerusalem was still standing,
and the whole Jewish worship celebrated in it,
Jesus foretold what would befall it from the
hand of the Romans. For they will not main-
tain that the accjuaintances and pupils of Jesus
Himself handed down His teaching contained
in the Gospels without committing it to writing,
I and left His disciples without the memoirs of
] Jesus contained in their works.^ Now in these


' Matt. X. i8.

2 Matt. xxiv. 14.

^ [" Celsus quotes the writings of the disciples of Jesus concern-
ing His life, as possessing unquestioned authority: and that these
were the four canonical Gospels is proved both by the absence of all
evidence to the contrary, and by the special facts which he brings
forward And not only this, but both Celsus and Porphyry appear to
have been acquainted with the Pauline Epistles " (Westcott's ///>-
tory of ike Canon of the New Testament, pp. 464, 465, 137, 138,
401,402). See also /Vj/ra, cap. Ixxiv. S.J


it is recorded, that " when ye shall see Jerusalem
compassed about with armies, then shall ye know
that the desolation thereof is nigh."* But at
that time there were no armies around Jerusalem,
encompassing and enclosing and besieging it ;
for the siege began in the reign of Nero, and
lasted till the government of Vespasian, whose
son Titus destroyed Jerusalem, on account, as
Josephus says, of James the Just, the brother of
Jesus who was called Christ, but in reality, as
the truth makes clear, on account of Jesus Christ
the Son of God.


Celsus, however, accepting or granting that
Jesus foreknew what would befall Him, might
think to make light of the admission, as he did
in the case of the miracles, when he alleged that
they were wrought by means of sorcery ; for he
might say that many persons by means of divi-
nation, either by auspices, or auguries, or sacri-
fices, or nativities, have come to the knowledge
of what was to happen. But this concession he
would not make, as being too great a one ; and
although he somehow granted that Jesus worked
miracles, he thought to weaken the force of this
by the charge of sorcery. Now Phlegon, in the
thirteenth or fourteenth book, I think, of his
Chronicles, not only ascribed to Jesus a knowl-
edge of future events (although falling into con-
fusion about some things which refer to Peter,
as if they referred to Jesus), but also testified
that the result corresponded to His predictions.
So that he also, by these very admissions re-
garding foreknowledge, as if against his will,
expressed his opinion that the doctrines taught
by the fathers of our system were not devoid of
divine power.

CHAP. XV.

Celsus continues : " The disciples of Jesus,
having no undoubted fact on which to reh',
devised the fiction that he foreknew everything
before it happened ; " not observing, or not
wishing to observe, the love of truth which ac-
tuated the writers, who acknowledged that Jesus
had told His disciples beforehand, " All ye shall
be offended because of Me this night," — a
statement which was fulfilled by their all being
offended; and that He predicted to Peter, "Be-
fore the cock crow, thou shalt deny Me thrice,"
which was followed by Peter's threefold denial.
Now if they had not been lovers of truth, but,
as Celsus supposes, inventors of fictions, they
would not have represented Peter as denying,
nor His disciples as being offended. For al-
though these events actually happened, who
could have proved that they turned out in that
manner? And yet, according to all probability.


[Luke :


s.]


438


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


these were matters whicli ought to have been
passed over in silence by men who wished to
teach the readers of the Gospels to despise
death for the sake of confessing Christianity.
But now, seeing that the word, by its power, will
gain the mastery over men, they related those
facts which they have done, and which, I know
not how, were neither to do any harm to their
readers, nor to afford any pretext for denial.


Exceedingly weak is his assertion, that " the
disciples of Jesus wrote such accounts regarding
him, by way of extenuating the charges that told
against him : as if," he says, " any one were to
say that a certain person was a just man, and
yet were to show that he was guilty of injustice ;
or that he was pious, and yet had committed
murder ; or that he was immortal, and yet was
dead ; subjoining to all these statements the
remark that he had foretold all these things."
Now his illustrations are at once seen to be
inappropriate ; for there is no absurdity in Him
who had resolved that He would become a liv-
ing pattern to men, as to the manner in which
they were to regulate their lives, showing also
how they ought to die for the sake of their re-
ligion, apart altogether from the fact that His
death on behalf of men was a benefit to the
whole world, as we proved in the preceding
book. He imagines, moreover, that the whole
of the confession of the Saviour's sufferings con-
firms his objection instead of weakening it. For
he is not acquainted either with the philosophi-
cal remarks of Paul," or the statements of the
prophets, on this subject. And it escaped him
that certain heretics have declared that Jesus
underwent His sufferings in appearance, not in
reality. For had he known, he would not have
said : " For ye do not even allege this, that he
seemed to wicked men to suffer this punishment,
though not undergoing it in reality ; but, on the
contrary, ye acknowledge that he openly suf-
fered." But we do not view His sufferings as
having been merely in appearance, in order that
His resurrection also may not be a false, but a
real event. For he who really died, actually
arose, if he did arise ; whereas he who appeared
only to have died, did not in reality arise. But
since the resurrection of Jesus Christ is a subject
of mockery to unbelievers, we shall quote the
words of Plato,^ that Erus the son of Armenius
rose from the funeral pile twelve days after he
had been laid upon it, and gave an account of
what he had seen in Hades ; and as we are
replying to unbelievers, it will not be altogether
useless to refer in this place to what Heraclides ^


■ 6<ra TTfpi TouTOu koI napa TiJ navAw 7re<f>iAo<rd<|)7)Tai.

2 Cf. Plato, de Ke/., x. p. 614.

3 Cf. Plin., JVai. Hist., vii. c. 52.


relates respecting the woman who was deprived
of life. And many persons are recorded to have
risen from their tombs, not only on the day of
their burial, but also on the day following. What
wonder is it, then, if in the case of One who
performed many marvellous things, both beyond
the power of man and with such fulness of evi-
dence, that he who could not deny their per-
formance, endeavoured to calumniate them by
comparing them to acts of sorcery, should have
manifested also in His death some greater dis-
play of divine power, so that His soul, if it
pleased, might leave its body, and having per-
formed certain offices out of it, might return
again at pleasure? And such a declaration is
Jesus said to have made in the Gospel of John,
when He said : " No man taketh My life from
Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have power
to lay it down, and I have power to take it
again.""* And perhaps it was on this account
that He hastened His departure from the body,
that He might preserve it, and that His legs
might not be broken, as were those of the rob-
bers who were crucified with Him. " For the
soldiers brake the legs of the first, and of the
other who was crucified with Him ; but when
they came to Jesus, and saw that He was dead,
they brake not His legs." s We have accord-
ingly answered the question, " How is it credible
that Jesus could have predicted these things?"
And with respect to this, " How could the dead
man be immortal?" let him who wishes to un-
derstand know, that it is not the dead man who
is immortal, but He who rose, from the dead.
So far, indeed, was the dead man from being
immortal, that even the Jesus before His de-
cease — the compound being, who was to suffer
death — was not immortal.'^ For no one is im-
mortal who is destined to die ; but he is immor-
tal when he shall no longer be subject to death.
But " Christ, being raised from the dead, dieth
no more : death hath no more dominion over
Him ; " 7 although those may be unwilling to
admit this who cannot understand how such
things should be said.


Extremely foohsh also is his remark, "What
god, or spirit, or prudent man would not, on
foreseeing that such events were to beflill him,
avoid them if he could ; whereas he threw him-
self headlong into those things which he knew
beforehand were to happen?" And yet Socrates
knew that he would die after drinking the hem-
lock, and it was in his power, if he had allowed
himself to be persuaded by Crito, by escaping


* John X. i8.

5 John xix. 32, 33.

6 Oil /lioi'oi/ ovv ovx o vexpo^ aOdvaTO';, aAA' ovS' 6 vp'o tc
veKpov 'IrjcroOs 6 avvdtTOi a86.vo.TO'; r]V, 6? ye e/iieAAe TiOvq^icrBa

7 Rom. vi. 9.


Chap. XX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


439


from prison, to avoid these calamities ; but
nevertheless he decided, as it appeared to him
consistent with right reason, that it was better
for him to die as became a philosopher, than to
retain his life in a manner unbecoming one.
Leonidas also, the Lacedaemonian general, know-
ing that he was on the point of dying with his
followers at Thermopylae, did not make any
effort to preserve his life by disgraceful means,
but said to his companions, " Let us go to break-
fast, as we shall sup in Hades." And those who
are interested in collecting stories of this kind,
will find numbers of them. Now, where is the
wonder if Jesus, knowing all things that were to
happen, did not avoid them, but encountered
what He foreknew ; when Paul, His own dis-
ciple, having heard what would befall him when
he went up to Jerusalem, proceeded to face the
danger, reproaching those who were weeping
around him, and endeavouring to prevent him
from going up to Jerusalem ? Many also of our
I contemporaries, knowing well that if they made
' a confession of Christianity they would be put
I to death, but that if they denied it they would
I be liberated, and their property restored, de-
I spised life, and voluntarily selected death for the
I sake of their religion.
I

CHAP. XVIII.

After this the Jew makes another silly remark,
saying, " How is it that, if Jesus pointed out be-
forehand both the traitor and the perjurer, they
did not fear him as a God, and cease, the one
from his intended treason, and the other from
his perjury? " Here the learned Celsus did not
see the contradiction in his statement : for if
Jesus foreknew events as a God, then it was im-
possible for His foreknowledge to prove untrue ;
and therefore it was impossible for him who was
known to Him as going to betray Him not to
execute his purpose, nor for him who was re-
buked as going to deny Him not to have been
guilty of that crime. For if it had been possible
for the one to abstain from the act of betrayal,
and the other from that of denial, as having been
warned of the consequences of these actions be-
forehand, then His words were no longer true,
who predicted that the one would betray Him
and the other deny Him. For if He had fore-
knowledge of the traitor, He knew the wicked-
ness in which the treason originated, and this
wickedness was by no means taken away by the
foreknowledge. And, again, if He had ascer-
tained that one would deny Him, He made that
prediction from seeing the weakness out of which
that act of denial would arise, and yet this weak-
ness was not to be taken away thus at once ' by
the foreknowledge. But whence he derived the


statement, " that these persons betrayed and
denied him without manifesting any concern
about him," I know not ; for it was proved, with
respect to the traitor, that it is false to say that
he betrayed his master without an exhibition of
anxiety regarding Him. And this was shown to
be equally true of him who denied Him ; for he
went out, after the denial, and wept bitterly.


Superficial also is his objection, that " it is
always the case when a man against whom a
plot is formed, and who comes to the knowledge
of it, makes known to the conspirators that he
is acquainted with their design, that the latter
are turned from their purpose, and keep upon
their guard." For many have continued to plot
even against those who were acquainted with
their plans. And then, as if bringieg his argu-
ment to a conclusion, he says : " Not because
these things were predicted did they come to
pass, for that is impossible ; but since they have
come to pass, their being predicted is shown to
be a falsehood : for it is altogether impossible
that those who heard beforehand of the discov-
ery of their designs, should carry out their plans
of betrayal and denial ! " But if his premises
are overthrown, then his conclusion also falls to
the ground, viz., "that we are not to believe,
because these things were predicted, that they
have come to pass." Now we maintain that
they not only came to pass as being possible, but
also that, because they came to pass, the fact of
their being predicted is shown to be true ; for
the truth regarding future events is judged of by
results. It is false, therefore, as asserted by him,
that the prediction of these events is proved to
be untrue ; and it is to no purpose that he says,
" It is altogether impossible for those who heard
beforehand that their designs were discovered,
to carry out their plans of betrayal and denial."

CHAP. XX.

Let us see how he continues after this :
" These events," he says, " he predictetl as be-
ing a God, and the prediction must by all means
come to pass. God, therefore, who above all
others ought to do good to men, and especially
to those of his own household, led on his own
disciples and prophets, with whom he was in the
habit of eating and drinking, to such a degree
of wickedness, that they became impious and
unholy men. Now, of a truth, he who shared a
man's table would not be guilty of conspiring
against him ; but after banqueting with God, he
became a conspirator. And, what is still more
absurd, God himself plotted against the mem-
bers of his own table, by converting them into
traitors and villains ! " Now, since you wish me


440


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


to answer even those charges of Celsus which
seem to me frivolous/ the following is our reply
to such statements. Celsus imagines that an
event, predicted through foreknowledge, comes
to pass because it was predicted ; but we do not
grant this, maintaining that he who foretold it
was not the cause of its happening, because he
foretold it would happen ; but the future event
itself, which would have taken place though not
predicted, afforded the occasion to him, who
was endowed with foreknowledge, of foretelling
its occurrence. Now, certainly this result is pres-
ent to the foreknowledge of him who predicts
an event, when it is possible that it may or may
not happen, viz., that one or other of these
things will take place. For we do not assert
that he who foreknows an event, by secretly tak-
ing away the possibility of its happening or not,
makes any such declaration as this : " 'I'his shall
infallibly happen, and it is impossible that it can
be otherwise." And this remark applies to all
the foreknowledge of events dependent upon
ourselves, whether contained in the sacred Scrip-
tures or in the histories of the Greeks. Now,
what is called by logicians an " idle argument," -
which is a sophism, will be no sophism as far as
Celsus can help, but according to sound reason-
ing it is a sophism. And that this may be seen,
I shall take from the Scriptures the predictions
regarding Judas, or the foreknowledge of our
Saviour regarding him as the traitor ; and from
the Greek histories the oracle that was given to
Laius, conceding for the present its truth, since
it does not affect the argument. Now, in Ps.
cviii., Judas is spoken of by the mouth of the
Saviour, in words beginning thus : " Hold not
Thy peace, O God of my praise ; for the mouth
of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful
are opened against me." Now, if you carefully
observe the contents of the psalm, you will find
that, as it was foreknown that he would betray
the Saviour, so also was he considered to be
himself the cause of the betrayal, and deserving,
on account of his wickedness, of the impreca-
tions contained in the prophecy. For let him
suffer these things, " because," says the psalmist,
" he remembered not to show mercy, but perse-
cuted the poor and needy man." Wherefore it
was possible for him to show mercy, and not to
persecute him whom he did persecute. But al-
though he might have done these things, he did
not do them, but carried out the act of treason,
so as to merit the curses pronounced against
him in the prophecy.

And in answer to the Greeks we shall quote
the following oracular response to Laius, as
recorded by the tragic poet, either in the exact


evTe\e<Ti.
ap-yb? Ao'yos,


words of the oracle or in equivalent terms.
Future events are thus made known to him by
the oracle : " Do not try to beget children
against the will of the gods. For if you beget
a son, your son shall murder you ; and all your
household shall wade in blood." ^ Now from
this it is clear that it was within the power of
Laius not to try to beget children, for the oracle
would not have commanded an impossibility ;
and it was also in his power to do the opposite,
so that neither of these courses was compulsory.
And the consequence of his not guarding against
the begetting of children was, that he suffered
from so doing the calamities described in the
tragedies relating to CEdipus and Jocasta and
their sons. Now that which is called the " idle
argument," being a quibble, is such as might be
applied, say in the case of a sick man, with
the view of sophistically preventing him from
employing a physician to promote his recovery ;
and it is something like this : " If it is decreed
that you should recover from your disease, you
will recover whether you call in a physician or
not ; but if it is decreed that you should not
recover, you will not recover whether you call in
a physician or no. But it is certainly decreed
either that you should recover, or that you should
not recover ; and therefore it is in vain that you
call in a physician." Now with this argument
the following may be wittily compared : " If it
is decreed that you should beget children, you
will beget them, whether you have intercourse
with a woman or not. But if it is decreed that
you should not beget children, you will not do so,
whether you have intercourse with a woman or
no. Now, certainly, it is decreed either that you
should beget children or not ; therefore it is in
vain that you have intercourse with a woman."
For, as in the latter instance, intercourse with a
woman is not employed in vain, seeing it is an
utter impossibility for him who does not use it to
beget children ; so, in the former, if recovery from
disease is to be accomplished by means of the
healing art, of necessity the physician is sum-
moned, and it is therefore false to say that " in
vain do you call in a physician." We have
brought forward all these illustrations on account
of the assertion of this learned Celsus, that " be-
ing a God He predicted these things, and the
predictions must /^y all means come to pass."
Now, if by " by all means " he means " necessari-
ly^'' we cannot admit this. For it was quite pos-
sible, also, that they might 7iot come to pass.
But if he uses " by all means " in the sense of
" simple futurity" '* which nothing hinders from
being true (although it was possible that they
might not happen), he ^oes not at all touch my


Euripid., Phoenissce, i8-


Chap. XXIV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


441


argument ; nor did it follow, from Jesus having
predicted the acts of the traitor or the perjurer,
that it was the same thing with His being the
cause of such impious and unholy proceedings.
For He who was amongst us, and knew what was
in man, seeing his evil disposition, and foreseeing
what he would attempt from his spirit of covet-
ousness, and from his want of stable ideas of
duty towards his Master, along with many other
declarations, gave utterance to this also : " He
that dippeth his hand with Me in the dish, the
same shall betray Me." '


Obsen'e also the superficiality and manifest
falsity of such a statement of Celsus, when he
asserts " that he who was partaker of a man's
table would not conspire against him ; and if he
would not conspire against a man, much less
would he plot against a God after banqueting
with him." For who does not know that many
persons, after partaking of the salt on the table,^
have entered into a conspiracy against their en-
tertainers? I'he whole of Greek and Barbarian
history is full of such instances. And the Iam-
bic poet of Paros,3 when upbraiding Lycambes
with having violated covenants confirmed by the
salt of the table, says to him : —

" But thou hast broken a mighty oath — that, viz., by the
salt of the table."

And they who are interested in historical learn-
ing, and who give themselves wholly to it, to the
j neglect of other branches of knowledge more
'necessary for the conduct of life,-* can quote
{numerous instances, showing that they who
shared in the hospitality of others entered into
conspiracies against them.

CHAP. XXII.

He adds to this, as if he had brought together
an argument with conclusive demonstrations and
consequences, the following : " And, which is
Istill more absurd, God himself conspired against
those who sat at his table, by converting them
into traitors and impious men." But how Jesus
:ould either conspire or convert His disciples
nto traitors or imjMous men, it would be impos-
;ible for him to prove, save by means of such
I deduction as any one could refute with the
greatest ease.

j CHAP. XXIII.

I He continues in this strain : " If he had deter-
jnined upon these things, and underwent chastise-
ment in obedience to his Father, it is manifest
pat, being a God, and submitting voluntarily.


' Matt. xxvi. 23.

3 Archilochus.

* Guietus would expunge these words as " inept."


those things that were done agreeably to his own
decision were neither painful nor distressing."
But he did not observe that here he was at once
contradicting himself. For if he granted that
He was chastised because He had determined
upon these things, and had submitted Himself
to His Father, it is clear that He actually suffered
punishment, and it was impossible that what was
inflicted on Him by His chastisers should not
be painful, because pain is an involuntary thing.
But if, because He was willing to suffer. His in-
flictions were neither painful nor distressing, how
did He grant that "He was chastised?" He
did not perceive that when Jesus had once, by
His birth, assumed a body, He assumed one
j which was capable both of suffering pains, and
those distresses incidental to humanity, if we are
j to understand by distresses what no one volun-
I tarily chooses. Since, therefore, He voluntarily
I assumed a body, not wholly of a different nature
from that of human flesh, so along with His body
He assumed also its sufferings and distresses,
which it was not in His power to a\'oid enduring,
it being in the power of those who inflicted them
to send upon Him things distressing and painful.
And in the preceding pages we have already
shown, that He would not have come into the
hands of men had He not so willed. But He
did come, because He was willing to come, and
because it was manifest beforehand that His
dying upon behalf of men would be of ad\antage
to the whole human race.

CHAP. XXIV.

After this, wishing to prove that the occur-
rences which befell Him were painful and dis-
tressing, and that it was impossible for Him, had
He wished, to render them otherwise, he pro-
ceeds : " Why does he mourn, and lament, and
pray to escape the fear of death, expressing
himself in terms like these : ' O Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from Me?'"* Now
in these words observe the malignity of Celsus,
how not accepting the love of truth which actu-
ates the writers of the Gospels (who might have
passed over in silence those points which, as
Celsus thinks, are censurable, but who did not
omit them for many reasons, which any one, in
expounding the Gospel, can give in their i)roper
place), he brings an accusation against the (.jOS-
pel statement, grossly exaggerating the facts, and
cjuoting what is not written in the Gospels, seeing
it is nowhere found that Jesus lamented. And
he changes the words in the expression, " Father,
if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me," and
does not give what follows immediate!)' after,
which manifests at once the ready obedience of
Jesus to His Father, and His greatness of mind,


442


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


and which runs thus : " Nevertheless, not as I
will, but as Thou wilt." ' Nay, even the cheer-
ful obedience of Jesus to the will of His Father
in those things which He was condemned to
suffer, exhibited in the declaration, " If this cup
cannot pass from Me except I drink it, Thy will
be done," he pretends not to have observed, act-
ing here like those wicked individuals who listen
to the Holy Scriptures in a malignant spirit, and
"who talk wickedness with lofty head." For
they appear to have heard the declaration, " I
kill," ^ and they often make it to us a subject of
reproach ; but the words, " I will make alive,"
they do not remember, — the whole sentence
showing that those who live amid public wicked-
ness, and who work wickedly, are put to death
by God, and that a better life is infused into
them instead, even one which God will give to
those who have died to sin. And so also these
men have heard the words, " I will smite ; " but
they do not see these, " and I will heal," which
are like the words of a physician, who cuts
bodies asunder, and inflicts severe wounds, in
order to extract from them substances that are
injurious and prejudicial to health, and who does
not terminate his work with pains and lacera-
tions, but by his treatment restores the body to
that state of soundness which he has in view.
Moreover, they have not heard the whole of the
announcement, " For He maketh sore, and again
bindeth up ; " but only this part, " He maketh
sore." So in like manner acts this Jew of Celsus,
who quotes the words, " O Father, would that
this cup might pass from Me ; " but who does
not add what follows, and which exhibits the
firmness of Jesus, and His preparedness for suf-
fering. But these matters, which afford great
room for explanation from the wisdom of God,
and which may reasonably be pondered over ^ by
those whom Paul calls " perfect " when he said,
" We speak wisdom among them who are per-
fect," '^ we pass by for the present, and shall
speak for a little of those matters which are use-
ful for our present purpose.

CH.\P. XXV.

We have mentioned in the preceding pages
that there are some of the declarations of Jesus
which refer to that Being in Him which was the
"first-born of every creature," such as, "I am
the way, and the truth, and the life," and such
like ; and others, again, which belong to that in
*Him which is understood to be man, such as,
" But now ye seek to kill Me, a man that hath
told you the truth which I have heard of the


' Matt. xxvi. 39.

2 Deut. xxxii. 39.

3 Kai TavTa 6e, n-oAArjv e)(ovTa Siiqyr)(nv airo <ro<f)ias ©eoO ols
IlaOAo? wfo/xacre reAeiois fiikoyiai wapaSodrjaoiiivriv.

* I Cor. ii. 6.


Father." s And here, accordingly, he describes
the element of weakness belonging to human
flesh, and that of readiness of spirit which existed
in His humanity : the element of weakness in
the expression, " Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from Me ; " the readiness of the
spirit in this, " Nevertheless, not as I will, but as
Thou wilt." And since it is proper to observe
the order of our quotations, observe that, in the
first place, there is mentioned only the single
instance, as one would say, indicating the weak-
ness of the flesh ; and afterwards those other
instances, greater in number, manifesting the
willingness of the spirit. For the expression,
" Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from
Me," is only one : whereas more numerous are
those others, viz., " Not as I will, but as Thou
wilt ; " and, " O My Father, if this cup cannot
pass from Me except I drink it, Thy will be
done." It is to be noted also, that the words
are not, " let this cup depart from Me ; " but
that the whole expression is marked by a tone
of piety and reverence, " Father, if it be possi-
ble, let this cup pass from Me." I know, indeed,
that there is another explanation of this passage
to the following effect : — The Saviour, foresee-
ing the sufferings which the Jewish people and
the city of Jerusalem were to undergo in requital
of the wicked deeds which the Jews had dared
to perpetrate upon Him, from no other motive
than that of the purest philanthropy towards
them, and from a desire that they might escape
the impending calamities, gave utterance to the
prayer, " Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from Me." It is as if He had said, "Be-
cause of My drinking this cup of punishment,
the whole nation will be forsaken by Thee, I
pray, if it be possible, that this cup may pass
from Me, in order that Thy portion, which was
guilty of such crimes against Me, may not be
altogether deserted by Thee." But if, as Celsus
would allege, " nothing at that time was done to
Jesus which was either painful or distressing,"
how could men afterwards quote the example of
Jesus as enduring sufferings for the sake of reli-
gion, if He did not suffer what are human suffer-
ings, but only had the appearance of so doing?

CHAP. XXVI.

This Jew of Celsus still accuses the disciples
of Jesus of having invented these statements,
saying to them : " Even although guilty of false-
hood, ye have not been able to give a colour of
credibility to your inventions." In answer to
which we have to say, that there was an easy
method of concealing these occurrences, — that,
viz., of not recording them at all. For if the
Gospels had not contained the accounts of these


John viii. 40.


Chap. XXX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


443


things, who could have reproached us with Jesus
having spoken such words during His stay upon
the earth? Celsus, indeed, did not see that it
was an inconsistency for the same persons both
to be deceived regarding Jesus, beUeving Him
to be God, and the subject of prophecy, and to
invent fictions about Him, knowing manifestly
that these statements were false. Of a truth,
therefore, they were not guilty of inventing un-
truths, but such were their real impressions, and
they recorded them truly ; or else they were
guilty of falsifying the histories, and did not
entertain these views, and were not deceived
when they acknowledged Him to be God.

CHAP. XXVII.

After this he says, that certain of the Chris-
tian believers, like persons who in a fit of drunk-
ennegi lay violent hands upon themselves, have
corrupted the Gospel from its original integrity,
to a threefold, and fourfold, and many-fold de-
gree, and have remodelled it, so that they might
be able to answer objections. Now I know of
no others who have altered the Gospel, save the
followers of Marcion, and those of Valentinus,
and, I think, also those of Lucian. But such an
allegation is no charge against the Christian sys-
tem, but against those who dared so to trifle
with the Gospels. And as it is no ground of
accusation against philosophy, that there exist
Sophists, or Epicureans, or Peripatetics, or any
others, whoever they may be, who hold false
opinions ; so neither is it against genuine Chris-
tianity that there are some who corrupt the
Gospel histories, and who introduce heresies
opposed to the meaning of the doctrine of Jesus.

CHAP. XXVIII.

And since this Jew of Celsus makes it a subject
of reproach that Christians should make use of
the prophets, who predicted the events of Christ's
life, we have to say, in addition to what we have
already advanced upon this head, that it became
him to spare individuals, as he says, and to
expound the prophecies themselves , and after
admitting the probability of the Christian inter-
pretation of them, to show how the use which
they make of them may be overturned.' For in
this way he would not appear hastily to assume
so important a position on small grounds, and
particularly when he asserts that the " prophecies
agree with ten thousand other things more credi-
bly than with Jesus." And he ought to have
carefully met this powerful argument of the Chris-
tians, as being the strongest which they adduce.


I ■ The original here is probably corrupt: 'Otc ixPW ai'Tov (iy
1 (^Tjai) ii>€L&6^€V0V ayOpijiiTruiV aitrd^ €Kd€tj6ai Ta9 7rpO(fnjTeta5, Kai
(TWayopevaaifTa rai? Trt^ai'OTTjaiv avTujVy ttji/ rt>atvotJ.€vr)v avTwv
afOLTpoirTqv Tij? \p>J(Teu>9 Tu>r ;rpo*/)TjTi'cajf eKOeuOaL, For 0et56)iiei'Oi'
Boherellus would read Kri&6iJ.evoi', and rrji/ <^aivo)xeVi)i' avrtu avar-
poiriji/.


and to have demonstrated with regard to each
particular prophecy, that it can apply to other
events with greater probability than to Jesus.
He did not, however, perceive that this was a
plausible argument to be advanced against the
Christians only by one who was an opponent of
the prophetic writings ; but Celsus has here put
in the mouth of a Jew an objection which a Jew
would not have made. For a Jew will not admit
that the prophecies may be applied to countless
other things with greater probability than to
Jesus ; but he will endeavour, after giving what
appears to him the meaning of each, to oppose
the Christian interpretation, not indeed by any
means adducing convincing reasons, but only
attempting to do so.

CHAP. XXIX.

In the preceding pages we have already spoken
of this point, viz., the prediction that there were
to be two advents of Christ to the human race,
so that it is not necessary for us to reply to the
objection, supposed to be urged by a Jew, that
" the prophets declare the coming one to be a
mighty potentate, Lord of all nations and ar-
mies." But it is in the spirit of a Jew, I think,
and in keeping with their bitter animosity, and
baseless and even improbable calumnies against
Jesus, that he adds : " Nor did the prophets pre-
dict such a pestilence." ^ For neither Jews, nor
Celsus, nor any other, can bring any argument
to prove that a pestilence converts men from the
practice of evil to a life which is according to
nature, and distinguished by temperance and
other virtues.

CHAP. XXX.

This objection also is cast in our teeth by
Celsus : " From such signs and misinterpreta-
tions, and from proofs so mean, no one could
prove him to be God, and the Son of God."
Now it was his duty to enumerate the alleged
misinterpretations, and to prove them to be such,
and to show by reasoning the meanness of the
evidence, in order that the Christian, if any of
his objections should seem to be plausible, might
be able to answer and confute his arguments.
What he said, however, regarding Jesus, did
indeed come to pass, because He was a mighty
potentate, although Celsus refuses to see that it
so happened, notwithstanding that the clearest
evidence proves it true of Jesus. " For as the
sun," he says, "which enlightens all other ob-
jects, first makes himself visible, so ought the
Son of God to have done." We would say in
reply, that so He did ; for righteousness has
arisen in His days, and there is abundance of
peace, which took its commencement at His


444


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


birth, God preparing the nations for His teach-
ing, that they might be under one prince, the
king of the Romans, and that it might not, owing
to the want of union among the nations, caused
by the existence of many kingdoms, be more
difficult for the apostles of Jesus to accomplish
the task enjoined upon them by their Master,
when He said, " Go and teach all nations."
Moreover it is certain that Jesus was born in the
reign of Augustus, who, so to speak, fused to-
gether into one monarchy the many populations
of the earth. Now the existence of many king-
doms would have been a hindrance to the spread
of the doctrine of Jesus throughout the entire
world ; not only for the reasons mentioned, but
also on account of the necessity of men every-
where engaging in war, and fighting on behalf
of their native country, which was the case be-
fore the times of Augustus, and in periods still
more remote, when necessity arose, as when the
Peloponnesians and Athenians warred against
each other, and other nations in like manner.
How, then, was it possible for the Gospel doc-
trine of peace, which does not permit men to
take vengeance even upon enemies, to prevail
throughout the world, unless at the advent of
Jesus ' a milder spirit had been everywhere in-
troduced into the conduct of things ?

CHAP. XXXI.

He next charges the Christians witn being
" guilty of sophistical reasoning, in saying that
the Son of God is the Logos Himself." And he
thinks that he strengthens the accusation, be-
cause " when we declare the Logos to be the
Son of God, we do not present to view a pure
and holy Logos, but a most degraded man, who
was punished by scourging and crucifixion."
Now, on this head we have briefly replied to the
charges of Celsus in the preceding pages, where
Christ was shown to be the first-born of all crea-
tion, who assumed a body and a human soul ;
and that God gave commandment respecting the
creation of such mighty things in the world, and
they were created ; and that He who received
the command was God the Logos. And seeing
it is a Jew who makes these statements in the
work of Celsus, it will not be out of place to
quote the declaration, " He sent His word, and
healed them, and delivered them from their
destruction,"^ — a passage of which we spoke a
little ago. Now, although I have conferred with
many Jews who professed to be learned men, I
never heard any one expressing his approval of
the statement that the Logos is the Son of God,
as Celsus declares they do, in putting into the


' [In fulfilment of the great plan foreshadowed in Daniel, and
promised by Ha^gai (ii. 7), where I adhere to the Anglican version
and the Vulgate!]

2 Ps. cvii. 20.


mouth of the Jew such a declaration as this : " If
your Logos is the Son of God, we also give our
assent to the same."

CHAP. XXXII.

We have already shown that Jesus can be re-
garded neither as an arrogant man, nor a sor-
cerer ; and therefore it is unnecessary to repeat
our former arguments, lest, in replying to the
tautologies of Celsus, we ourselves should be
guilty of needless repetition. And now, in find-
ing fault with our Lord's genealogy, there are
certain points which occasion some difficulty
even to Christians, and which, owing to the dis-
crepancy between the genealogies, are advanced
by some as arguments against their correctness,
but which Celsus has not even mentioned. For
Celsus, who is truly a braggart, and who pro-
fesses to be acquainted with all matters relating
to Christianity, does not know how to raise
doubts in a skilful manner against the credibility
of Scripture. But he asserts that the " framers
of the genealogies, from a feeling of pride, made
Jesus to be descended from the first man, and
from the kings of the Jews." And he thinks
that he makes a notable charge when he adds,
that " the carpenter's wife could not have been
ignorant of the fact, had she been of such illus-
trious descent." But what has this to do with
the question? Granted that she was not igno-
rant of her descent, how does that affect the
result? Suppose that she we?-e ignorant, how
could her ignorance prove that she was not de-
scended from the first man, or could not derive
her origin from the Jewish kings? Does Celsus
imagine that the poor must always be descended
from ancestors who are poor, or that kings are
always born of kings ? But it appears folly to
waste time upon such an argument as this, seeing
it is well known that, even in our own days, some
who are poorer than Mary are descended from
ancestors of wealth and distinction, and that
rulers of nations and kings have sprung from
persons of no reputation.

CHAP. xxxm.
" But," continues Celsus, " what great deeds
did Jesus perform as being a God? Did he put
his enemies to shame, or bring to a ridiculous
conclusion what was designed against him?"
Now to this question, although we are able to
show the striking and miraculous character of
the events which befell Him, yet from what other
source can we furnish an answer than from the
Gospel narratives, which state that "there was
an earthquake, and that the rocks were split
asunder, and the tombs opened, and the veil of
the temple rent in twain from top to bottom,
and that darkness prevailed in the day-time, the


Chap. XXXVI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


445


sun failing to give light?"' But if Celsus be-
lieve the Gospel accounts when he thinks that
he can find in them matter of charge against
the Christians, and refuse to believe them when
they establish the divinity of Jesus, our answer
to him is : " Sir,- either disbelieve all the Gospel
narratives, and then no longer imagine that you
can found charges upon them ; or, in yielding
your belief to their statements, look in admira-
tion on the Logos of God, who became incar-
nate, and who desired to confer benefits upon
the whole human race. And this feature evinces
the nobility of the work of Jesus, that, down to
the present time, those whom God wills are healed
by His name. 3 And with regard to the eclipse
in the time of Tiberius Caesar, in whose reign
Jesus appears to have been crucified, and the
great earthquakes which then took place, Phle-
gon too, I think, has written in the thirteenth or
fourteenth book of his Chronicles." *

CHAP. XXXIV.

This Jew of Celsus, ridiculing Jesus, as he
imagines, is described as being acquainted with
the Bacchse of Euripides, in which Dionysus
says : —

" The divinity himself will liberate me whenever I wish." ^

Now the Jews are not much acquainted with
Greek literature ; but suppose that there was a
Jew so well versed in it (as to make such a quo-
tation on his part appropriate), how (does it
follow) that Jesus could not hberate Himself,
because He did not do so ? For let him believe
from our own Scriptures that Peter obtained his
freedom after having been bound in prison, an
angel having loosed his chains ; and that Paul,
having been bound in the stocks along with
Silas in Philippi of Macedonia, was liberated by
divine power, when the gates of the prison were
opened. But it is probable that Celsus treats
these accounts with ridicule, or that he never
read them ; for he would probably say in reply,
that there are certain sorcerers who are able by
incantations to unloose chains and to open doors,
so that he would liken the events related in our
histories to the doings of sorcerers. " But," he
continues, " no calamity happened even to him
who condemned him, as there did to Pentheus,
viz., madness or discerption." ^ And yet he does
not know that it was not so much Pilate that
condemned Him (who knew that " for envy the
Jews had delivered Him "), as the Jewish nation,
which has been condemned by God, and rent in


* Cf. Matt, xxvii. 51, 52; cf. Luke x.\iii. 44, 45.

* u) oJto?.

^ [Testimony not to be scorned.]

* On Phlegon, cf. note in Migne, pp. 823, 854. [See also vol.
Elucidation V. p. 58.]

5 Eurip., Bacchee, 498 (ed. Dindorf).

* Cf. Euseb., Hist. Eccles., bk. ii. c. vii.


pieces, and dispersed over the whole earth, in a
degree far beyond what happened to Pentheus.
Moreover, why did he intentionally omit what is
related of Pilate's wife, who beheld a vision, and
who was so moved by it as to send a message to
her husband, saying : "Have thou nothing to do
with that just man ; for I have suffered many
things this day in a dream because of Him ? " 7
And again, passing by in silence the proofs of
the divinity of Jesus, Celsus endeavours to cast
reproach upon Him from the narratives in the
Gospel, referring to those who mocked Jesus,
and put on Him the purple robe, and the crown
of thorns, and placed the reed in His hand.
From what source now, Celsus, did you derive
these statements, save from the Gospel narra-
tives ? And did you, accordingly, see that they
were fit matters for reproach, while they who
recorded them did not think that you, and such
as you, would turn them into ridicule ; but that
others would receive from them an example how
to despise those who ridiculed and mocked Him
on account of His religion, who appropriately
laid down His life for its sake ? Admire rather
their love of truth, and that of the Being who
bore these things voluntarily for the sake of
men, and who endured them with all constancy
and long-suffering. For it is not recorded that
He uttered any lamentation, or that after His
condemnation He either did or uttered anything
unbecoming.

CHAP. XXXV.

But in answer to this objection, " If not before,
yet why now, at least, does he not give some
manifestation of his divinity, and free himself
from this reproach, and take vengeance upon
those who insult both him and his Father?"
We have to reply, that it would be the same
thing as if we were to say to those among the
Greeks who accept the doctrine of providence,
and who believe in portents, Why does God not
punish those who insult the Divinity, and subvert
the doctrine of providence ? For as the Greeks
would answer such objections, so would we, in
the same, or a more effective manner. There
was not only a portent from heaven — the eclipse
of the sun — but also the other miracles, which
show that the crucified One possessed something
that was divine, and greater than was possessed
by the majority of men.

CHAP. XXXVI.

Celsus next says : " What is the nature of the
ichor in the body of the crucified Jesus? Is it
' such as flows in the bodies of the immortal
gods?' "^ He puts this question in a spirit of
mockery ; but we shall show from the serious


7 Matt, xxvii. 19.
^ Cf. Iliad, V. 340.


446


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


narratives of the Gospels, although Celsns may
not like it, that it was no mythic and Homeric
ichor which flowed from the body of Jesus, but
that, after His death, " one of the soldiers with
a spear pierced His side, and there came there-
out blood and water. And he that saw it bare
record, and his record is true, and he knoweth
that he saith the truth." ' Now, in other dead
bodies the blood congeals, and pure water does
not flow forth ; but the miraculous feature in the
case of the dead body of Jesus was, that around
the dead body blood and water flowed forth from
the side. But if this Celsus, who, in order to
find matter of accusation against Jesus and the
Christians, extracts from the Gospel even pas-
sages which are incorrecriy interpreted, but
passes over in silence the evidences of the divin-
ity of Jesus, would listen to divine portents, let
him read the Gospel, and see that even the
centurion, and they who with him kept watch
over Jesus, on seeing the earthquake, and the
events that occurred, were greatly afraid, saying,
" This man was the Son of God." ^

CHAP, xxxvir.
After this, he who extracts from the Gospel
narrative those statements on which he thinks he


CHAP. XXXVIII.

The Jew next remarks : " You, O sincere be-
lievers,5 find fault with us, because we do not
recognise this individual as God, nor agree with
you that he endured these (sufierings) for the
benefit of mankind, in order that we also might
despise punishment." Now, in answer to this,
we say that we blame the Jews, who have been
brought up under the training of the law and
the prophets (which foretell the coming of
Christ), because they neither refute the argu-
ments which we lay before them to prove that
He is the Messiah,^ adducing such refutation as
a defence of their unbehef ; nor yet, while not
offering any refutation, do they believe in Him
who was the subject of prophecy, and who clearly
manifested through His disciples, even after the
period of His appearance in the flesh, that He
underwent these things for the benefit of man-
kind ; having, as the object of His first advent,
not to condemn men and their actions ^ before
He had instructed them, and pointed out to
them their duty,** nor to chastise the wicked and
save the good, but to disseminate His doctrine
in an extraordinary 9 manner, and with the evi-
dence of divine power, among the whole human
race, as the prophets also have represented these
things. And we blame them, moreover, because


can found an accusation, makes the vmegar and i ^j^^ ^^^ ^^^^ believe in Him who gave evidence
the gall a subject of reproach to Jesus, saying ; ^^ ^^^ ^^^^^ ^,^^^ ^^,^^ -^^ ^-^^^ ^^^ asserted that
that " he rushed with open mouth 3 to drink ot j ^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ demons from the souls of men

prince of the demons ;


rnai •• ne rusneu vviLu upcii uiwuui - uw ..x...^ "' I He cast out demons
them, and could not endure his _ thirst as any | ^j^^^^ , Beelzebub the


ordinary man frequently endures it." Now this
matter admits of an explanation of a peculiar
and figurative kind ; but on the present occa-
sion, the statement that the prophets predicted
this very incident may be accepted as the more
common answer to the objection. For in the
sixty-ninth Psalm there is written, with reference
to Christ : " And they gave me gall for my meat,
and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." •♦
Now, let the Jews say who it is that the prophet-
ic writing represents as uttering these words ;
and let them adduce from history one who re-
ceived gall for his food, and to whom vinegar
was given as drink. Would they venture to
assert that the Christ whom they expect still to
come might be placed in such circumstances?
Then we would say. What prevents the predic-
tion from having been already accomplished?
For this very prediction was uttered many ages
before, and is sufficient, along with the other
prophetic utterances, to lead him who fairiy
examines the whole matter to the conclusion
that Jesus is He who was prophesied of as Christ,
and as the Son of God.


and we blame them because they slander the
philanthropic character of Him, who over-
looked not only no city, but not even a single
village in Judea, that He might everywhere an-
nounce the kingdom of God, accusing Him of
leading the wandering life of a vagabond, and
passing an anxious existence in a disgraceful
body. But there is no disgrace in enduring such
labours for the benefit of all those who may be
able to understand Him.

CHAP. XXXIX.

And how can the following assertion of this
Jew of Celsus appear anything else than a mani-
fest falsehood, viz., that Jesus, " having gained
over no one during his fife, not even his own
disciples, underwent these punishments and suf-
ferings?" For from what other source sprang
the envy which was aroused against Him by the
Jewish high priests, and elders, and scribes, save
from the fact that multitudes obeyed and fol-
lowed Him, and were led into the deserts not


» Cf. John xix. 34, 35.
2 Cf. Matt, xxvii. 54.


5 a> TTttTTOTaTOt.

6 TOl/ XpiCTOV.

7 TO. avOpuimov.

8 fiapTvpaa9ai. Trepl Tttiv irpaKTiuv.

9 7rapa66fu)S.


Chap. XLII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


447


only by the persuasive ' language of Him whose
words were always appropriate to His hearers,
but who also by His miracles made an impres-
sion on those who were not moved to behef by
His words ? And is it not a manifest falsehood
to say that " he did not gain over even his own
disciples," who exhibited, indeed, at that time
some symptoms of human weakness arising from
cowardly fear — for they had not yet been dis-
ciplined to the exhibition of full courage — but
who by no means abandoned the judgments
which they had formed regarding Him as the
Christ? For Peter, after his denial, perceiving
to what a depth of wickedness he had fallen,
" went out and wept bitterly ; " while the others,
although stricken with dismay on account of
what had happened to Jesus (for they still con-
tinued to admire Him), had, by His glorious
appearance,- their belief more firmly estabhshed
than before that He was the Son of God.

CHAP. XL.

It is, moreover, in a very unphilosophical spirit
that Celsus imagines our Lord's pre-eminence
among men to consist, not in the preaching of
salvation and in a pure morality, but in acting
contrary to the character of that personality
which He had taken upon Him, and in not dy-
ing, although He had assumed mortality ; or, if
dying, yet at least not such a death as might
serve as a pattern to those who were to learn by
that very act how to die for the sake of religion,
and to comport themselves boldly through its
help, before those who hold erroneous views on
the subject of religion and irreligion, and who
regard religious men as altogether irreligious,
but imagine those to be most religious who err
regarding God, and who apply to everything
rather than to God the ineradicable 3 idea of
Him (which is implanted in the human mind),
and especially when they eagerly rush to destroy
those who have yielded themselves up with their
whole soul (even unto death), to the clear evi-
dence of one God who is over all things.


In the person of the Jew, Celsus continues to
find fault with Jesus, alleging that " he did not
show himself to be pure from all evil." Let
Celsus state from what " evil " our Lord did not
show Himself to be pure. If he means that
He was not pure from what is properly termed
"evil," let him clearly prove the existence of
any wicked work in Him. But if he deems
poverty and the cross to be evils, and conspiracy
on the part of wicked men, then it is clear that


Tijc Trepi avToO a5i.a<rTpo<f>ov ivvoiav.


he would say that evil had happened also to
Socrates, who was unable to show himself pure
from evils. And how great also the other band
of poor men is among the Greeks, who have
given themselves to philosophical pursuits, and
have voluntarily accepted a life of poverty, is
known to many among the Greeks from what is
recorded of Democritus, who allowed his prop-
erty to become pasture for sheep ; and of Crates,
who obtained his freedom by bestowing upon
the Thebans the price received for the sale of
his possessions. Nay, even Diogenes himself,
from excessive poverty, came to live in a tub ;
jand yet, in the opinion of no one possessed of
moderate understanding, was Diogenes on that
account considered to be in an evil (sinful)
condition.

CHAP. xui.

But further, since Celsus will have it that "Jesus
was not irreproachable," let him instance anyone
of those who adhere to His doctrine, who has
recorded anything that could truly furnish ground
I of reproach against Jesus ; or if it be not from
these that he derives his matter of accusation
against Him, let him say from what quarter he
I has learned that which has induced him to say
that He is not free from reproach. Jesus, how-
! ever, performed all that He promised to do, and
I by which He conferred benefits upon his adher-
ents. And we, continually seeing fulfilled all
I that was predicted by Him before it happened,
I viz., that this Gospel of His should be preached
throughout the whole world, and that His disci-
ples should go among all nations and announce
His doctrine ; and, moreover, that they should be
brought before governors and kings on no other
account than because of His teaching ; we are
lost in wonder at Him, and have our faith in
Him daily confirmed. And I know not by what
greater or more convincing proofs Celsus would
have Him confirm His predictions ; unless, in-
deed, as seems to be the case, not understanding
that the Logos had become the man Jesus, he
would have Him to be subject to no human
weakness, nor to become an illustrious pattern
to men of the manner in which they ought to
bear the calamities of life, although these appear
to Celsus to be most lamentable and disgraceful
occurrences, seeing that he regards labour •♦ to
be the greatest of evils, and pleasure the perfect
good, — a view accepted by none of those phil-
osophers who admit the doctrine of providence,
and who allow that courage, and fortitude, and
magnanimity are virtues. Jesus, therefore, by
His sufferings cast no discredit upon the faith of
which He was the object ; but rather confirmed
the same among those who would approve of
manly courage, and among those who were


448


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[POOK II.


taught by Him that what was truly and properly
the happy life was not here below, but was to
be found in that which was called, according to
His own words, the " coming world ; " whereas
in what is called the " present world " life is a
calamity, or at least the first and greatest struggle
of the soul'

CHAP. XLIII.

Celsus next addresses to us the following re-
mark : " You will not, I suppose, say of him,
that, after failing to gain over those who were in
this world, he went to Hades to gain over those
who were there." But whether he like it or not,,
we assert that not only while Jesus was in the
body did He win over not a few persons merely,
but so great a number, that a conspiracy was
formed against Him on account of the multitude
of His followers ; but also, that when He became
a soul, without the covering of the body. He
dwelt among those souls which were without
bodily covering, converting such of them as were
willing to Himself, or those whom He saw, for
reasons known to Him alone, to be better adapted
to such a course. 2

CHAP. XLIV.

Celsus in the next place says, with indescrib-
able silliness : " If, after inventing defences which
are absurd, and by which ye were ridiculously
deluded, ye imagine that you really make a good
defence, what prevents you from regarding those
other individuals who have been condemned,
and have died a miserable death, as greater and
more divine messengers of heaven (than Jesus) ? "
Now, that manifestly and clearly there is no sim-
ilarity between Jesus, who suffered what is de-
scribed, and those who liave died a wretched
death on account of their sorcery, or whatever
else be the charge against them, is patent to
every one. For no one can point to any acts of
a sorcerer which turned away souls from the
practice of the many sins which prevail among
men, and from the flood of wickedness (in the
world) .3 But since this Jew of Celsus compares
Him to robbers, and says that "any similarly
shameless fellow might be able to say regarding
even a robber and murderer whom punishment
had overtaken, that such an one was not a rob-
ber, but a god, because he predicted to his
fellow-robbers that he would suffer such punish-
ment as he actually did suffer," it might, in the
first place, be answered, that it is not because
He predicted that He would suffer such things
that we entertain those opinions regarding Jesus
which lead us to have confidence in Him, as
one who has come down to us from God. And,


* ayiiva Tov TrpaJTOV Kal |u.6'yio-T0V TJjs i/'^'X')?-

2 [See Dean Plumptre's T/te Spirits in Prison:
Life after Death, p. 85. S.]

3 T^? Kara. 7T]v Kaxiav \V(TeQ>i,


in the second place, we assert that this very
comparison ■♦ has been somehow foretold in the
Gospels ; since God was numbered with the
transgressors by wicked men, who desired rather
a " murderer " (one who for sedition and mur-
der had been cast into prison) to be released
unto them, and Jesus to be crucified, and who
crucified Him between two robbers. Jesus, in-
deed, is ever crucified with robbers among His
genuine disciples and witnesses to the truth, and
suffers the same condemnation which they do
among men. And we say, that if those persons
have any resemblance to robbers, who on ac-
,count of their piety towards God suffer all kinds
of injury and death, that they may keep it pure
and unstained, according to the teaching of
Jesus, then it is clear also that Jesus, the author
of such teaching, is with good reason compared
by Celsus to the captain of a band of robbers.
But neither was He who died for the common
good of mankind, nor they who suffered because
of their religion, and alone of all men were per-
secuted because of what appeared to them the
right way of honouring God, put to death in
accordance with justice, nor was Jesus perse-
cuted without the charge of impiety being in-
curred by His persecutors.

CHAP. XLV.

But observe the superficial nature of his argu-
ment respecting the former disciples of Jesus, in
which he says : " In the next place, those who
were his associates while alive, and who listened
to his voice, and enjoyed his instructions as their
teacher, on seeing him subjected to punishment
and death, neither died with him, nor for him,
nor were even induced to regard punishment
with contempt, but denied even that they were
his disciples, whereas now ye die along with
him." And here he believes the sin which was
committed by the disciples while they were yet
beginners and imperfect, and which is recorded
in the Gospels, to have been actually committed,
in order that he may have matter of accusation
against the Gospel ; but their upright conduct
after their transgression, when they behaved with
courage before the Jews, and suffered countless
cruelties at their hands, and at last suffered death
for the doctrine of Jesus, he passes by in silence.
For he would neither hear the words of Jesus,
when He predicted to Peter, " When thou shalt
be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands," 5 etc.,
to which the Scripture adds, " This spake He,
signifying by what death he should glorify God ;"
nor how James the brother of John — an apos-
tle, the brother of an apostle — was slain with
the sword by Herod for the doctrine of Christ ;


Studies on the


Chap. XLVIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


449


nor even the many instances of boldness dis-
played by Peter and the other apostles because
of the Gospel, and " how they went forth from
the presence of the Sanhedrim after being
scourged, rejoicing that they were counted wor-
thy to suffer shame for His name," ' and so sur-
passing many of the instances related by the
Greeks of the fortitude and courage of their
philosophers. From the very beginning, then,
this was inculcated as a precept of Jesus among
His hearers, which taught men to despise the
life which is eagerly sought after by the multi-
tude, but to be earnest in living the life which
resembles that of God.

CHAP. XLVI.

But how can this Jew of Celsus escape the
charge of falsehood, when he says that Jesus,
" when on earth, gained over to himself only ten
sailors and tax-gatherers of the most worthless
character, and not even the whole of these?"
Now it is certain that the Jews themselves would
admit that He drew over not ten persons merely,
nor a hundred, nor a thousand, but on one
occasion five thousand at once, and on another
four thousand ; and that He attracted them to
such a degree that they followed Him even into
the deserts, which alone could contain the as-
sembled multitude of those who believed in God
through Jesus, and where He not only addressed
to them discourses, but also manifested to them
His works. And now, through his tautology, he
compels us also to be tautological, since we are
careful to guard against being supposed to pass
over any of the charges advanced by him ; and
therefore, in reference to the matter before us,
following the order of his treatise as we have it,
he says : " Is it not the height of absurdity to
maintain, that if, while he himself was alive, he
won over not a single person to his views, after
his death any who wish are able to gain over
such a multitude of individuals?" Whereas he
ought to have said, in consistency with truth,
that if, after His death, not simply those who
j will, but they who have the will and the power,
can gain over so many proselytes, how much
more consonant to reason is it, that while He
was alive He should, through the greater power
of His words and deeds, have won over to Him-
self manifold greater numbers of adherents ?

CHAP. XLVII.

He represents, moreover, a statement of his
own as if it were an answer to one of his ques-
tions, in which he asks : '' By what train of argu-

ent were you' led to regard him as the Son of
d? " For he makes us answer that " we were


won over to him, because "" we know that his
punishment was undergone to bring about the
destruction of the father of evil." Now we were
won over to His doctrine by innumerable other
considerations, of which we have stated only the
smallest part in the preceding pages ; but, if
God permit, we shall continue to enumerate
them, not only while dealing with the so-called
True Discourse of Celsus, but also on many
other occasions. And, as if we said that we
consider Him to be the Son of God because
He suffered punishment, he asks : "What then?
have not many others, too, been punished, and
that not less disgracefully?" And here Celsus
acts like the most contemptible enemies of the
Gospel, and like those who imagine that it fol-
lows as a consequence from our history of the
crucified Jesus, that we should worship those
who have undergone crucifixion !

CHAP. XLVIII.

Celsus, moreover, unable to resist the miracles
which Jesus is recorded to have performed, has
already on several occasions spoken of them
slanderously as works of sorcery ; and we also
on several occasions have, to the best of our
ability, replied to his statements. And now he
represents us as saying that " we deemed Jesus
to be the Son of God, because he healed the
lame and the blind." And he adds : " Moreover,
as you assert, he raised the dead." That He
healed the lame and the blind, and that there-
fore we hold Him to be the Christ and the Son
of God, is manifest to us from what is contained
in the prophecies : " Then the eyes of the blind
shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall
hear ; then shall the lame man leap as an hart."^
And that He also raised the dead, and that it is
no fiction of those who composed the Gospels,
is shown by this, that if it had been a fiction,
many individuals would have been represented
as having risen from the dead, and these, too,
such as had been many years in their graves.
But as it is no fiction, they are very easily
counted of whom this is related to ha\-e hap-
pened ; viz., the daughter of the ruler of the
synagogue (of whom I know not why He said,
" She is not dead, but sleepeth," stating regard-
ing her something which does not apply to all
who die) ; and the only son of the widow, on
whom He took compassion and raised him up,
making the bearers of the corpse to stand still ;
and the third instance, that of Lazarus, who had
been four days in the grave. Now, regarding
these cases we would say to all persons of can-
did mind, and especially to the Jew, that as


2 The reading in the text is ei Ka\ io-ufi': for which both Bohe-
reau and De la Rue propose int\ IcrtMfv, which has been adopted in
the translation: cf. enei fitoAa<rflr;, infra.

^ Cf. Isa. XXXV. 5, 6.


450


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


there were many lepers in the days of EHsha the
prophet, and none of them was healed save
Naaman the Syrian, and many widows in the
days of Elijah the prophet, to none of whom
was Elijah sent save to Sarepta in Sidonia (for
the widow there had been deemed worthy l)y a di-
vine decree of the miracle which was wrought by
the prophet in the matter of the bread) ; so also
there were many dead in the days of Jesus, but
those only rose from the grave whom the Logos
knew to be fitted for a resurrection, in order that
the works done by the Lord might not be mere-
ly symbols of certain things, but that by the very
acts themselves He might gain over many to the
marvellous doctrine of the Gospel. I would say,
moreover, that, agreeably to the promise* of Je-
sus, His disciples performed even greater works
than these miracles of Jesus, which were per-
ceptible only to the senses.' For the eyes of
those who are blind in soul are ever opened ;
and the ears of those who were deaf to virtuous
words, listen readily to the doctrine of God, and
of the blessed life with Him ; and many, too,
who were lame in the feet of the " inner man,"
as Scripture calls it, having now been healed
by the word, do not simply leap, but leap as the
hart, which is an animal hostile to serpents, and
stronger than all the poison of vipers. And
these lame who have been healed, receive from
Jesus power to trample, with those feet in which
they were formerly lame, upon the serpents and
scorpions of wickedness, and generally upon all
the power of the enemy ; and though they tread
upon it, they sustain no injury, for they also have
become stronger than the poison of all evil and
of demons.

CHAP. XLIX.

Jesus, accordingly, in turning away the minds
of His disciples, not merely from giving heed to
sorcerers in general, and those who profess in
any other manner to work miracles — for His
disciples did not need to be so warned — but
from such as gave themselves out as the Christ
of God, and who tried by certain apparent ^ mir-
acles to gain over to them the disciples of Jesus,
said in a certain passage : " Then, if any man
shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there ;
believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs,
and false prophets, and shall show great signs
and wonders ; insomuch that, if it were possible,
they shall deceive the very elect. Behold, I have
told you before. Wherefore, if they shall say
unto you. Behold, he is in the desert, go not
forth ; behold, he is in the secret chambers, be-
lieve it not. For as the lightning cometh out of
the east, and shineth even to the west, so also
shall the coming of the Son of man be." ^ And


' ojv 'iT/trou! aicrflrjToiv

2 <f>ai'Tacriwi^.

3 Matt. xxiv. 23-27.


in another passage : " Many will say unto Me in
that day. Lord, Lord, have we not eaten and
drunk in Thy name, and by Thy name have cast
out demons, and done many wonderful works?
And then will I say unto them. Depart from Me,
because ye are workers of iniquity." ^ But Cel-
sus, wishing to assimilate the miracles of Jesus
to the works of human sorcery, says in express
terms as follows : " O light and truth ! he dis-
tinctly declares, with his own voice, as ye your-
selves have recorded, that there will come to
you even others, employing miracles of a similai"
kind, who are wicked men, and sorcerers ; and
he calls him who makes use of such devices, one
Satan. So that Jesus himself does not deny
that these works at least are not at all divine,
but are the acts of wicked men ; and being com-
pelled by the force of truth, he at the same time
not only laid open the doings of others, but con-
victed himself of the same acts. Is it not, then,
a miserable inference, to conclude from the same
works that the one is God and the other sor-
cerers ? Why ought the others, because of these
acts, to be accounted wicked rather than this
man, seeing they have him as their witness
against himself? For he has himself acknowl-
edged that these are not the works of a divine
nature, but the inventions of certain deceivers,
and of thoroughly wicked men." Observe, now,
whether Celsus is not clearly convicted of slan-
dering the Gospel by such statements, since what
Jesus says regarding those who are to work signs
and wonders is different from what this Jew of
Celsus alleges it to be. For if Jesus had simply
told His disciples to be on their guard against
those who professed to work miracles, without
declaring what they would give themselves out
to be, then perhaps there would have been some
ground for his suspicion. But since those against
whom Jesus would have us to be on our guard
give themselves out as the Christ — which is not
a claim put forth by sorcerers — and since He
says that even some who lead wicked .lives will
perform miracles in the name of Jesus, and ex-
pel demons out of men, sorcery in the case of
these individuals, or any suspicion of such, is
rather, if we may so speak, altogether banished,
and the divinity of Christ established, as well as
the divine mission 5 of His disciples ; seeing
that it is possible that one who makes use of
His name, and who is wrought upon by some
power, in some way unknown, to make tlie
pretence that he is the Christ, should seem
to perform miracles like those of Jesus, while
others through His name should do works re-
sembling those of His genuine disciples.

Paul, moreover, in the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, shows in what manner there will


* Cf. Matt. vii. 22. 23, with Luke xiii. 26, 27.
5 fleioTrjs, lit. divinity.


Chap. LL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


451


one day be revealed " the man of sin, the son
of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth himself
above all that is called God, or that is wor-
shipped ; so that he sitteth in the temple of
God, showing himself that he is God." ' And
again he says to the Thessalonians : " And now
ye know what withholdeth that he might be re-
vealed in histime. For the mystery of iniquity
doth already work : only he who now letteth will
let, until he be taken out of the way : and then
shall that \Vicked be revealed, whom the Lord
will consume with the spirit of His mouth, and
shall destroy with the brightness of His coming :
even him, whose cunning is after the working of
Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying won-
ders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteous-
ness in them that perish." ^ And in assigning
the reason why the man of sin is permitted to
continue in existence, he says : " Because they
recei\-ed not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved. And for this cause God shall
send them strong delusion, that they should be-
lieve a lie ; that they all might be damned who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in un-
righteousness." 3 Let any one now say whether
any of the statements in the Gospel, or in the
writings of the apostle, could give occasion for
the suspicion that there is therein contained any
prediction of sorcery. Any one, moreover, who
likes may find the prophecy in Daniel respecting
antichrist. ■♦ But Gelsus falsifies the words of
Jesus, since He did not say that others would
come working similar miracles to Himself, but
who are wicked men and sorcerers, although
Celsus asserts that He uttered such words. For
as the power of the Egyptian magicians was not
similar to the divinely-bestowed grace of Moses,
but the issue clearly proved that the acts of the
former were the effect of magic, while those of
Moses were wrought by divine power ; so the
proceedings of the antichrists, and of those who
feign that they can work miracles as being the
disciples of Christ, are said to be lying signs and
wonders, prevailing with all deceivableness of un-
righteousness among them that perish ; whereas
the works of Christ and His disciples had for
their fruit, not deceit, but the salvation of human
souls. And who would rationally maintain that
an improved moral life, which daily lessened the
number of a man's offences, could proceed from
a system of deceit?


Celsus, indeed, evinced a slight knowledge of
Scripture when he made Jesus say, that it is " a
certain Satan who contrives such devices ; " al-


zThess. ii. 3, 4.
2 Thess. ii. 6-10.
2 Thess. ii 10-12.
Cf. Dan. vii. 26.


though he begs the question 5 when he asserts
that "Jesus did not deny that these works have
in them nothing of divinity, but proceed from
wicked men," for he makes things which differ
in kind to be the same. Now, as a wolf is not
of the same species as a dog, although it may.,
appear to have some resemblance in the figure
of its body and in its voice, nor a common
wood-pigeon ^ the same as a dove, 7 so there is
no resemblance between what is done by the
power of God and what is the effect of sorcery.
And we might further say, in answer to the cal-
umnies of Celsus, Are those to be regarded as
miracles which are wrought through sorcery by
wicked demons, but those not which are per-
formed by a nature that is holy and divine ? and
does human life endure the worse, but never re-
ceive the better? Now it appears to me that we
must lay it down as a general principle, that as,
wherever anything that is evil would make itself
to be of the same nature with the good, there
must by all means be something that is good
opposed to the evil ; so also, in opposition to
those things which are brought about by sorcery,
there must also of necessity be some things in
human life which are the result of divine power.
And it follows from the same, that we must either
annihilate both, and assert that neither exists, or,
assuming the one, and particularly the evil, admit
also the reality of the good. Now, if one were
to lay it down that works are wrought by means
of sorcery, but would not grant that there are
also works which are the product of divine
power, he would seem to me to resemble him
who should admit the existence of sophisms and
plausible arguments, which have the appearance
of establishing the truth, although really under-
mining it, while denying that truth had anywhere
a home among men, or a dialectic which differed
from sophistry. But if we once admit that it is
consistent with the existence of magic and sor-
cery (which derive their power from evil demons,
who are spell-bound by elaborate incantations,
and become subject to sorcerers) that some
works must be found among men which proceed
from a power that is divine, why shall we not
test those who profess to perform them by their
lives and morals, and the consetjuences of their
miracles, viz., whether they tend to the injury of
men or to the reformation of conduct? What
minister of evil demons, e.g., can do such things ?
and by means of what incantations and magic
arts ? And who, on the other hand, is it that,
having his soul and his spirit, and I imagine also
his body, in a pure and holy state, receives a
divine spirit, and performs such works in order
to benefit men, and to lead them to believe on


5 (Tvvapndid rov Aoyof.

6 4)dir<Ta.

7 nfpKTTepd.


452


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


the true God ? But if we must once investigate
(without being carried away by the miracles them-
seh'es) who it is that performs them by help of a
good, and who by help of an evil power, so that i
we may neither slander all without discrimina-
tion, nor yet admire and accept all as divine, will
it not be manifest, from what occurred in the
times of Moses and Jesus, when entire nations
were established in consetiuence of their miracles,
that these men wrought by means of divine power
what they are recorded to have performed? For
wickedness and sorcery would not have led a
whole nation to rise not only above idols and
images erected by men, but also above all created
things, and to ascend to the uncreated origin of
the God of the universe.


But since it is a Jew who makes these asser-
tions in the treatise of Celsus, we would say to
him : Pray, friend, why do you believe the works
which are recorded in your writings as having
been performed by God through the instrumen-
tality of Moses to be really divine, and endeavour
to refute those who slanderously assert that they
were wrought by sorcery, like those of the
Egyptian magicians ; while, in imitation of your
Egyptian opponents, you charge those which
were done by Jesus, and which, you admit, were
actually performed, with not being divine ? For
if the final result, and the founding of an entire
nation by the miracles of Moses, manifestly de-
monstrate that it was God who brought these
things to pass in the time of Moses the Hebrew
lawgiver, why should not such rather be shown
to be the case with Jesus, who accomplished far
greater works than those of Moses? For the
former took those of his own nation, the descend-
ants of Abraham, who had observed the rite of
circumcision transniitted by tradition, and who
were careful observers of the Abrahamic usages,
and led them out of Egypt, enacting for them
those laws which you believe to be divine ;
whereas the latter ventured upon a greater un-
dertaking, and superinduced upon the pre-exist-
ing constitution, and upon ancestral customs and
modes of life agreeable to the existing laws, a
constitution in conformity with the Gospel. And
as it was necessary, in order that Moses should
find credit not only among the elders, but the
common people, that there should be performed
those miracles which he is recorded to have per-
formed, why should not Jesus also, in order that
He may be believed on by those of the people
who had learned to ask for signs and wonders,
need ' to work such miracles as, on account of
their greater grandeur and divinity (in compari-
son with those of Moses), were able to convert


' [Serjcrerai. S.]


men from Jewish fables, and from the human
traditions which prevailed among them, and make
them admit that He who taught and did such
things was greater than the prophets? For how
was not He greater than the prophets, who was
proclaimed by them to be the Christ, and the
Saviour of the human race ?

CHAP. LIII.

All the arguments, indeed, which this Jew of
Celsus advances against those who believe on
Jesus, may, by parity of reasoning, be urged as
ground of accusation against Moses : so that
there is no difference in asserting that the sorcery
practised by Jesus and that by Moses were similar
to each other,^ — both of them, so far as the
language of this Jew of Celsus is concerned,
being liable to the same charge ; as, e.g., when
this Jew says of Christ, " But, O light and truth !
Jesus with his own voice expressly declares, as
you yourselves have recorded, that there will
appear among you others also, who will perform
miracles like mine, but who are wicked men and
sorcerers," some one, either Greek or Egyptian,
or any other party who disbelieved the Jew,
might say respecting Moses, " But, O light and
tiuth ! Moses with his own voice expressly de-
clares, as ye also have recorded, that there will
appear among you others also, who will perform
miracles like mine, but who are wicked men and
sorcerers. For it is written in your law, ' If there
arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of
dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder, and
the sign or wonder come to pass whereof he
spake unto thee, saying. Let us go after other
gods which thou hast not known, and let us serve
them ; thou shalt not hearken to the words of
that prophet, or dreamer of dreams,' " ^ etc.
Again, perverting the words of Jesus, he says,
" And he terms him who devises such things, one
Satan ; " while one, applying this to Moses, might
say, " And he terms him who devises such things,
a prophet who dreams dreams." And as this
Jew asserts regarding Jesus, that " even he him-
self does not deny that these works have in them
nothing of divinity, but are the acts of wicked
men ; " so any one who disbelieves the writings of
Moses might say, quoting what has been already
said, the same thing, viz., that, " even Moses
does not deny that these works have in them
nothing of divinity, but are the acts of wicked
men." And he will do the same thing also with
respect to this : " Being compelled by the force
of truth, Moses at the same time both exposed
the doings of others, and convicted himself of
the same." And when the Jew says, " Is it not
a wretched inference from the same acts, to con-


2 tutrre firj^ev Sia(j}€
'ly)(Tov Ty Ma)u<re'(05.

3 Deut. xiii. 1-3.


Chap. LIV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


453


elude that the one is a God, and the others sor-
cerers? " one might object to him, on the grovmd
of those words of Moses already quoted, ''Is it
not then a wretched inference from the same ^
acts, to conclude that the one is a prophet and '
servant of God, and the others sorcerers?" But
when, in addition to those comparisons which I
have already mentioned, Celsus, dwelling upon
the subject, adduces this also : " Why from these [
works should the others be accounted wicked, |
rather than this man, seeing they have him as a '
witness against himself?" — we, too, shall adduce
the following, in addition to what has been already
said : " Why, from those passages in which Moses
forbids us to believe those who exhibit signs and
wonders, ought we to consider such persons as
wicked, rather than Moses, because he calumni-
ates some of them in respect of their signs and
wonders ? " And urging more to the same effect,
that he may appear to strengthen his attempt,
he says : " He himself acknowledged that these
were not the works of a divine nature, but were
the inventions of certain deceivers, and of very
wicked men." Who, then, is " himself? " You,
O Jew, say that it is Jesus ; but he who accuses
you as liable to the same charges, will transfer
this " himself" to the person of Moses.


After this, forsooth, the Jew of Celsus, to keep
up the character assigned to the Jew from the
beginning, in his address to those of his country-
men who had become believers, says : "By
what, then, were you induced (to become his '
followers) ? Was it because he foretold that ,
after his death he would rise again?" Now
this question, like the others, can be retorted
upon Moses. For we might say to the Jew : j
" By what, then, were you induced (to become
the follower of Moses) ? Was it because he put
on record the following statement about his own
death : ' And Moses, the servant of the Lord,
died there, in the land of Moab, according to
the word of the Lord ; and they buried him in
Moab, near the house of Phogor : and no one
knoweth his sepulchre until this day?'"' For
as the Jew casts discredit upon the statement,
that " Jesus foretold that after His death He
would rise again," another person might make a
similar assertion about Moses, and would say in
reply, that Moses also put on record (for the
book of Deuteronomy is his composition) the
statement, that " no one knoweth his sepulchre
until this day," in order to magnify and enhance
the importance of his place of burial, as being
unknown to mankind.


Cf. Deut. xxxiv. 5, 6.


The Jew continues his address to those of his
countrymen who are converts, as follows : " Come
now, let us grant to you that the prediction was
actually uttered. Yet how many others are there
who practise such juggling tricks, in order to
deceive their simple hearers, and who make gain
by their deception? — as was the case, they say,
with Zamolxis ^ in Scythia, the slave of Pythag-
oras ; and with Pythagoras himself in Italy ;
and with Rhampsinitus^ in Egypt (the latter of
whom, they say, played at dice with Demeter in
Hades, and returned to the upper world with a
golden napkin which he had received from her
as a gift) ; and also with Orpheus "♦ among i]^t
Odrysians, and Protesilaus in Thessaly, and Her-
cules ^ at Cape Tsenarus, and Theseus. But the
question is, whether any one who was really dead
ever rose with a veritable body.s Or do you
imagine the statements of others not only to be
myths, but to have the appearance of such, while
you have discovered a becoming and credible
termination to your drama in the voice from the
cross, when he breathed his last, and in the
earthquake and the darkness? That while alive
he was of no assistance to "himself, but that when
dead he rose again, and showed the marks of
his punishment, and how his hands were pierced
with nails: who beheld this? A half-frandc^
woman, as you state, and some other one, per-
haps, of those who were engaged in the same
system of delusion, who had either dreamed so,
owing to a peculiar state of mind,^ or under the
influence of a wandering imagination had formed
to himself an appearance according to his own
wishes,*^ which has been the case with number-
less individuals ; or, which is most probable, one
who desired to impress others with this portent,
and by such a falsehood to furnish an occasion
to impostors like himself."

Now, since it is a Jew who makes these state-
ments, we shall conduct the defence of our Jesus
as if we were replying to a Jew, still continuing
the comparison derived from the accounts re-
garding Moses, and saying to him : " How many
others are there who practise similar juggling
tricks to those of Moses, in order to deceive
their silly hearers, and who make gain by their
deception?" Now this objection would be
more appropriate in the mouth of one who did
not believe in Moses (as we might quote the
instances of Zamolxis and Pythagoras, who were


2 Cf. Herodot., iv. 95.

3 Cf Herodot., ii. 122.

4 Cf. Diodor., iv., Bil>:. Hist.

5 a.vTm CMnaTt. [See Mozley's Bampton Lectures On Miracles,
3d ed , p. 297: " That a man should rise from the dead, was treated
by them (the heathen) as an absoUitely incredible fact." S.]

^ yvvt) TTapoKTTpo?.

7 Kara Tua indOtaiv oi-eipuifa?.

8 )j (Card T>)»' aiiToO ^ovKifauv &o^j) 77e»rAar>)fieV(} <|)a>'Ta<7iujS«i>.


454


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[r.ooK II.


engaged in such juggling tricks) tiian in that of
a Jew, who is not very learned in the histories
of the Greeks. An Egyptian, moreover, who did
not believe the miracles of Moses, might credibly
adduce the instance of Rhampsinitus, saying that
it was far more credible that he had descended
to Hades, and had played at dice with Demeter,
and that after stealing from her a golden napkin
he exhibited it as a sign of his having been in
Hades, and of his having returned thence, than
that Moses should have recorded that he entered
into the darkness, where God was, and that he
alone, above all others, drew near to God. For
the following is his statement : " Moses alone
shall come near the Lord ; but the rest shall not
come nigh." ' We, then, who are the disciples
of Jesus, say to the Jew who urges these objec-
tions : " While assailing our belief in Jesus, de-
fend yourself, and answer the Egyptian and the
Greek objectors : what will you say to those
charges which you brought against our Jesus,
but which also might be brouglit against Moses
first ? And if you should make a vigorous effort
to defend Moses, as indeed his history does
admit of a clear and powerful defence, you will
unconsciously, in your support of Moses, be an
unwilling assistant ifl establishing the greater
divinity of Jesus."


But since the Jew says that these histories
of the alleged descent of heroes to Hades, and of
their return thence, are juggling impositions,-
maintaining that these heroes disappeared for a
certain time, and secretly withdrew themselves
from the sight of all men, and gave themselves
out afterwards as having returned from Hades,
— for such is the meaning which his words seem
to convey respecting the Odrysian Orpheus, and
the Thessalian Protesilaus, and the Ttenarian
Hercules, and Theseus also, — let us endeavour
to show that the account of Jesus being raised
from the dead cannot possibly be compared to
these. For each one of the heroes respectively
mentioned might, had he wished, have secretly
withdrawn himself from the sight of men, and
returned again, if so determined, to those whom
he had left ; but seeing that Jesus was crucified
before all the Jews, and His body slain in the
presence of His nation, how can they bring
themselves to say that He practised a similar
deception 3 with those heroes who are related to
have gone down to Hades, and to have returned
thence? But we say that the following con-
sideration might be adduced, perhaps, as a de-
fence of the public crucifixion of Jesus, especially


1 Cf. Ex. xxiv. 2.

2 TepaTti'a?.

3 Tru)? oioi'Toi TO TrapaTTkrjcrioi' irXdaaa
icTTopoufitVots, etc.


aVTOC T019


in connection with the existence of those stories
of heroes who are supposed to have been com-
pelled ^ to descend to Hades : that if we were
to suppose Jesus to have died an obscure death,
so that the fact of His decease was not patent to
the whole nation of the Jews, and aftenvards to
have actually risen from the dead, there would,
in such a case, have been ground for the same
suspicion entertained regarding the heroes being
also entertained regarding Himself. Probably,
then, in addition to other causes for the cruci-
fixion of Jesus, this also may have contributed
to His dying a conspicuous death upon the
cross, that no one might have it in his power to
say that He voluntarily withdrew from the sight
of men, and seemed only to die, without really
doing so ; but, appearing again, made a juggler's
tricks of the resurrection from the dead. But
a clear and unmistakeable proof of the fact I
hold to be the undertaking of His disciples,
who devoted themselves to the teaching of a
doctrine which was attended with danger to
human life, — a doctrine which they would not
have taught with such courage had they invented
the resurrection of Jesus from the dead ; and
who also, at the same time, not only prepared
others to despise death, but were themselves the
first to manifest their disregard for its terrors.


But observe whether this Jew of Celsus does
not talk very blindly, in saying that it is impos-
sible for any one to rise from the dead with a
veritable body, his language being : " But this
is the question, whether any one who was really
dead ever rose again with a veritable body?"
Now a Jew would not have uttered these words,
who believed what is recorded in the third and
fourth books of Kings regarding little children,
of whom the one was raised up by Elijah,^ and
the other by Elisha.7 And on this account, too,
I think it was that Jesus appeared to no other
nation than the Jews, who had become accus-
tomed to miraculous occurrences ; so that, by
comparing what they themselves believed with
the works which w«re done by Him, and with
what was related of Him, they might confess
that He, in regard to whom greater things were
done, and by whom mightier marvels were per-
formed, was greater than all those who preceded
Him.

CHAP. LVIII.

Further, after these Greek stories which the
Jew adduced respecting those who were guilty


* lcaTa|3e^J))tcVat /3ia. Bohereau proposes the omission of ^i?.

5 eTepareucraTO.

6 Cf. I Kings xvii. 21, 22. [3 Kings, Sept and Vulg. S.J

7 Cf. 2 Kings iv. 34, 35. [4 Kings, Sept. and Vulg. S.]


i


Chap. LX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


455


of juggling practices/ and who pretended to
liave risen from the dead, he says to those Jews
who are converts to Christianity ; " Do you
imagine the statements of others not only to be
myths, but to have the appearance of such, while
you have discovered a becoming and credible
termination to your drama in the voice from the
cross, when he breathed his last?" We reply to
the Jew : " What you adduce as myths, we re-
gard also as such ; but the statements of the
Scriptures which are common to us both, in
which not you only, but we also, take pride, we
do not at all regard as myths. And therefore
we accord our belief to those who have therein
related that some rose from the dead, as not
being guilty of imposition ; and to Him espe-
cially there mentioned as having risen, who both
predicted the event Himself, and was the sub-
ject of prediction by others. And His resurrec-
tion is more miraculous than that of the others
in this respect, that they were raised by the
prophets Elijah and Elisha, while He was raised
by none of the prophets, but by His Father in
heaven. And therefore His resurrection also
produced greater results than theirs. For what
great good has accrued to the world from the
resurrection of the children through the instru-
mentality of Elijah and Elisha, such as has re-
sultfed from the preaching of the resurrection of
Jesus, accepted as an article of belief, and as
effected through the agency of divine power? "


He imagines also that both the earthquake
and the darkness were an invention ; - but re-
garding these, we have in the preceding pages
made our defence, according to our ability, ad-
ducing the testimony of Phlegon, who relates
that these events took place at the time when
our Saviour suffered.^ And he goes on to say,
that " Jesus, while alive, was of no assistance to
himself, but that he arose after death, and ex-
hibited the marks of his punishment, and showed
how his hands had been pierced by nails." We
ask him what he means by the expression, " was
of no assistance to himself? " For if he means
it to refer to want of virtue, we reply that He
was of very great assistance. For He neither
uttered nor committed anything that was im-
proper, but was truly " led as a sheep to the
slaughter, and was dumb as a lamb before the
shearer ;" + and the Gospel testifies that He
opened not His mouth. But if Celsus applies
the expression to things indifferent and corpo-
real,5 (meaning that in such Jesus could render


* Tepareuofxerot?.

2 TfpaTeiai'.

3 [See cap. xxxiii., note, p. 443, su/r

* Isa. liii. 7.

S ei 6e TO " (TTYIpKeaiV " OlTt'o Tcil' /


aio^aTLKtov Aa/u."


no help to Himself,) we say that we have proved
from the Gospels that He went voluntarily to
encounter His sufferings. Speaking next of the
statements in the Gospels, that after His resur-
rection He showed the marks of His punish-
ment, and how His hands had been pierced, he
asks, "Who beheld this?" And discrediting
the narrative of Mary Magdalene, who is related
to have seen Him, he replies, "A half-frantic
woman, as ye state." And because she is not
the only one who is recorded to have seen the
Saviour after His resurrection, but others also
are mentioned, this Jew of Celsus calumniates
these statements also in adding, " And some one
else of those engaged in the same system of
deception ! "

CHAP. LX.

In the next place, as if this were possible, viz.,
that the image of a man who was dead could
appear to another as if he were still living, he
adopts this opinion as an Epicurean, and says,
" That some one having so dreamed owing to a
peculiar state of mind, or having, under the in-
fluence of a perverted imagination, formed such
an appearance as he himself desired, reported
that such had been seen ; and this," he con-
tinues, " has been the case with numberless in-
dividuals." But even if this statement of his
seems to have a considerable degree of force, it
is nevertheless only fitted to confirm a necessary
doctrine, that the soul of the dead exists in a
separate state (from the body) ; and he who
adopts such an opinion does not believe without
good reason in the immortality, or at least con-
tinued existence, of the soul, as even Plato says
in his treatise on the Soul that shadowy phantoms
of persons already dead have appeared to some
around their sepulchres. Now the phantoms
which exist about the soul of the dead are pro-
duced by some substance, and this substance is
in the soul, which exists apart in a body said
to be of splendid appearance.^ But Celsus, un-
willing to admit any such view, will have it that
some dreamed a waking dream,^ and, under the
influence of a perverted imagination, formed to
themselves such an image as they desired. Now
it is not irrational to believe that a dream may
take place while one is asleep ; but to suppose
a waking vision in the case of those who are not
altogether out of their senses, and under the in-
fluence of delirium or hypochondria, is incredi-
ble. And Celsus, seeing this, called the woman
"half-mad," — a statement which is not made
by the history recording the fact, but from which
he took occasion to charge the occurrences with
being untrue.


TO. iifv oiiv yivoixd'a jrepi il/vx")? ■ffSfrtKOTtav c^avracTfiaTa ano
: vnoK(i.iJLevov yiVerai, Tov Kara T'r)v i/^f o'Trjicuiai' ei' Tip Ka\ov-
I avyodSel aoJfiaTt yj/vxrjf. Cf. note in Benedictine ed.

i/Trap,


456


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


Jesus accordingly, as Celsus imagines, ex
hibited after His death only the appearance of
wounds received on the cross, and was not in
reahty so wounded as He is described to have i
been ; whereas, according to the teaching of the |
Gospel — some portions of which Celsus arbi-
trarily accepts, in order to find ground of accu-
sation, and other parts of which he rejects —
Jesus called to Him one of His disciples who
was sceptical, and who deemed the miracle an
impossibility. That individual had, indeed, ex-
pressed his belief in the statement of the woman
who said that she had seen Him, because he did
not think it impossible that the soul of a dead
man could be seen ; but he did not yet consider
the report to be true that He had been raised in
a body, which was the antitype of the former."
And therefore he did not merely say, " Unless I
see, I will not believe ; " but he added, " Unless
I put my hand into the print of the nails, and
lay my hands upon His side, I will not believe."
These words were spoken by Thomas, who
deemed it possible that the body of the soul ^
might be seen by the eye of sense, resembling in
all respects its former appearance,

" Both in size, and in beauty of eyes,
And in voice ; "

and frequently, too,

" Having, also, such garments around the person ^ (as
when alive)."

Jesus accordingly, having called Thomas, said,
" Reach hither thy finger, and behold My hands ;
and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into My
side : and be not faithless, but believing." ^

CHAP. LXII.

Now it followed from all the predictions which
were uttered regarding Him — amongst which
was this prediction of the resurrection — and
from all that was done by Him, and from all the
events which befell Him, that this event should
be marvellous above all others. For it had been
said beforehand by the prophet in the person of
Jesus : " My flesh shall rest in hope, and Thou
wilt not leave my soul in Hades, and wilt not
suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption." s And
truly, after His resurrection. He existed in a
body intermediate, as it were, between the gross-
ness of that which He had before His sufferings,
and the appearance of a soul uncovered by such
a body. And hence it was, that when His disci-
ples were together, and Thomas with them, there
" came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in


^ €v (Tuifj.aTc avTLrvTrftt eyr]y€p9at,

2 il/oxij? criotia.

3 Cf. Homer, Iliad, xxiii. 66, 67.
■* Cf. John XX. 27.

5 Ps. xvi. 9, 10.


the midst-, and said, Peace be unto you. Then
saith He to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger," ^
etc. And in the Gospel of Luke also, while
Simon and Cleopas were conversing with each
other respecting all that had happened to them,
Jesus " drew near, and went with them. And
their eyes were holden, that they should not
know Him. And He said unto them. What
manner of communications are these that ye
have one to another, as ye walk?" And when
their eyes were opened, and they knew Him,
then the Scripture says, in express words, " And
He vanished out of their sight." 7 And although
Celsus may wish to place what is told of Jesus,
and of those who saw Him after His resurrection,
on the same level with imaginary appearances of
a different kind, and those who have invented
such, yet to those who institute a candid and in-
telligent examination, the events will appear only
the more miraculous.


CHAP. LXIII.

After these points, Celsus proceeds to bring
against the Gospel narrative a charge which is
not to be lightly passed over, saying that "if
Jesus desired to show that his power was really
divine, he ought to have appeared to those who
had ill-treated him, and to him who had con-
demned him, and to all men universally." For
it appears to us also to be true, according to the
Gospel account, that He was not seen after His
resurrection in the same manner as He used
formerly to show Himself — publicly, and to all
men. But it is recorded in the Acts, that "being
seen during forty days," He expounded to His
disciples " the things pertaining to the kingdom
of God."^ And in the Gospels 9 it is not stated
that He was always with them ; but that on one
occasion He appeared in their midst, after eight
days, when the doors were shut, and on another
in some similar fashion. And Paul also, in the
concluding portions of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, in reference to His not having pub-
licly appeared as He did in the period before
He suffered, writes as follows : " For I delivered
unto you first of all that which I also received,
how that Christ died for our sins according to
the Scriptures ; and that He was seen of Cephas,
then of the twelve : after that He was seen of
above five hundred brethren at once, of whom
the greater part remain unto the present time,
but some are fallen asleep. After that He was
seen of James, then of all the apostles. And
last of all He was seen of me also, as of one
born out of due time." '° I am of opinion now


° John XX. 26. 27.
' Luke xxiv. 15, 31
^ Acts i. 3.
9 Cf. John XX. 26.
■o I Cor. XV. 3-8.


Chap. LXV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


457


that the statements in this passage contain some
great and wonderful mysteries, which are be-
yond the grasp not merely of the great multi-
tude of ordinary believers, but even of those
who are far advanced (in Christian knowledge),
and that in them the reason would be explained
why He did not show Himself, after His resur-
rection from the dead, in the same manner as
before that event. And in a treatise of this
nature, composed in answer to a work directed
against the Christians and their faith, observe
whether we are able to adduce a few rational
arguments out of a greater number, and thus
make an impression upon the hearers of this
apology.

CHAP. LXIV.

Although Jesus was only a single individual. He
was nevertheless more things than one, accord-
ing to the different standpoint from which He
might be regarded ; ' nor was He seen in the
same way by all who beheld Him. Now, that
He was more things than one, according to the
varying point of view, is clear from this state-
ment, " I am the way, and the truth, and the
life ; " and from this,«" I am the bread ; " and
this, " I am the door," and innumerable others.
And that when seen He did not appear in like
fashion to all those who saw Him, but according
to their several ability to receive Him, will be
clear to those who notice why, at the time when
He was about to be transfiguretl on the high
mountain, He did not admit all His apostles (to
this sight) , but only Peter, and James, and John,
because they alone were capable of beholding
His glory on that occasion, and of observing the
glorified appearance of Moses and Elijah, and
of listening to their conversation, and to the
voice from the heavenly cloud. I am of opinion,
too, that before He ascended the mountain
where His disciples came to Him alone, and
where He taught them the beatitudes, when He
was somewhere in the lower part of the moun-
tain, and when, as it became late. He healed
those who were brought to Him, freeing them
from all sickness and disease. He did not appear
the same person to the sick, and to those who
needed His healing aid, as to those who were
able by reason of their strength to go up the
mountain along with Him. Nay, even when He
interpreted privately to His own disciples the
parables wliich were delivered to the multitudes
without, from whom the explanation was with-
held, as they who heard them explained were
endowed with higher organs of hearing than
they who heard them without explanation, so
was it altogether the same with the eyes of their
soul, and, I think, also with those of their body.^


* ovTui Ka'i Tac9 6\jje<Ti, ndvTo)';
t (Cat ToO crcu^aTos.


: i//i;>;f(5, e-yu) &' jjyou^ai,


And the following statement shows that He had
not always the same appearance, viz., that Ju-
das, when about to betray Him, said to the mul-
titudes who were setting out with him, as not
being acquainted with Him, " Whomsoever I
shall kiss, the same is He." 3 And I think that
the Saviour Himself indicates the same thing by
the words : " I was daily with you, teaching in
the temple, and ye laid no hold on Me." ■* En-
tertaining, then, such exalted views regarding
Jesus, not only with respect to the Deity within,
and which was hidden from the view of the mul-
titude, but with respect to the transfiguration of
His body, which took place when and to whom
He would, we say, that before Jesus had " put
off the governments and powers," 5 and while as
yet He was not dead unto sin, all men were
capable of seeing Him ; but that, when He had
" put off the governments and powers," and had
no longer anything which was capable of being
seen by the multitude, all who had formerly seen
Him were not now able to behold Him. And
therefore, sparing them. He did not show Him-
self to all after His resurrection from the dead.


And why do I say "to all?" For even with
His own apostles and disciples He was not per-
petually present, nor did He constantly show
Himself to them, because they were not able
without intermission^ to receive His divinity.
For His deity was more resplendent after He
had finished the economy 7 (of salvation) : and
this Peter, surnamed Cephas, the first-fruits as it
were of the apostles, was enabled to behold, and
along with him the twelve (Matthias having been
substituted in room of Judas) ; and after them
He appeared to the five hundred brethren at
once, and then to James, and subsequently to
all the others besides the twelve apostles, perhaps
to the seventy also, and lastly to Paul, as to one
born out of due time, and who knew well how
to say, " Unto me, who am less than the least
of all saints, is this grace given ; " and probably
the expression " least of all " has the same
meaning with " one born out of due time." For
as no one could reasonably blame Jesus for not
having admitted all His aposdes to the high
mountain, but only the three already mentioned,
on the occasion of His transfiguration, when He
was about to manifest the s{)lendour which ap-
peared in His garments, and the glory of Moses
and Elias talking with Him, so none could rea-
sonably object to the statements of the apostles,
who introduce the appearance of Jesus after His
resurrection as having been made not to all, but


3 Matt. xxvi. 48.
* Matt. xxvi. 55.
5 Toi' ^li) aTrcKfiuo-a/aefor, etc. Cf. -■Mford, in ioco (Col. ii. 15).

1 Ti)c OiKOfOfiiav TeAeaai'Tos.


458


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


to those only whom He knew to have received
eyes capable of seeing His resurrection. I think,
moreover, that the following statement regarding
Him has an apologetic value ' in reference to
our subject, viz. : " For to this end Christ died,
and rose again, that He might be Lord both of
the dead and living." ^ For observe, it is con-
veyed in these words, that Jesus died that He
might be Lord of the dead; and that He rose
again to be Lord not only of the dead, but also
of the living. And the apostle understands, un-
doubtedly, by the dead over whom Christ is to
be Lord, those who are so called in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, " For the trumpet
shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incor-
ruptible ; " ^ and by the living, those who are to
be changed, and who are different from the dead
who are to be raised. And respecting the living
the words are these, "And we shall be changed ; "
an expression which follows immediately after
the statement, "The dead shall be raised first." •♦
Moreover, in the first Epistle to the Thessalon-
ians, describing the same change in different
words, he says, that they who sleep are not the
same as those who are alive ; his language being,
" I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren,
concerning them who are asleep, that ye sorrow
not, even as others which have no hope. For if
we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even
so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring
with Him. For this we say unto you by the word
of the Lord, that we who are alive and remain
unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent
them that are asleep." s The explanation which
appeared to us to be appropriate to this passage,
we gave in the exegetical remarks which we have
made on the first Epistle to the Thessalonians.

CHAP. LXVI.

And be not surprised if all the multitudes who
have believed on Jesus do not behold His resur-
rection, when Paul, writing to the Corinthians,
can say to them, as being incapable of receiving
greater matters, " For I determined not to know
anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and
Him crucified;"^ which is the same as saying,
" Hitherto ye were not able, neither yet now are
ye able, for ye are still carnal." ^ The Scripture,
therefore, doing everything by appointment of
God, has recorded of Jesus, that before His suf-
ferings He appeared to all indifferently, but not
always ; while after His sufferings He no longer
appeared to all in the same way, but with a cer-
tain discrimination which measured out to each


yori(TLfxoi' 6 oifiai jrpos aiTo\oyi,a.v Tuiv TrpoKCi/aeviot'.
2(|pf. Rom. xiv. 9.
3 I Cor XV. 52.

* Cf. I Cor. XV. 52 with i Thess. iv. 16.
5 Cf. I Thess. iv. 13-15.

* I Cor. ii. 2.

'' Cf. I Cor. iii. 2, 3.


his due. And as it is related that " God ap-
peared to Abraham," or to one of the saints,
and this " appearance " was not a thing of con-
stant occurrence, but took place at intervals, and
not to all, so understand that the Son of God
appeared in the one case on the same principle
that God appeared to the latter.^

CHAP. LXVII.

To the best of our ability, therefore, as in a
treatise of this nature, we have answered the
objection, that " if Jesus had really wished to
manifest his divine power, he ought to have
shown himself to those who ill-treated him, and
to the judge who condemned him, and to all
without reservation." There was, however, no
obligation on Him to appear either to the judge
who condemned Him, or to those who ill-treated
Him. For Jesus spared both the one and the
other, that they might not be smitten with blind-
ness, as the men of Sodom were when they con-
spired against the beauty of the angels entertained
by Lot. And here is the account of the matter :
" But the men put forth their hand, and pulled
Lot into the house to thefti, and shut to the door.
And they smote the men who were at the door
of the house with blindness, both small and
great ; so that they wearied themselves to find
the door." 9 Jesus, accordingly, wished to show
that His power was ciivine to each one who was
capable of seeing it, and according to the meas-
ure of His capability. And I do not suppose
that He guarded against being seen on any other
ground than from a regard to the fitness of those
who were incapable of seeing Him. And it is
in vain for Celsus to add, " For he had no longer
occasion to fear any man after his death, being,
as you say, a God ; nor was he sent into the
world at all for the purpose of being hid." Yet
He was sent into the world not only to become
known, but also to be hid. For all that He was,
was not known even to those to whom He was
known, but a certain part of Him remained con-
cealed even from them ; and to some He was
not known at all. And He opened the gates of
light to those who were the sons of darkness and
of night, and had devoted themselves to becom-
ing the sons of light and of the day. For our
Saviour Lord, like a good physician, came rather
to us who were full of sins, than to those who
were righteous.

CHAP. LXVIII.

But let us observe how this Jew of Celsus
asserts that, " if this at least would have helped
to manifest his divinity, he ought accordingly


8 ovTia HOI voei kol toi' vibv toi) 0eoO ux^Sai Trj TrapOTrATjcrio
ei? TO Trepl e/ceu'ioi-, ci5 to ox^Sai avToU Toi/ @e6v, Kpiaei.

9 Cf. Gen. xix. lo, ii. [Also Jude 7, "strange (or ct/ier)
flesh."!


J


Chap. LXIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


459


to have at once disappeared from the cross."
Now this seems to me to be like the argument
of those who oppose the doctrine of provi- ,
dence, and who arrange things differently from
what they are, and allege that the world would
be better if it were as they arrange it. Now, in
those instances in which their arrangement is a
possible one, they are proved to make the world,
so far as depends upon them, worse by their
arrangement than it actually is ; while in those
cases in which they do not portray things worse
than they really are, they are shown to desire
impossibilities ; so that in either case they are !
deserving of ridicule. And here, accordingly, |
that there was no impossibility in His coming, as
a being of diviner nature, in order to disappear j
when He chose, is clear from the very nature of
the case ; and is certain, moreover, from what is j
recorded of Him, in the judgment of those who
do not adopt certain portions merely of the nar- j
rative that they may have ground for accusing
Christianity, and who consider other portions to
be fiction. For it is related in St. Luke's Gos-
pel, that Jesus after His resurrection took bread,
and blessed it, and breaking it, distributed it to
Simon and Cleopas ; and when they had re-
ceived the bread, " their eyes were opened, and
they knew Him, and He vanished out of their
sight." '

CHAP. LXIX. i

But we wish to show that His instantaneous
bodily disappearance from the cross was not
better fitted to serve the purposes of the whole
economy of salvation (than His remaining upon !
it was). For the mere letter and narrative of|
the events which happened to Jesus do not pre-
sent the whole view of the truth. For each one
of them can be shown, to those who have an
intelligent apprehension of Scripture, to be a
symbol of something else. Accordingly, as His
crucifixion contains a truth, represented in the
words, " I am crucified with Christ," and inti-
mated also in these, " God forbid that I should
glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom the world is crucified to me, ^d I
unto the world ; " ^ and as His death was neces-
sary, because of the statement, " For in that He
died, He died unto sin once," ^ and this, " Be-
ing made conformable to His death," ■* and this,
" For if we be dead with Him, we shall also live
with Him : " 5 so also His burial has an applica-
tion to those who have been made conformable
to His death, who have been both crucified with
Him, and have died with Him ; as is declared
by Paul, "For we were buried with Him by bap-


' Cf. Luke xxiv. ^o, ^i.
= Cf. Gal. vi. 14.
^ Rom. vi. 10.
* Phil. iii. 10.
5 2 Tim. ii. ii.


tism, and have also risen with Him." ^ These
matters, however, which relate to His burial, and
His sepulchre, and him who buried Him, we shall
expound at greater length on a more suitable
occasion, when it will be our professed purpose
to treat of such things. But, for the present, it
is sufficient to notice the clean linen in which
the pure body of Jesus was to be enwrapped,
and the new tomb which Joseph had hewn out
of the rock, where " no one was yet lying," 7 or,
as John expresses it, " wherein was never man
yet laid." ^ And observe whether the harmony
of the three evangelists here is not fitted to make
an impression : for they have thought it right to
describe the tomb as one that was " quarried or
hewn out of the rock ; " so that he who exam-
ines the words of the narrative may see some-
thing worthy of consideration, both in them and
in the newtiessoi the tomb, — a point mentioned
by Matthew and John,^ — and in the statement
of Luke and John,'° that no one had ever been
interred therein before. For it became Him,
who was unlike other dead men (but who even
in death manifested signs of life in the water and
the blood), and who was, so to speak, a new
dead man, to be laid in a new and clean tomb,
in order that, as His birth was purer than any
other (in consequence of His being born, not in
the way of ordinary generation, but of a virgin),
His burial also might have the purity symboli-
cally indicated in His body being deposited in
a sepulchre which was new, not built of stones
gathered from various quarters, and having no
natural unity, but quarried and hewed out oione
rock, united together in all its parts. Regarding
the explanation, however, of these points, and
the method of ascending from the narratives
themselves to the things which they symbolized,
one might treat more profoundly, and in a man-
ner more adapted to their divine character, on a
more suitable occasion, in a work expressly de-
voted to such subjects. The literal narrative,
however, one might thus explain, viz., that it
was appropriate for Him who had resolved to
endure suspension upon the cross, to maintain
all the accompaniments of the character He had
assumed, in order that He who as a man had
been put to death, and who as a man had died,
might also as a man be buried. But even if it
had been related in the Gospels, according to
the view or Celsus, that Jesus had immediately
disappeared from the cross, he and other unbe-
lievers would have found fault with the narrative,
and would have brought against it some such
objection as this : " Why, pray, did he disappear
after he had been put upon the cro.ss, and not


' Cf. Rom. vi. 4.
Luke xxiii. q^.
' John xix.


9 Cf Matt, xxvii. 60 with John
'th Jo!


'° Cf. Luke xxiii. 53 with John xix. 41.


460


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


disappear before he suffered?" If, then, after 1
learning from the Gospels that He did not at |
once disappear from the cross, they imagine that
they can find fault with the narrative, because it .
did notjnvent, as they consider it ought to have
done, any such instantaneous disappearance, but
gave a true account of the matter, is it not rea-
sonable that they should accord their faith also
to His resurrection, and should believe that He,
according to His pleasure, on one occasion,
when the doors were shut, stood in the midst of
His disciples, and on another, after distributing
bread to two of His acquaintances, immediately
disappeared from view, after He had spoken to
them certain words?

CHAP. LXX.

But how is it that this Jew of Celsus could
say that Jesus concealed Himself? For his
words regarding Him are these : "And who that
is sent as a messenger ever conceals himself when
he ought to make known his message ? " Now,
He did not conceal Himself, who said to those
who sought to apprehend Him, " I was daily
teaching openly in the temple, and ye laid no
hold upon Me." But having once already an-
swered this charge of Celsus, now again re-
peated, we shall content ourselves with what we
have formerly said. We have answered, also, in
the preceding pages, this objection, that " while
he was in the body, and no one believed upon
him, he preached to all without intermission ;
but when he might have produced a powerful
belief in himself after rising from the dead, he
showed himself secretly only to one woman, and
to his own boon companions." ' Now it is not
true that He showed Himself only to one
woman ; for it is stated in the Gospel according
to Matthew, that " in the end of the Sabbath, as
it began to dawn towards the first day of the
week, came Mary Magdalene, and the other
Mary, to see the sepulchre. And, behold, there
had been a great earthquake : for the angel of
the Lord had descended from heaven, and come
and rolled back the stone." ^ And, shortly after,
Matthew adds : "And, behold, Jesus met them "
— clearly meaning the afore-mentioned Marys —
" saying. All hail. And they came and held Him
by the feet, and worshipped Him." ^ And we
answered, too, the charge, that " \^hile under-
going liis punishment he was seen by all, but
after his resurrection only by one," when we
offered our defence of the fact that " He was
not seen by all." And now we might say that His
merely human attributes were visible to all men,
but those which were divine in their nature — I
speak of the attributes not as related, but as dis-


' T019 cauTou OiainuTai?.

2 Matt, xxviii. i, 2.

3 Matt, xxviii. 9.


tinct ■♦ — were not capable of being received by
all. But observe here the manifest contradiction
into which Celsus falls. For having said, a little
before, that Jesus had appeared secretly to one
woman and His own boon companions, he im-
mediately subjoins : " While undergoing his pun-
ishment he was seen by all men, but after his
resurrection by one, whereas the opposite ought
to have happened." And let us hear what he
means by " ought to have happened." The
being seen by all men while undergoing His
punishment, but after His resurrection only by
one individual, are opposites.s Now, so far as
his language conveys a meaning, he would have
that to take place which is both impossible and
absurd, viz., that while undergoing His punish-
ment He should be seen only by one individual,
but after His resurrection by all men ! or else
how will you explain his words, " The opposite
ought to have happened? "

CHAP, LXXI,

Jesus taught us who it was that sent Him, in
the words, " None knoweth the Father but the
Son;"^ and in these, "No man hath seen
God at any time ; the only-begotten Son, who is
in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared
Him." 7 He, treating of Deity, stated to His
true disciples the doctrine regarding God ; and
we, discovering traces of such teaching in the
Scripture narratives, take occasion from such to
aid our theological conceptions,** hearing it de-
clared in one passage, that " God is light, and
in Him there is no darkness at all ; " 9 and in
another, " God is a Spirit, and they that worship
Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth." '°
But the purposes for which the Father sent Him
are innumerable ; and these any one may ascer-
tain who chooses, partly from the prophets who
prophesied of Him, and partly from the narra-
tives of the evangelists. And not a few things
also will he learn from the apostles, and espe-
cially from Paul. Moreover, those who are pious
He leadeth to the light, and those who sin He
wmII •punish, — a circumstance which Celsus not
observing, has represented Him " as one who
will lead the pious to the light, and who will
have mercy on others, whether they sin or re-
pent." "


4 Aeyw 5e ov nepi toiv O'xeo'i'' Tpo? eVepa exoi'Tcoi', dAAi irepl
Ttov Kara 6ta(J)opar.

5 erai'Ti'oi' TOf ixev KoXa^oixevov tvo.(tiv iiapaaBai, avauTat'Ta 6e
kvi. The Benedictine editor reads rbi' fikv Ko\aC,6fi.ivov, and
Bohereau proposes evavTiov T<p KoAa^o/xti'Oi' fiiv, etc.

6 Cf Luke X. 22.

7 John i. i8.

8 i>v Ixvr) iv rot? ^e-ypa/i/u-eVois eupttricovTes a<j>opnai; exOfiev
OeoKoyeiv.

9 I John i. 5.
'° John iv. 24.

" The text is, tou? fie afnapTavovra^ r) /JLerayvoPTa^ eXeriaoii'. Bo-
hereau would read ^i>j fieTayvovTa^, or would render the passage as
if the reading were r? ap.apravofTa';, i) ixfTayvovTai. This suggestion
has been adopted in the translation.


J


Chap. LXXV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


461


CHAP. LXXII.

After the above statements, he continues : " If
he wished to remain hid, why was there heard a
voice from heaven proclaiming him to be the
Son of God ? And if he did not seek to remain
concealed, why was he punished ? or why did he
die ? " Now, by such questions he thinks to con-
vict the histories of discrepancy, not observing
that Jesus neither desired all things regarding
Himself to be known to all whom He happened
to meet, nor yet all things to be unknown. Ac-
cordingly, the voice from heaven which pro-
claimed Him to be the Son of God, in the
words, " This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased," ' is not stated to have been audi-
ble to the multitudes, as this Jew of Celsus sup-
posed. The voice from the cloud on the high
mountain, moreover, was heard only by those
who had gone up with Him. For the divine
voice is of such a nature, as to be heard only by
those whom the speaker wishes to hear it. And
1 maintain, that the voice of God which is re-
ferred to, is neither air which has been struck,
nor any concussion of the air, nor anything else
which is mentioned in treatises on the voice ; ^
and therefore it is heard by a better and more
divine organ of hearing than that of sense.
And when the speaker will not have his voice
to be heard by all, he that has the finer ear
hears the voice of God, while he who has the
ears of his soul deadened does not perceive
that it is God who speaks. These things I
have mentioned because of his asking, " Why
was there heard a voice from heaven proclaim-
ing him to be the Son of God?" while with
respect to the query, "Why was he punished,
if he wished to remain hid?" what has been
stated at greater length in the preceding pages
on the subject of His suffering may suffice.

CHAP. LXXIII.

The Jew proceeds, after this, to state as a con-
sequence what does not follow from the prem-
ises ; for it does not follow from " His having
wished, by the punishments which He underwent,
to teach us also to despise death," that after His
resurrection He should openly summon all men
to the light, and instruct them in the object of
His coming. For He had formerly summoned
all men to the light in the words, " Come unto
Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest." ^ And the object of His
coming had been explained at great length in
His discourses on the beatitudes, and in the an-
nouncements which followed them, and in the
parables, and in His conversations with the


scribes and Pharisees. And the instruction af-
forded us by the Gospel of John, shows that
! the eloquence of Jesus consisted not in words,
: but in deeds ; while it is manifest from the
Gospel narratives that His speech was " with
power," on which account also they marvelled
at Him.

CHAP. LXXIV.

In addition to all this, the Jew further says :
" All these statements are taken from your own
books, in addition to which we need no other
witness ; for ye fall upon your own swords." ■♦

Now we have proved that many foolish asser-
tions, opposed to the narratives of our Gospels,
occur in the statements of the Jew, either with
respect to Jesus or ourselves. And I do not
think that he has shown that " we fall upon our
own swords ; " but he only so imagines. xA.nd
ivhen the Jew adds, in a general way, this to his
former remarks : " O most high and heavenly
one ! what God, on appearing to men, is received
with incredulity?" we must say to him, that
according to the accounts in the law of Moses,
God is related to have visited the Hebrews in a
most public manner, not only in the signs and
wonders performed in Egypt, and also in the
passage of the Red Sea, and in the pillar of fire
and cloud of light, but also when the Decalogue
was announced to the whole people, and yet was
received with incredulity by those who saw these
things : for had they believed what they saw and
heard, they would not have fashioned the calf,
nor changed their own glory into the likeness of
a grass-eating calf; nor would they have said to
one another with reference to the calf, " These
be thy gods, O Israel, who brought thee up out
of the land of Egypt." 5 And observe whether
it is not entirely in keeping with the character
of the same people, who formerly refused to
believe such wonders and such appearances of
divinity, throughout the whole period of wander-
ing in the wilderness, as they are recorded in the
law of the Jews to have done, to refuse to be
convinced also, on occasion of the glorious ad-
vent of Jesus, by the mighty words which were
spoken by Him with authority, and the marvels
which He performed in the presence of all the
people,

CHAP. LXXV.

I think what has been stated is enough to
convince any one that the unbelief of the Jews
with regard to Jesus was in keeping with what is
related of this people from the beginning. For
I would say in reply to this Jew of Celsus, when
he asks, " What God that appeared among men
is received with incredulity, and that, too, when


^c?.


CTrATj-y^evo?* >; iT\y\yt\


Matt. xi. 28.


4 avroi yap eauToct weptT

5 Cf. Ex. xxxii. 4.


[See note sii/'ra.


462


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


appearing to those who expect him? or why,
pray, is he not recognized by those who have
been long looking for him ? " what answer,
friends, would you have us return to your '
questions? Which class of miracles, in your
judgment, do you regard as the greater? Those
which were wrought in Egypt and the wilder-
ness, or those which we declare that Jesus per-
formed among you? For if the former are in
your opinion greater than the latter, does it not
appear from this very fact to be in conformity
with the character of those who disbelieved
the greater to despise the less ? And this is the
opinion entertained with respect to our accounts
of the miracles of Jesus. But if those related
of Jesus are considered to be as great as those
recorded of Moses, what strange thing has come
to pass among a nation which has manifested
incredulity with regard to the commencement,
of both dispensations? 2 For the beginning of
the legislation was in the time of Moses, in whose
work are recorded the sins of the unbelievers
and wicked among you, while the commence-
ment of our legislation and second covenant is
admitted to have been in the time of Jesus.
And by your unbelief of Jesus ye show that ye
are the sons of those who in the desert discred-
ited the divine appearances ; and thus what was
spoken by our Saviour will be applicable also to
you who beheved not on Him : " Therefore ye
bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your
fathers." ^ And there is fulfilled among you also
the prophecy which said : " Your life shall hang
in doubt before your eyes, and you will have no
assurance of your life." + For ye did not believe
in the life which came to visit the human race.


CHAP. LXXVI.


Celsus, in adopting the character of a Jew,
could not discover any objections to be urged
against the Gospel which might not be retorted
on him as liable to be brought also against the
law and the prophets. For he censures Jesus in
such words as the following : " He makes use of
threats, and reviles men on light grounds, when
he says, ' Woe unto you,' and ' I tell you before-
hand.' For by such expressions he manifestly
acknowledges his inability to persuade ; and this
would not be the case with a God, or even a pru-
dent man." Observe, now, whether these charges
do not manifestly recoil upon the Jew. For in
the writings of the law and the prophets God
makes use of threats and revilings, when He
employs language of not less severity than that


' The text reads rjuwv, for which Bohereau and the Benedictine,
editor propose either ii/na? or rj/u.as, the former of which is preferred
by Lommatzsch.

2 Kar' aiJ.(j)OTepai; Ta? apxa^ T^v jrpoy/iaTuii' dn-icTToOi'Tt ;

3 Cf Luke xi. 48.

•♦ Cf. Deut. xxviii. 66.


found .in the Gospel, such as the following ex-
pressions of Isaiah : " Woe unto them that join
house to house, and lay field to field ; " s and,
'•' Woe unto them that rise up early in the morn-
ing that they may follow strong drink ;'"^ and,
" W^oe unto them that draw their sins after them
as with a long rope ; " 7 and, " AVoe unto them
that call evil good, and good evil ;"^ and, "Woe
unto those of you who are mighty to drink
wine; "9 and innumerable other passages of the
same kind. And does not the following resemble
the threats of which he speaks : " Ah sinful na-
tion, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil-
doers, children that are corrupters?"'" and so
on, to which he subjoins such threats as are
equal in severity to those which, he says, Jesus
made use of. For is it not a threatening, and a
great one, which declares, " Your country is des-
olate, your cities are burned with fire : your land,
strangers devour it in your presence, and it is
desolate, as overthrown by strangers?"" And
are there not revilings in Ezekiel directed against
the people, when the Lord says to the prophet,
" Thou dwellest in the midst of scorpions ? " '^
Were you serious, then, Celsus, in representing
the Jew as saying of Jesus, that " he makes use
of threats and revilings on slight grounds, when
he employs the expressions, ' Woe unto you,'
and ' I tell you beforehand? ' " Do you not see
that the charges which this Jew of yours brings
against Jesus might be brought by him against
God ? For the God who speaks in the prophetic
writings is manifestly liable to the same accusa-
tions, as Celsus regards them, of inability to per-
suade. I might, moreover, say to this Jew, who
thinks that he makes a good charge against Jesus
by such statements, that if he undertakes, in sup-
port of the scriptural account, to defend the
numerous curses recorded in the books of Le-
viticus and Deuteronomy, we should make as
good, or better, a defence of the revilings and
threatenings which are regarded as having been
spoken by Jesus. And as respects the law of
Moses itself, we are in a position to make a bet-
ter defence of it than the Jew is, because we
have been taught by Jesus to have a more intel-
ligent apprehension of the writings of the law.
Nay, if the Jew perceive the meaning of the
prophetic Scriptures, he will be able to show
that it is for no light reason that God employs
threatenings and revilings, when He says, " Woe
unto you," and " I tell you beforehand." And
how should God employ such expressions for the
conversion of men, which Celsus thinks that even


s Isa. V. 8.

6 Isa. V. II.

7 Isa. V. i8.
^ Isa. V. 2o.

9 Isa. V. 22.

'° Cf Isa. i. 4

n Is.1. i. 7.

'- Ezek. li. 6.


Chap. LXXVIIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


4^3


a prudent man would not have recourse to?
But Christians, who know only one God — the
same who spoke in the prophets and in the
Lord (Jesus) — can prove the reasonableness of
those threatenings and revilings, as Celsus con-
siders and entitles them. And here a few re-
marks shall be addressed to this Celsus, who
professes both to be a philosopher, and to be ac-
quainted with all our system. How is it, friend,
when Hermes, in Homer, says to Odysseus,

" Why, now, wretched man, do you come wandering
alone over the mountain-tops?"'

that you are satisfied with the answer, which ex-
plains that the Homeric Hermes addresses such
language to Odysseus to remind him of his duty,^
because it is characteristic of the Sirens to flatter
and to say pleasing things, around whom

"Is a huge heap of bones," ^
and who say,

"Come hither, much lauded Odysseus, great glory of
the Greeks ; " "

whereas, if our prophets and Jesus Himself, in
order to turn their hearers from evil, make use
of such expressions as "Woe unto you," and
what you regard as revilings, there is no conde-
scension in such language to the circumstances
of the hearers, nor any application of such words
to them as healings medicine? Unless, indeed,
you would have God, or one who partakes of
the divine nature, when conversing with men, to
have regard to His own nature alone, and to what
is worthy of Himself, but to have no regard to
what is fitting to be brought before men who are
under the dispensation and leading of His word,
and with each one of whom He is to converse
agreeably to his individual character. And is it
not a ridiculous assertion regarding Jesus, to say
that He was unable to persuade men, when you
compare the state of matters not only among
the Jews, who have many such instances re-
corded in the prophecies, but also among the
Greeks, among whom all of those who have at-
tained great reputation for their wisdom have
been unable to persuade those who conspired
against them, or to induce their judges or ac-
cusers to cease from evil, and to endeavour to
attain to virtue by the way of philosophy?

CHAP. LXXVII.

I After this the Jew remarks, manifesdy in ac-
1 cordance with the Jewish belief: "We certainly
I hope that there will be a bodily resurrection, and
j that we shall enjoy an eternal life ; and the ex-
I ample and archetype of this will be He who is


' Cf. Oifyss.,x.2&i.

^ UTTfp e7rio-TpOcft>J!.

3 Cf. Ot/yss., xii. 45.

" Uid., xii. 184.

5 iraiujt'tov' (^apiJ.aKOV,


sent to us, and who will show that nothing is
impossible with God." We do not know, in-
deed, whether the Jew would say of the expected
Christ, that He exhibits in Himself an example
of the resurrection ; but let it be supi)osed that
he both thinks and says so. We shall give this
answer, then, to him who has told us that he
drew his information from our own writings :
" Did you read those writings, friend, in which
you think you discover matter of accusation
against us, and not find there the resurrection
of Jesus, and the declaration that He was the
first-born from the dead ? Or because you will
not allow such things to have been recorded,
were they not actually recorded?" But as the
Jew still admits the resurrection of the body, I
do not consider the present a suitable time to
discuss the subject with one who both believes
and says that there is a bodily resurrection,
whether he has an articulate ^ understanding of
such a topic, and is able to plead well on its
behalf,7 or not, but has only given his assent to
it as being of a legendary character.^ Let the
above, then, be our reply to this Jew of Celsus.
And when he adds, " Where, then, is he, that
we may see him and believe upon him?" we
answer : Where is He now who spoke in the
prophecies, and who wrought miracles, that we
may see and believe that He is part of God?
Are you to be allowed to meet the objection,
that God does not perpetually show Himself to
the Hebrew nation, while 7ae are not to be per-
mitted the same defence with regard to Jesus,
who has both once risen Himself, and led His
disciples to believe in His resurrection, and so
thoroughly persuaded them of its truth, that they
show to all men by their sufferings how they are
able to laugh at all the troubles of life, behold-
ing the life eternal and the resurrection clearly
demonstrated to them both in word and deed?

CHAP. LXXVIII.

The Jew continues : " Did Jesus come into
the world for this purpose, that we should not
believe him ? " To which we immediately answer,
that He did not come with the object of produ-
cing incredulity among the Jews ; but knowing
beforehand that such would be the result, He
foretold it, and made use of their unbelief for
the calling of the Gentiles. For through their
sin salvation came to the Gentiles, respecting
whom the Christ who speaks in the prophecies
says, " A people whom I did not know became
subject to Me : they were obedient to the hear-
ing of My ear ; " ^ and, " I was found of them
who sought Me not ; I became manifest to those


6 etre Si.apdpovvTa to toioCtoi' rrc

7 Kai Svi-afxcfoi' npfa^ivcTai trepi

8 aWa iJLvOLKuiTfpov <TvyKaTaT(.^e^

9 Cf. 2 Sam. xxii. 44, 45.


Aoyou KaAio^,
/ Ta> Aoyw.


464


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book II.


who inquired not after Me." ' It is certain,
moreover, that the Jews were punished even in
this present hfe, after treating Jesus in the man-
ner in which they cUd. And let the Jews assert
what they will when we charge them with guilt,
and say, " Is not the providence and goodness
of God most wonderfully displayed in your pun-
ishment, and in your being deprived of Jerusa-
lem, and of the sanctuary, and of your splendid
worship? " For whatever they may say in reply
with respect to the providence of pod, we shall
be able more effectually to answer it by remark-
ing, that the providence of God was wonderfully
manifested in using the transgression of that
people for the purpose of calling into the king-
dom of God, through Jesus Christ, those from
among the Gentiles who were strangers to the
covenant and aliens to the promises. And these
things were foretold by the prophets, who said
that, on account of the transgressions of the
Hebrew nation, God would make choice, not of
a nation, but of individuals chosen from all
lands ; ^ and, having selected the foolish things
of the world, would cause an ignorant nation to
become acquainted with the divine teaching, the
kingdom of God being taken from the one and
given to the other. And out of a larger number
it is sufficient on the present occasion to adduce
the prediction from the song in Deuteronomy
regarding the calling of the Gentiles, which is as
follows, being spoken in the person of the Lord :
"They have moved Me to jealousy with those
who are not gods ; they have provoked Me to
anger with their idols : and I will move them to
jealousy with those who are not a people • I will
provoke them to anger with a foolish nation." ^

CHAP. LXXIX.

The conclusion of all these arguments regard-
ing Jesus is thus stated by the Jew : " He was
therefore a man, and of such a nature, as the
truth itself proves, and reason demonstrates him
to be." I do not know, however, whether a man
who had the courage to spread throughout the
entire world his doctrine of religious worship
and teaching,* could accomplish what he wished


' Cf. Isa. Ixv. I.

3 Cf. Deut. xxxii. 21.

4 TYjv Kar" avTov eco<T«/3€iai' Koi SiSaaxaKCav.


without the divine assistance, and could rise su-
perior to all who withstood the progress of his
doctrine — kings and rulers, and the Roman
senate, and governors in all places, and the
common people. And how could the nature of
a man possessed of no inherent excellence con-
vert so vast a multitude ? For it would not be
wonderful if it were only the wise who were so
converted ; but it is the most irrational of men,
and those devoted to their passions, and who,
by reason of their irrationality, change with the
greater difficulty so as to adopt a more tem-
perate course of life. And yet it is because
Christ was the power of God and the wisdom
of the Father that He accomplished, and still
accomplishes, such results, although neither the
Jews nor Greeks who disbelieve His word will
so admit. And therefore we shall not cease to
believe in God, according to the precepts of
Jesus Christ, and to seek to convert those who
are blind on the subject of religion, although it
is they who are truly blind themselves that charge
us with blindness : and they, whether Jews or
Greeks, who lead astray those that follow them,
accuse us of seducing men — a good seduction,
truly ! — that they may become temperate in-
stead of dissolute, or at least may make ad-
vances to temperance ; may become just instead
of unjust, or at least may tend to become so ;
prudent instead of foolish, or be on the way to
become such ; and instead of cowardice, mean-
ness, and timidity, may exhibit the virtues of
fortitude and courage, especially displayed in the
struggles undergone for the sake of their religion
towards God, the Creator of all things. Jesus
Christ therefore came announced beforehand,
not by one prophet, but by all ; and it was a
proof of the ignorance of Celsus, to represent
a Jew as saying that one prophet only had pre-
dicted the advent of Christ. But as this Jew of
Celsus, after being thus introduced, asserting that
these things were indeed in conformity with his
own law, has somewhere here ended his dis-
course, with a mention of other matters not
worthy of remembrance, I too shall here ter-
minate this second book of my answer to his
treatise. But if God permit, and the power of
Christ abide in my soul, I shall endeavour in the
third book to deal with the subsequent state-
ments of Celsus.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS,

BOOK III.


In the first book of our answer to the work
of Celsus, who had boastfully entitled the treatise
which he had composed against us A True Dis-
course, we have gone through, as you enjoined,
my faithful Ambrosius, to the best of our ability,
his preface, and the parts immediately following
it, testing each one of his assertions as we went
along, until we finished with the tirade ' of this
Jew of his, feigned to have been delivered
against Jesus. And in the second book we met,
as we best could, all the charges contained in the
invective ' of the said Jew, which were levelled
at us who are believers in God through Christ ;
and now we enter upon this third division of our
discourse, in which our object is to refute the
allegations which he makes in his own person.

He gives it as his opinion, that "the contro-
versy between Jews and Christians is a most
foolish one," and asserts that " the discussions
which we have with each other regarding Christ
differ in no respect from what is called in the
proverb, 'a fight about the shadow of an ass ; '"^
and thinks that "there is nothing of importance ^
in the investigations of the Jews and Christians :
for both believe that it was predicted by the
Divine Spirit that one was to come as a Saviour
to the human race, but do not yet agree on the
point whether the person predicted has actually
come or not." For we Christians, indeed, have
believed in Jesus, as He who came according to
the predictions of the prophets. But the ma-
jority of the Jews are so far from believing in
Him, that those of them who lived at the time of
His coming conspired against Him ; and those
Df the present day, approving of what the Jews of
"ormer times dared to do against Him, speak
livil of Him, asserting that it was by means of
liorcery ■♦ that he passed himself off for Him who


ST|(ii)Yopta5: cf. book i. c. 71.

Kara ttji/ irapoi/iiiai' KaKov \j.ivr\^ oj-ov o-icid9 na^^T)?. On this
■roverb, see Zenobius, Centuria Sexta, adag. 28, and the note of
chottius. Cf also Suidas, s.v, hvov <7Kia. — Dk la Rue.

iia Tti'O! yoijTeias.


was predicted by the prophets as the One who
was to come, and who was called, agreeably to
the traditions of the Jews,5 the Christ,


But let Celsus, and those who assent to his
charges, tell us whether it is at all like " an ass's
shadow," that the Jewish prophets should have
predicted the birth-place of Him who was to be
the ruler of those who had lived righteous lives,
and who are called the "heritage" of God ;^ and
that Emmanuel should be conceived by a virgin ;
and that such signs and wonders should be per-
formed by Him who was the subject of prophe-
cy ; and that His word should have such speedy
course, that the voice of His apostles should go
forth into all the earth ; and that He should
undergo certain sufferings after His condemna-
tion by the Jews ; and that He should rise again
from the dead. For was it by chance ^ that the
prophets made these announcements, with no
persuasion of the truth in their minds,^ moviiig
them not only to speak, but to deem their an-
nouncements worthy of being committed to
writing? And did so great a nation as that of
the Jews, who had long ago received a country
of their own wherein to dwell, recognise certain
men as prophets, and reject others as utterers of
false predictions, without any conviction of the
soundness of the distinction ?** And was there
no motive which induced them to class with the
books of Moses, which were held as sacred,
the words of those persons who were afterwards
deemed to be prophets? And can those who
charge the Jews and Christians with folly, show
us how the Jewish nation could have continued to
subsist, had there existed among them no prom-
ise of the knowledge of future events ? and how,
while each of the surrounding nations believed,
agreeably to their ancient institutions, that they


5 (Card to 'louiaiaii' jrarpia.

6 x(i)C xp-i]\t.o.T\.C,6vruiv juepi6os QfQV.
1 Jpa yap w?_eTuxe.

fi <TVV OViffJ.!.^ TTcdal'dTIJTl.


465


466


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


received oracles and predictions from those whom
they accounted gods, this people alone, who were
taught to view with contempt all those who
were considered gods by the heathen, as not
being gods, but demons, according to the dec-
laration of the prophets, " For all the gods of
the nations are demons," ' had among them no
one who professed to be a prophet, and who
could restrain such as, from a desire to know the
future, were ready to desert ^ to the demons ' of j
other nations ? Judge, then, whether it were not
a necessity, that as the whole nation had been \
taught to despise the deities of other lands, they '
should have had an abundance of prophets, who
made known events which were of far greater
importance in themselves,^ and which surpassed
the oracles of all other countries.


In the next place, miracles were performed in
all countries, or at least in many of them, as
Celsus himself admits, instancing the case of
^sculapius, who conferred benefits on many,
and who foretold future events to entire cities,
which were dedicated to him, such as Tricca,
and Epidaurus, and Cos, and Pergamus ; and
along with yEsculapius he mentions Aristeas of
Proconnesus, and a certain Clazomenian, and
Cleomedes of Astypatea. But among the Jews
alone, who say they are dedicated to the God
of all things, there was wrought no miracle or
sign which might help to confirm their faith in
the Creator of all things, and strengthen their
hope of another and better life ! But how can
they imagine such a state of things ? For they
would immediately have gone over to the wor-
ship of those demons which gave oracles and
performed cures, and deserted the God who was
believed, as far as words went,'^ to assist them,
but who never manifested to them His visible
presence. But if this result has not taken place,
and if, on the contrary, they have suffered count-
less calamities rather than renounce Judaism
and their law, and have been cruelly treated, at
one time in Assyria, at another in Persia, and
at another under Antiochus, is it not in keeping
with the probabilities of the case 5 for those to
suppose who do not yield their belief to their
miraculous histories and prophecies, that the
events in question could not be inventions, but
that a certain divine Spirit being in the holy
souls of the prophets, as of men who underwent


1 Ps. xcvi. 5, Saifiovia, " idols," Auth. Vers, We have in this
passage, and in many others, the identification of the &ai.ij.ov«; or
gods of the heathen with the 6ai.tiovt<; or iiai/i.di'ia, " evil spirits," or
angels, supposed to be mentioned in Gen. vi. 2.

2 The reading in the text is auTonioAeii', on which Bohereau, with
whom the Benedictine editor agrees, remarks that we must either
read auTOiuoAijuovTas, or understand some such word as eToi/nous
before avToixo^eiv.

3 TO fi.ei^oi' ouToflei'.

5 Trws oux't £^ e'iKOTuiy KaraaKeva^erat,


any labour for the cause of virtue, did move
them to prophesy some things relating to their
contemporaries, and others to their posterity,
but chiefly regarding a certain personage who
was to come as a Saviour to the human race ?


And if the above be the state of the case,
how do Jews and Christians search after " the
shadow of an ass," in seeking to ascertain from
those prophecies which they believe in common,
whether He who was foretold has come, or has
not yet arrived, and is still an object of expecta-
tion ? But even suppose^ it be granted to Celsus
that it was not Jesus who was announced by
the prophets, then, even on such a hypothesis, the
investigation of the'sense of the prophetic writ-
ings is no search after "the shadow of an ass," if
He who was spoken of can be clearly pointed
out, and it can be shown both what sort of per-
son He was predicted to be, and what He was to
do, and, if possible, when He was to arrive. But
in the preceding pages we have already spoken
on the point of Jesus being the individual who
was foretold to be the Christ, quoting a few
prophecies out of a larger number. Neither
Jews nor Christians, then, are wrong in assuming
that the prophets spoke under divine influence ; ?
but they are in error who form erroneous opin-
ions respecting Him who was expected by the
prophets to come, and whose person and charac-
ter were made known in their " true discourses."


Immediately after these points, Celsus, imagin- ;
ing that the Jews are Egyptians by descent, and j
had abandoned Egypt, after revolting against !
the Egyptian state, and despising the customs
of that people in matters of worship, says that
" they suff"ered from the adherents of Jesus, who ,
believed in Him as the Christ, the same treat-
ment which they had inflicted upon the Egyp- ;
tians ; and that the cause which led to the new i
state of things '^ in either instance was rebellion i
against the state." Now let us observe what
Celsus has here done. The ancient Egyptians,
after inflicting many cruelties upon the Hebrew
race, who had settled in Egypt owing to a famine
which had broken out in Judea, suflered, in con-
sequence of their injustice to strangers and sup-
pliants, that punishment which divine Providence
had decreed was to fall on the whole nation for
having combined against an entire people, who
had been their guests, and who had done them
no harm ; and after being smitten by plagues
from God, they allowed them, with difliculty,


' Ka8' vn66e<Tiv.

7 0(6e€i'.

* T^S KaLyoTO/xCai.


MiifH


CiiAr. VIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


467


and after a brief period, to go wherever they
liked, as being unjustly detained in slavery. Be-
cause, then, they were a selfish people, who hon-
oured those who were in any degree related to
them far more than they did strangers of better
lives, there is not an accusation which they have
omitted to bring against Moses and the Hebrews,
— not altogether denying, indeed, the miracles
and wonders done by him, but alleging that they
were wrought by sorcery, and not by divine
power. Moses, however, not as a magician, but
as a devout man, and one devoted to the God
of all things, and a partaker in the divine Spirit,
both enacted laws for the Hebrews, according
to the suggestions of the Divinity, and recorded
events as they happened with perfect fidelity.


Celsus, therefore, not investigating in a spirit
of impartiality the facts, which are related by the
Egyptians in one way, and by the Hebrews in
another, but being bewitched, as it were,' in fa-
vour of the former, accepted as true the state-
ments of those who had oppressed the strangers,
and declared that the Hebrews, who had been
unjustly treated, had departed from Egypt after
revoltnig against the Egyptians, — not observing
how impossible it was for so great a multitude
of rebellious Egyptians to become a nation,
which, dating its origin from the said revolt,
should change its language at the time of its
rebellion, so that those who up to that time made
use of the Egyptian tongue, should completely
adopt, all at once, the language of the Hebrews !
Let it be granted, however, according to his sup-
position, that on abandoning Egypt they did
conceive a hatred also of their mother tongue,^
how did it happen that after so doing they did
not rather adopt the Syrian or Phoenician lan-
guage, instead of preferring the Hebrew, which
is different from both ? But reason seems to me
to dejiionstrate that the statement is false, which
makes those who were Egyptians by race to have
revolted against Egyptians, and to have left the
country, and to have proceeded to Palestine, and
occupied the land now called Judea. For He-
brew was the language of their fathers before
their descent into Egypt ; and the Hebrew let-
ters, employed by Moses in writing those five
books which are deemed sacred by the Jews,
were different from those of the Egyptians.

j CHAP. VII.

I In like manner, as the statement is false " that

I the Hebrews, being (originally) Egyptians, dated

the commencement (of their political existence)

j from the time of their rebellion," so also is this.


HpoicaTaATjiietl? w?

'i'lf (TVVTpOiPov <j)Ull-


" that in the days of Jesus others who were Jews
rebelled against the Jewish state, and became
His followers ; " for neither Celsus nor they who
think with him are able to point out any act on
the part of Christians which savours of rebellion.
And yet, if a revolt had led to the formation of-
the Christian commonwealth, so that it derived
its existence in this way from that of the Jews,
who were permitted to take up arms in defence
of the members of their families, and to slay
their enemies, the Christian Lawgiver would not
have altogether forbidtlen the putting of men to
death ; and yet He nowhere teaches that it is
right for His own disciples to offer violence to
any one, however wicked. For He did not deem
it in keeping with such laws as His, which were
derived from a divine source, to allow the killing
of any individual whatever. Nor would the
Christians, had they owed their origin to a rebel-
lion, have adopted laws of so exceedingly mild
a character as not to allow them, when it was
their fate to be slain as sheep, on any occasion
to resist their persecutors. And truly, if we look
a little deeper into things, we may say regarding
the exodus from Egypt, that it is a miracle if a
whole nation a/ once adopted the language called
Hebrew, as if it had been a gift from heaven,
when one of their own prophets said, " As they
went forth from Egypt, they heard a language
which they did not understand." 3


In the following way, also, we may conclude
that they who came out of Egypt with Moses
were not Egyptians ; for if they had been Egyp-
tians, their names also would be Egyptian, be-
cause in every language the designations (of
persons and things) are kindred to the language.-*
But if it is certain, from the names being He-
brew, that the people were not Egyptians, —
and the Scriptures are full of Hebrew names,
and these bestowed, too, upon their children
while they were in Egypt, — it is clear that the
Egyptian account is false, which asserts that
they were Egyptians, and went forth from Egypt
with Moses. Now it is absolutely certain 5 that,
being descended, as the Mosaic history records,
from Hebrew ancestors, they employed a lan-
guage from which they also took the names
which they conferre-d upon their children. But
with regard to the Christians, because they were
taught not to avenge themselves upon their ene-
mies (and have thus observed laws of a mild
and philanthrojiic character) ; and because they
would not, although al)le, have made war even
if they had received authority to do so, — they
have obtained this reward from God, that He


3 Cf. Ps. Ixxxi. s.

5 ^a</)a>; crap-yf'?.


at irpoo-TiYoptai


468


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


has always warred in their behalf, and on certain
occasions has restrained those who rose up
against them and desired to destroy them. For
in order to remind others, that by seeing 2. few
engaged in a struggle for their religion, they also
might be better fitted to despise death, some, on
special occasions, and these individuals who can
be easily numbered, have endured death for the
sake of Christianity, — God not permitting the
whole nation to be exterminated, but desiring
that it should continue, and that the whole world
should be filled with this salutary and religious
doctrine.' And again, on the other hand, that
those who were of weaker minds might recover
their courage and rise superior to the thought of
death, God interposed His providence on behalf
of believers, dispersing by an act of His will
alone all the conspiracies formed against them ;
so that neither kings, nor rulers, nor the pop-
ulace, might be able to rage' against them beyond
a certain point. Such, then, is our answer to the
assertions of Celsus, " that a revolt was the origi-
nal commencement of the ancient Jewish state,
and subsequently of Christianity."

CHAP. IX.

But since he is manifestly guilty of falsehood
in the statements which follow, let us examine
his assertion when he says, " If all men wished
to become Christians, the latter would not desire
such a result." Now that the above statement
is false is clear from this, that Christians do not
neglect, as far as in them lies, to take measures
to disseminate their doctrine throughout the
whole world. Some of them, accordingly, have
made it their business to itinerate not only
through cities, but even villages and country
houses,^ that they might make converts to God.
And no one would maintain that they did this
for the sake of gain, when sometimes they would
not accept even necessary sustenance ; or if at
any time they were pressed by a necessity of this
sort, were contented with the mere supply of
their wants, although many were willing to share
(their abundance) with them, and to bestow
help upon them far above their need. At the
present day, indeed, when, owing to the multi-
tude of Christian believers, not only rich men,
but persons of rank, and delicate and high-born
ladies, receive the teachers of Christianity, some
perhaps will dare to say that it is for the sake of
a little glory ^ that certain individuals assume the
office of Christian instructors. It is impossible,
however, rationally to entertain such a suspicion


' [Gibbon, in the sixteenth chapter of his Decline and Fall of
ih,' Roman Empire, quotes the first part of this sentence as proving
that " the learned Origen declares, in the most express terms, that
the number of martyrs was very inconsiderable." I5ut see Guizot's
note on the passage. S.]

2 'En-aiJAets,

3 Ao|apiOf'.


with respect to Christianity in its beginnings, when
the danger incurred, especially by its teachers,
was great ; while at the present day the dis-
credit attaching to it among the rest of mankind
is greater than any supposed honour enjoyed
among those who hold the same belief, espe-
cially when such honour is not shared by all. It
is false, then, from the very nature of the case,
to say that " if all men wished to become Chris-
tians, the latter would not desire such a result."


But observe what he alleges as a proof of his \
statement : " Christians at first were few in num-
ber, and held the same opinions ; but when they
grew to be a great multitude, they were divided ;
and separated, each wishing to have his own j
individual party : 't for this was their object from '
the beginning." That Christians at first were !
few in number, in comparison with the multi- i
tudes who subsequently became Christian, is un-
doubted ; and yet, all things considered, they
were not so very few.s For what stirred up the
envy of the Jews against Jesus, and aroused
them to conspire against Him, was the great
number of those who followed Him into the
wilderness, — five thousand men on one occa-
sion, and four thousand on another, having at-
tended Him thither, without including the women
and children. For such was the charm ^ of Je-
sus' words, that not only were men willing to
follow Him to the wilderness, but women also,
forgetting 7 the weakness of their sex and a re- '
gard for outward propriety^ in thus following
their Teacher into desert places. Children, too,
who are altogether unaffected by such emotions,^
either following their parents, or perhaps at- \
tracted also by His divinity, in order that it ;
might be implanted within them, became His
followers along with their parents. But let it !
be granted that Christians were few in number
at the beginning, how does that help to .prove
that Christians would be unwilling to make all
men believe the doctrine of the Gospel? ^


He says, in addition, that " all the Christians
were of one mind," not observing, even in this
particular, that from the beginning there were
differences of opinion among believers regarding
the meaning '° of the books held to be divine.
At all events, while the apostles were still preach-
ing, and while eye-witnesses of (the works of)


■* (rrdcreis iSi'as.

S KO-i TOt ou ■na,vT(\ y)<ja.v oAt-yot,

* '<-iyh- . . . .

^ The reading in Spencer's and the Benedictine edition is i"fo-
Te/xvojaeVa?, for which Lommatzsch reads i/TrofiejacTj/xei/as.

8 Kal TO hoKOvv.

9 a7Ta0e'(7TaTa.
10 'Ek6ox';i'.


J


Chap. XIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


469


Jesus were still teaching His doctrine, there was
no small discussion among the converts from
Judaism regarding Gentile believers, on the point
whether they ought to observe Jewish customs,
or should reject the burden of clean and unclean
meats, as not being obligatory on those who had
abandoned their ancestral Gentile customs, and
had become believers in Jesus. Nay, even in
the Elpistles of Paul, who was contemporary with
those who had seen Jesus, certain particulars are
found mentioned as having been the subject of
dispute, — viz., respecting the resurrection,' and
whether it were already past, and the day of the
Lord, whether it were nigh at hand ^ or not.
Nay, the very exhortation to "avoid profane and
vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely
so called : which some professing, have erred
concerning the faith," 3 is enough to show that
from the very beginning, when, as Celsus im-
agines, believers were few in number, there were
certain doctrines interpreted in different ways.*


In the next place, since he reproaches us with
the existence of heresies in Christianity as being
a ground of accusation against it, saying that
" when Christians had greatly increased in num-
bers, they were divided and split up into fac-
tions, each individual desiring to have his own
party ; " and further, that " being thus separated
through their numbers, they confute one another,
still having, so to speak, one name in common,
if indeed they still retain it. And this is the
only thing which they are yet ashamed to aban-
don, while other matters are determined in dif-
ferent ways by the various sects." In reply to
which, we say that heresies of different kinds
have never originated from any matter in which
the principle involved was not important and
beneficial to human life. For since the science
of medicine is useful and necessary to the human
race, and many are the points of dispute in it
respecting the manner of curing bodies, there
are found, for this reason, numerous heresies
confessedly prevailing in the science of medicine
among the Greeks, and also, I suppose, among
those barbarous nations who profess to employ
medicine. And, again, since philosophy makes a
profession of the truth, and promises a knowledge
of existing things with a view to the regulation of
life, and endeavours to teach what is advanta-
geous to our race, and since the investigation of
these matters is attended with great differences
of opinion,5 innumerable heresies have conse-


' Cf. I Cor. XV. 12 sqq.
* Cf. 2 Thess. ii. 2.
' Cf. I Tim. vi. 20.
*■ Tti/e9 TrapexSoxai. [He
such oppositions.]

5 TtoKK^v e)f€t hLoKKy\v,


quently sprung up in philosophy, some of which
are more celebrated than others. Even Judaism
itself afforded a pretext for the origination of
heresies, in the different acceptation accorded
to the writings of Moses and those of the proph-,-
ets. So, then, seeing Christianity appeared an
object of veneration to men, not to the more
servile class alone, as Celsus supposes, but to
many among the Greeks who were devoted to
literary pursuits,*^ there necessarily originated
heresies, — not at all, however, as the result of
faction and strife, but through the earnest desire
of many literary men to become acquainted with
the doctrines of Christianity. The consequence
of which was, that, taking in different accepta-
tions those discourses which were believed by
all to be divine, there arose heresies, which re-
ceived their names from those individuals who
admired, indeed, the origin of Christianity, but
who were led, in some way or other, by certain
plausible reasons, to discordant views. And yet
no one would act rationally in avoiding medi-
cine because of its heresies ; nor would he who
aimed at that which is seemly ^ entertain a hatred
of philosophy, and adduce its many heresies as
a pretext for his antipathy. And so neither are
the sacred books of Moses and the prophets to
be condemned on account of the heresies in
Judaism.

CHAP. XIII.

Now, if these arguments hold good, why
should we not defend, in the same way, the ex-
istence of heresies in Christianity ? And respect-
ing these, Paul appears to me to speak in a very
striking manner when he says, " For there must
be heresies among you, that they who are ap-
proved may be made manifest among you." **
For as that man is "approved" in medicine
who, on account of his experience in various
(medical) heresies, and his honest examination
of the majority of them, has selected the prefer-
able system, — and as the great proficient in
philosophy is he who, after acquainting himself
experimentally with the various views, has given
in his adhesion to the best, — so I would say that
the wisest Christian was he who had carefiilly
studied the heresies both of Judaism and Chris-
tianity. Whereas he who finds fault with Chris-
tianity because of its heresies would find fault
also with the teaching of Socrates, from whose
school have issued many others of discordant
views. Nay, the opinions of Plato might be
chargeable with error, on account of Aristotle's
having separated from his school, and founded a
new one, — on which subject we have remarked
in the preceding book. But it appears to me


admits the fact, but does not jvistify


TO irpen-oi/.
I Cor. xi. 19.


470


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


that Celsus has become acquainted with certain
heresies which do not possess even the na^ne of
Jesus in common with us. Perhaps he had
"heard of the sects called Ophites and Cainites,
or some others of a similar nature, which had
departed in all points from the teaching of Je-
sus. And yet surely this furnishes no ground
for a charge against the Christian doctrine.

CHAP. XIV.

After this he continues: " Their union is the
more wonderful, the more it can be shown to be
based on no substantial reason. And yet rebel-
lion is a substantial reason, as well as the ad-
vantages which accrue from it, and the fear of
external enemies. Such are the causes which
give stability to their faith." To this we answer,
that our union does thus rest upon a reason, or
rather not upon a reason, but upon the divine
working,' so that its commencement was God's
teaching men, in the prophetical writings, to ex-
pect the advent of Christ, who was to be the
Saviour of mankind. For in so far as this point
is not really refuted (although it may seem to be
by unbelievers), in the same proportion is the
doctrine commended as the doctrine of God,
and Jesus shown to be the Son of God both be-
fore and after His incarnation. I maintain,
moreover, that even after His incarnation. He is
always found by those who possess the acutest
spiritual vision to be most God-like, and to have
really come down to us from God, and to have
derived His origin or subsequent development
not from human wisdom, but from the manifes-
tation 2 of God wathin Him, who by His manifold
wisdom and miracles established Judaism first,
and Christianity afterwards ; and the assertion
that rebellion, and the advantages attending it,
were the originating causes of a doctrine which
has converted and improved so many men was
effectually refuted.

CHAP. XV.

But again, that it is not the fear of external
enemies which strengthens our union, is plain
from the fact that this cause, by God's will, has
already, for a considerable time, ceased to exist.
And it is probable that the secure existence, so
far as regards the world, enjoyed by believers at
present, will come to an end, since those who
calumniate Christianity in every way are again
attributing the present frequency of rebellion to
the multitude of believers, and to their not being
persecuted by the authorities as in old times.
For we have learned from the Gospel neither to
relax our efforts in days of peace, and to give
ourselves up to repose, nor, when the world
makes war upon us, to become cowards, and


apostatize from the love of the God of all things
which is in Jesus Christ. And we clearly mani-
fest the illustrious nature of our origin, and do
not (as Celsus imagines) conceal it, when we
impress upon the minds of our first converts a
contempt for idols, and images of all kinds, and,
besides this, raise their thoughts from the wor-
ship of created things instead of God, and elevate
them to the universal Creator ; clearly showing
Him to be the subject of prophecy, both from
the predictions regarding Him — of which there
are many — and from those traditions which
have been carefully investigated by such as are
able intelligently to understand the Gospels, and
the declarations of the apostles.

CHAP. XVI.

" But what the legends are of every kind which
we gather together, or the terrors which we in-
vent," as Celsus without proof asserts, he who
likes may show. I know not, indeed, what he
means by " inventing terrors," unless it be our
doctrine of God as Judge, and of the condem-
nation of men for their deeds, with the various
proofs derived partly from Scripture, partly from
probable reason. And yet — for truth is pre-
cious— Celsus says, at the close, "Forbid that
either I, or these, or any other individual should
ever reject the doctrine respecting the future
punishment of the wicked and the reward of
the good ! " What terrors, then, if you except the
doctrine of punishment, do we invent and im-
pose upon mankind? And if he should reply
that " we weave together erroneous opinions
drawn from ancient sources, and trumpet them
aloud, and sound them before men, as the priests
of Cybele clash their cymbals in the ears of those
who are being initiated in their mysteries ; "^ we
shall ask him in reply, " Erroneous opinions from
what ancient sources?" For, whether he refers
to Grecian accounts, which taught the existence
of courts of justice under the earth, or Jewish,
which, among other things, predicted the life
that follows the present one ; he will be unable
to show that we who, striving to believe on
grounds of reason, regulate our lives in con-
formity with such doctrines, have failed correctly
to ascertain the truth.'*

CHAP. XVII.

He wishes, indeed, to compare the articles of
our faith to those of the Egyptians ; " among
whom, as you approach their sacred edifices, are
to be seen splendid enclosures, and groves, and


3 TO. ToO TraAaioO Adyou napaKovcTfiaTa o-u/nirAaTTOVTe?, toutoi?
TrpoKaTavAoO/xec Ka'i TrpoKaTrjxovtxev ToOs avOpuinovi, ioi oi TOVi
Kopv^avTL^OfJLefOv^ Trepi^OjLL/Souj'Te?.

* ov< dv 6X01. napaa-Trjcrai., on VpieU fiiv ^v TrapaKOV<Tiia(Ti.
yei'Ofiej'ot ttj? aArjeeias, ocroi ye neipiuixeOa. ixerd \6yov maTevny,
TTpbi TO. TOiaiiTa ^li/u.ci' 66y/j.aTa.


^1


Chap. XX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


471


large and beautiful gateways, ' and wonderful
temples, and magnificent tents around them, and
ceremonies of worship full of superstition and
mystery ; but when you have entered, and passed
within, the object of worship is seen to be a cat,
or an ape, or a crocodile, or a goat, or a dog ! "
Now, what is the resemblance - between us and
the si)lendours of Egyptian worship which are
seen by those who draw near their temples?
And where is the resemblance to those irrational
animals which are worshipped within, after you
pass through the splendid gateways? Are our
prophecies, and the God of all things, and the
injunctions against images,^ objects of reverence
in the view of Celsus also, and Jesus Christ cru-
cified, the analogue to the worship of the irra-
tional animal? But if he should assert this —
and I do not think that he will maintain anything
else — we shall reply that we have spoken in the
preceding pages at greater length in defence of
those charges affecting Jesus, showing that what
appeared to have happened to Him in the
capacity of His human nature, was fraught with
benefit to all men, and with salvation to the
whole world.

CHAP. XVIII.

In the next place, referring to the statements
of the Egyptians, who talk loftily about irrational
I animals, and who assert that they are a sort of
symbols of God, or anything else which their
prophets, so termed, are accustomed to call
them, Celsus says that " an impression is pro-
duced in the minds of those who have learned
these things ; that they have not been initiated
in vain ; " ^ while with regard to the truths which
are taught in our writings to those who have made
progress in the study of Christianity (through
that which is called by Paul the gift consisting
in the " word of wisdom " through the Spirit, and
in the "word of knowledge" according to the
Spirit), Celsus does not seem even to have
formed an idea,5 judging not only from what he
has already said, but from what he subsequently
adds in his attack upon the Christian system,
when he asserts that Christians " repel every wise
man from the doctrine of their faith, and invite
only the ignorant and the vulgar ; " on which
assertions we shall remark in due time, when we
I come to the proper place.

I CHAP. XIX.

I He says, indeed, that " we ridicule the Egyp-
I tians, although they present many by no means

I


TiponvKaiuiv tiiyi6r\ re /cal KaKKr).

* TO avoKoyov,

3 [Clearly coincident with Clement and other early Fathers
this head. ]

* '\)ai'Ta(Tiav i^cnrotTTiKKdv Tois TaxiTa. /oie/oia0)))COffU', on

S Jr£(/)avTdo-9oi.


contemptible mysteries^ for our consideration,
when they teach us that such rites are acts of
worship offered to eternal ideas, and not, as the
multitude think, to ephemeral animals ; and that
we are silly, because we introduce nothing nobler
than the goats and dogs of the Egyptian worship
in our narratives about Jesus." Now to this we
reply, " Good sir,7 (suppose that) you are right
in eulogizing the fact that the Egyptians present
to view many by no means contemptible mys-
teries, and obscure explanations about the ani-
mals (worshipped) among them, you nevertheless
do not act consistently in accusing us as if you
believed that we had nothing to state which was
worthy of consideration, but that all our doc-
trines were contemptible and of no account, see-
ing we unfold ^ the narratives concerning Jesus
according to the ' wisdom of the word ' to those
who are ' perfect ' in Christianity. Regarding
whom, as being competent to understand the
wisdom that is in Christianity, Paul says : ' We
speak wisdom among them that are perfect ; yet
not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes
of this world, who come to nought, but we speak
the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hid-
den wisdom, which God ordained before the
world unto our glory ; which none of the princes
of this world knew.' " 9


And we say to those who hold similar opinions
to those of Celsus : " Paul then, we are to sup-
pose, had before his mind the idea of no pre-
eminent wisdom when he professed to speak
wisdom among them that are perfect?" Now,
as he spoke with his customary boldness when
in making such a profession he said that he was
possessed of no wisdom, we shall say in reply :
first of all examine the Epistles of him who utters
these words, and look carefully at the meaning
of each expression in them — say, in those to the
Ephesians, and Colossians, and Thessalonians,
and Philippians, and Romans, — and show two
things, both that you understand Paul's words,
and that you can demonstrate any of them to be
silly or foolish. For if any one give himself to
their attentive perusal, I am well assured either
that he will be amazed at the understanding of
the man who can clothe great ideas in common
language ; or if he be not amazed, he will only
exhibit himself in a ridiculous light, whether he
simply state the meaning of the writer as if he
had comprehended it, or try to controvert and
confute what he only imagined that he under-
stood !


Cor. ii. 6-8.


472


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


CHAP. XXI.

And I have not yet spoken of the observance '
of all that is written in the Gospels, each one of
which contains much doctrine difficult to be un-
derstood, not merely by the multitude, but even
by certain of the more intelligent, including a
very profound explanation of the parables which
Jesus delivered to " those without," while reserv-
ing the exhibition of their full meanings for those
who had passed beyond the stage of exoteric
teaching, and who came to Him privately in the
house. And when he comes to understand it,
he will admire the reason why some are said to
be " without," and others " in the house." And
again, who would not be filled with astonishment
that is able to comprehend the movements^ of
Jesus ; ascending at one time a mountain for the
purpose of delivering certain discourses, or of
performing certain miracles, or for His own
transfiguration, and descending again to heal
the sick and those who were unable to follow
Him whither His disciples went ? But it is not
the appropriate time to describe at present the
truly venerable and divine contents of the Gos-
pels, or the mind of Christ — that is, the wisdom
and the word — contained in the writings of
Paul. But what we have said is sufficient by
way of answer to the unphilosophic sneers ^ of
Celsus, in comparing the inner mysteries of the
Church of God to the cats, and apes, and croco-
diles, and goats, and dogs of Egypt.


But this low jester 5 Celsus, omitting no species
of mockery and ridicule which can be employed
against us, mentions in his treatise the Dioscuri,
and Hercules, and ^sculapius, and Dionysus,
who are believed by the Greeks to have become
gods after being men, and says that " we cannot
bear to call such beings gods, because they were
at first men,^ and yet they manifested many
noble qualities, which were displayed for the
benefit of mankind, while we assert that Jesus
was seen after His death by His own followers ; "
and he brings against us an additional charge, as
if we said that " He was seen indeed, but was
only a shadow ! " Now to this we reply, that it
was very artful of Celsus not here clearly to in-
dicate that he did not regard these beings as
gods, for he was afraid of the opinion of those
who might peruse his treatise, and who might
suppose him to be an atheist ; whereas, if he
had paid respect to what appeared to him to be
the truth, he would not have feigjied to regard


' Tijpijo-ea)?.
2 o-a(/)TJi/eia>'.

^ a(i}i\6ao(f>ov )^\evyjv,
S Pu)noAo;(05.

* The reading in the text is Ka\ ttpmtoi. for which Bohereau pro-
poses TO -npoiTov, which we have adopted in the translation.


them as gods.^ Now to either of the allegations
we are ready with an answer. Let us, accord-
ingly, to those who do tiot regard them as gods
reply as follows : These beings, then, are not
gods at all ; but agreeably to the view of those
who think that the soul of man perishes imme-
diately (after death), the souls of these men also
perished ; or according to the opinion of those
who say that the soul continues to subsist or is
immortal, these men continue to exist or are
immortal, and they are not gods but heroes, —
or not even heroes, but simply souls. If, then,
on the one hand, you suppose them 7wf to exist,
we shall have to prove the doctrine of the soul's
immortality, which is to us a doctrine of pre-
eminent importance ; ^ if, on the other hand,
they do exist, we have sti/l to proved the doc-
trine of immortality, not only by what the Greeks
have so well said regarding it, but also in a man-
ner agreeable to the teaching of Holy Scripture.
And we shall demonstrate that it is impossible
for those who were polytheists during their lives
to obtain a better country and position after
their departure from this world, by quoting the
histories that are related of them, in which is
recorded the great dissoluteness of Hercules,
and his effeminate bondage with Omphale, to-
gether with the statements regarding yEsculapius,
that their Zeus struck him dead by a thunder-
bolt. And of the Dioscuri, it will be said that
they die often —

" At one time live on alternate days, and at another
Die, and obtain honour equally with the gods." '°

How, then, can they reasonably imagine that one
of these is to be regarded as a god or a hero ?

CHAP. XXIII.

But we, in proving the facts related of our
Jesus from the prophetic Scriptures, and com-
paring afterwards His history with them, demon-
strate that no dissoluteness on His part is
recorded. For even they who conspired against
Him, and who sought false witnesses to aid them,
did not find even any plausible grounds for ad-
vancing a false charge against Him, so as to
accuse Him of licentiousness ; but His death
was indeed the result of a conspiracy, and bore
no resemblance to the death of ^^sculapius by
lightning. And what is there that is venerable
in the madman Dionysus, and his female gar-
ments, that he should be worshipped as a god ?
And if they who would defend such beings be-
take themselves to allegorical interpretations, we


7 We have followed in the translation the emendation of Guietus,
who proposes ei 6t" ttjt ^a.Lvo^€vr\v auroj aKriQ^Lav en-pto'/Seuo'ti', OVK
ai', K.T.A., instead of the textual reading, el tc t^9 (^aivofitVijs avTu
aAijfleia? eTrpea^evtriv, OUK av, K.r.K.

8 TO!/ TTporfyovixfvov 17/iiii' Trepl ypvxrj'; KaTaarKeva<niov \6yov.

9 Bohereau conjectures, with great probability, that instead of
OLTTO&eKTeor, we ought to read a.wo6fiKTeov

'° Cf. Horn., Odyss., xi. 303 and 304.


J


Chap. XXV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


473


must examine each individual instance, and as-
certain whether it is well founded,' and also in
each particular case, whether those beings can
have a real existence, and are deserving of re-
spect and worship who were torn by the Titans,
and cast down from their heavenly throne.
Whereas our Jesus, who appeared to the mem-
bers of His own troop ^ — for I will take the
word that Celsus employs — did really appear,
and Celsus makes a false accusation against the
Gospel in saying that what appeared was a
shadow. And let the statements of their his-
tories and that of Jesus be carefully compared
together. Will Celsus have the former to be
true, but the latter, although recorded by eye-
witnesses who showed by their acts that they
clearly understood the nature of what they had
seen, and who manifested their state qf mind by
what they cheerfully underwent for the sake of
His Gospel, to be inventions? Now, who is
there that, desiring to act always in conformity
with right reason, would yield his assent at ran-
dom 3 to what is related of the one, but would
rush to the history of Jesus, and without exam-
ination refuse to believe what is recorded of
Him?^

CHAP. XXIV.

And again, when it is said of ^sculapius that
a great multitude both of Greeks and Barbarians
acknowledge that they have frequently seen, and
still see, no mere phantom, but ^sculapius him-
self, healing and doing good, and foretelling the
future ; Celsus requires us to believe this, and
finds no fault with the believers in Jesus, when
we express our belief in such stories, but when
we give our assent to the disciples, and eye-wit-
nesses of the miracles of Jesus, who clearly mani-
fest the honesty of their convictions (because
we see their guilelessness, as far as it is possible
to see the conscience revealed in writing), we
are called by him a set of " silly " individuals,
although he cannot demonstrate that an incal-
culable 5 number, as he asserts, of Greeks and
Barbarians acknowledge the existence of ^scu-
lapius ; while we, if we deem this a matter of
importance, can clearly show a countless multi-
tude of Greeks and Barbarians who acknowledge
the existence of Jesus. And some give evidence
j of their having received through this faith a mar-
I vellous power by the cures which they perform,
j mvoking no other name over those who need
! their help than that of the God of all things,
I and of Jesus, along with a mention of His his-
I tory. For by these means we too have seen
many persons freed from grievous calamities, and


1 . ."' "' '"■

I auTou ;

5 a/auflrjTOi'


erao-Tcos opfiuiv a7rtcrT>)<rai tois n-epi


from distractions of mind,^ and madness, and
countless other ills, which could be cured neither
by men nor devils.

CHAP. XXV.

Now, in order to grant that there did exist a
healing spirit named ^sculapius, who used to
cure the bodies of men, I would say to those
who are astonished at such an occurrence, or at
the prophetic knowledge of Apollo, that since the
cure of bodies is a thing indifferent,^ and a mat-
ter within the reach not merely of the good,^
but also of the bad ; and as the foreknowledge
of the future is also a thing indifferent — for the
possessor of foreknowledge does not necessarily
manifest the possession of virtue — you must
show that they who practise healing or who fore-
fell the future are in no respect wicked, but ex-
hibit a perfect pattern of virtue, and are not far
from being regarded as gods. But they will fiot
be able to show that they are virtuous who prac-
tise the art of healing, or who are gifted with
foreknowledge, seeing many who are not fit to
live are related to have been healed ; and these,
too, persons whom, as leading improper lives, no
wise physician would wish to heal. And in the
responses of the Pythian oracle also you may
find some injunctions which are not in accord-
ance with reason, two of which we will adduce
on the present occasion ; viz., when it gave com-
mandment that Cleomedes ^ — the boxer, I sup-
pose — should be honoured with divine honours,
seeing some great importance or other attaching
to his pugilistic skill, but did not confer either
upon Pythagoras or upon Socrates the honours
which it awarded to pugilism ; and also when it
called Archilochus " the servant of the Muses "
— a man who employed his poetic powers upon
topics of the most wicked and licentious nature,
and whose public character was dissolute and
impure — and entitled him " pious," '° in respect
of his being the servant of the Muses, who are
deemed to be goddesses ! Now I am inclined
to think that no one would assert that he was a
" pious " man who was not adorned with all
moderation and virtue, or that a decorous " man
would utter such expressions as are contained in
the unseemly '^ iambics of Archilochus. And if
nothing that is divine in itself is shown to belong
either to the healing skill of ^Csculapius or the
prophetic power of Apollo, how could any one,
even were I to grant that the facts are as alleged,
reasonably worship them as pure divinities? —
and especially when the prophetic spirit of
Apollo, pure from any body of earth, secretly


" (KiXTaceiav,

8 atrreiou?.

9 Cf. Smith's D/ci. of Bicgraph.


474


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


enters through the private parts the person of
her who is called the priestess, as she is seated
at the mouth of the Pythian cave ! ' Whereas
regarding Jesus and His power we have no such
notion ; for the body which was born of the
Virgin was composed of human material, and
capable of receiving human wounds and death.

CHAP. XXVI.

Let us see what Celsus says next, when he ad-
duces from history marvellous occurrences, which
in themselves seem to be incredible, but which
are not discredited by him, so far at least as ap-
pears from his words. And, in the first place,
regarding Aristeas of Proconnesus, of whom he
speaks as follows : " Then, with respect to Aris-
teas of Proconnesus, who disappeared from
among men in a manner so indicative of divine
intervention, = and who showed himself again in
so unmistakeable a fashion, and on many subse-
quent occasions visited many parts of the world,
and announced marvellous events, and whom
Apollo enjoined the inhabitants of Metapontium
to regard as a god, no one considers him to be
a god." This account he appears to have taken
from Pindar and Herodotus. It will be sufficient,
however, at present to quote the statement of
the latter writer from the fourth book of his his-
tories, which is to the following effect : " Of what
country Aristeas, who made these verses, was,
has already been mentioned, and I shall now re-
late the account I heard of him in Proconnesus
and Cyzicus. They say that Aristeas, who was
inferior to none of the citizens by birth, entering
into a fuller's shop in Proconnesus, died sud-
denly, and that the fuller, having closed his
workshop, went to acquaint the relatives of the
deceased. When the report had spread through
the city that Aristeas was dead, a certain Cyzi-
cenian, arriving from Artace, fell into a dispute
with those who made the report, affirming that
he had met and conversed with him on his way
to Cyzicus, and he vehemently disputed the truth
of the report ; but the relations of the deceased
went to the fuller's shop, taking with them what
was necessary for the purpose of carrying the
body away ; but when the house was opened, !
Aristeas was not to be seen, either dead or alive. |
They say that afterwards, in the seventh year, he
appeared in Proconnesus, composed those verses
which by the Greeks are now called Arimaspian,
and having composed them, disappeared a second
time. Such is the story current in these cities.
But these things I know happened to the Meta-
pontines in Italy 340 years after the second dis-


^ ore Sia rov HvOiov crro/xiou nepiKade^otJiei'rj rrj KaXovixivrj
7rpO(|)r;Ti6t 7rce0/ia 6ta Tuiv yvvaLKiimv UTreio-epxerat to uavTiKiv,
6 'AttoAAcoi', to KaOapbv airb yrjivov aiujixaTo?. Boherellus con-


jectures


I 6at/A0i't(ij?.


Tov 'AttoAAwi'o; to


appearance of Aristeas, as I discovered by com-
putation in Proconnesus and Metapontium. The •
Metapontines say that Aristeas himself, having
appeared in their country, exhorted them to
erect an altar to Apollo, and to place near it a
statue bearing the name of Aristeas the Procon-
nesian ; for he said that Apollo had visited their
country only of all the Italians, and that he him-
self, who was now Aristeas, accompanied him ;
and that when he accompanied the god he was
a crow ; and after saying this he vanished. And
the Metapontines say they sent to Delphi to
inquire of the god what the apparition of the
man meant ; but the Pythian bade them obey
the apparition, and if they obeyed it would con-
duce to their benefit. They accordingly, having
received this answer, fulfilled the injunctions.
And now, a statue bearing the name of Aristeas ;
is placed near the image of Apollo, and around ;
it laurels are planted : the image is placed in the i
public square. Thus much concerning Aristeas." ^ I

CHAP. XXVII. j

Now, in answer to this account of Aristeas,
we have to say, that if Celsus had adduced it as
history, without signifying his own assent to its
truth, it is in a different way that we should have
met his argument. But since he asserts that he
" disappeared through the intervention of the j
divinity," and "showed himself again in an un- i
mistakeable manner," and " visited many parts 1
of the world," and " made marvellous announce- ;
ments ; " and, moreover, that there was " an i
oracle of Apollo, enjoining the Metapontines to
treat Aristeas as a god," he gives the accounts
relating to him as upon his own authority, and
with his full assent. And (this being the case),
we ask. How is it possible that, while supposing
the marvels related by the disciples of Jesus re-
garding their Master to be wholly fictitious, and
finding fault with those who believe them, you, :
O Celsus, do not regard these stories of yours to
be either products of jugglery '^ or invendons?
And how,5 while charging others with an irra-
tional belief in the marvels recorded of Jesus, can
you show yourself justified in giving credence
to such statements as the above, without pro- '
ducing some proof or evidence of the alleged i
occurrences having taken place? Or do He- '
rodotus and Pindar appear to you to speak the
truth, while they who have made it their con-
cern to die for the doctrine of Jesus, and who
have left to their successors writings so remark-
able on the truths which they believed, entered
for the sake of " fictions " (as you consider
them), and "myths," and "juggleries," upon a


3 Herod., book iv. chaps. 14 and 15 (Gary's transl.).

4 Tep_iTfi-n-.

5 Guietus conjectures, xal Trii;, u> \(Z<xTe.


d


Chap. XXIX.l


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


475


struggle which entails a life of danger and a
death of violence? Place yourself, then, as
a neutral party, between what is related of Aris-
teas and what is recorded of Jesus, and see
whether, from the result, and from the benefits
which have accrued from the reformation of
morals, and to the worship of the God who is
over all things, it is not allowable to conclude
that we must believe the events recorded of Je-
sus not to have happened without the divine
intervention, but that this was not the case with
the story of Aristeas the Proconnesian.

CHAP. XXVIII.

For with what purpose in view did Providence
accomplish the marvels related of Aristeas ? And
to confer what benefit upon the human race did
such remarkable events, as you regard them,
take place ? You cannot answer. Bui we, when
w^e relate the events of the history of Jesus', have
no ordinary defence to offer for theii occurrence ;
— this, viz., that God desired to commend the
doctrine of Jesus as a doctrine which was to
save mankind, and which was based, indeed,
upon the aposdes as foundations of the rising '
edifice of Christianity, but which increased in
magnitude also in the succeeding ages, in which
not a few cures are wrought in the name of Je-
sus, and certain other manifestations of no small
moment have taken place. Now what sort of
person is Apollo, who enjoined the Metapon-
tines to treat Aristeas as a god ? And with what
object does he do this ? And what advantage
was he procuring to the Metapontines from this
divine worship, if they were to regard him as a
god, who a little ago was a mortal ? And yet
the recommendations of Apollo (viewed by us
as a demon who has obtained the honour of li-
bation and sacrificial odours^) regarding this
Aristeas appear to you to be worthy of consider-
ation ; while those of the God of all things, and
of His holy angels, made known beforehand
through the prophets — not aftc}- the birth of
Jesus, but before He appeared among men — do
not stir you up to admiration, not merely of the
prophets who received the Divine Spirit, but of
Him also who was the object of their predic-
tions, whose entrance into life was so clearly
predicted many years beforehand by numerous
prophets, that the whole Jewish people who
were hanging in expectation of the coming of
Him who was looked for, did, after the advent
of Jesus, fall into a keen dispute with each other ;
and that a great multitude of them acknowl-
edged Christ, and believed Him to be the ob-
ject of prophecy, while others did not believe in
Him, but, despising the meekness of those who,


Tou KaO' ii^ai SoiVovo!, AaxocTos yepas Aoi^^s re kkiVo",,? re.


I on account of the teaching of Jesus, were un-
willing to cause even the most trifling sedition,
dared to inflict on Jesus those cruelties which
His disciples have so truthfully and candidly
recorded, without secretly omitting from their
marvellous history of Him what seems to the
multitude to bring disgrace upon the doctrine
of Christianity. But both Jesus Himself and His
disciples desired that His followers should be-
lieve not merely in His Godhead and miracles, *
as if He had not also been a partaker of human
nature, and had assumed the human flesh which
" lusteth against the Spirit ; " 3 but they saw also
that the power which had descended into human
nature, and into the midst of human miseries,
and which had assumed a human soul and body,'
contributed through faith, along with its divine
elements, to the salvation of believers,^ when
they see that from Him there began the union
of the divine with the human nature, in order
that the human, by communion with the divine,
might rise to be divine, not in Jesus alone, but
in all those who not only believe, but 5 enter up-
on the life which Jesus taught, and which ele-
vates to friendship with God and communion
with Him every one who lives according to the
precepts of Jesus.

CHAP. XXIX.

According to Celsus, then, Apollo wished the
Metapontines to treat Aristeas as a god. But as
the Metapontines considered the evidence in
favour of Aristeas being a man — and probably
not a virtuous one — to be stronger than the
declaration of the oracle to the effect that he
was a god or worthy of divine honours, they for
that reason would not obey Apollo, and- conse-
quently no one regarded Aristeas as a god. But
with respect to Jesus we would say that, as it
was of advantage to the human race to accept
him as the Son of God — God come in a human
soul and body — and as this did not seem to be
advantageous to the gluttonous appetites'' of the
demons which love bodies, and to those who
deem them to be gods on that account, the de-
mons that are on earth (which are supposed to
be gods by those who are not instructed in the
nature of demons), and also their worshippers,
were desirous to prevent the spread of the doc-
trine of Jesus ; for they saw that the lil)ations
and odours in which they greedily delighted were
being swept away by the prevalence of the instruc-
tions of Jesus. But the God who sent Jesus dis-
sipated all the conspiracies of the demons, and


3 iy ov KOivuivriaai'TO'! Tjrj avSpaniyn <t>v<Tei, ovS' ai-aAa/SdiTO?
TJjv tv avOpuiTToi'; <rdpKa ini8vfj.ov<rai' Kara Toii nfev/jiaTo^.

* .\AAd yap Ka'i Trjv KaTa^a<rav ei? ai'9ptjjnii'Yii' <fn-at
arflpuiTTira? TreptcTTatret? <
auOpuinLvov, iiopiov eK Toi

AOjUf I'rjc ft? (TWTrJpiaf Tol'


Aixi-eio,


i? al'Bpionn-qv <f>v(Tlf (tot ti?
[^vapiiff Kai ava\a^ovfjai' \itv\t}i' Ka\ ffioficL
Tn<TTCv€(T0ai fjiCTa. Tcoj' dt'ioT^ptoi' avfi^oK-

TTttJ-TfUOUCTll'.

Others read, /xera to iriaTeveiv.


476


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


made the Gospel of Jesus to prevail throughout
the whole world for the conversion and reforma-
tion of men, and caused Churches to be every-
where established in opposition to those of
superstitious and licentious and wicked men ; for
such is the character of the multitudes who con-
stitute the citizens ' in the assemblies of the va-
rious cities. Whereas the Churches of God
which are instructed by Christ, when carefully
contrasted with the assemblies of the districts in
which they are situated, are as beacons ^ in the
world ; for who would not admit that even the
inferior members of the Church, and those who
in comparison with the better are less worthy,
are nevertheless more excellent than many of
those who belong to the assemblies in the dif-
ferent districts?

CHAP. XXX.

For the Church ^ of God, e.g., which is at
Athens, is a meek and stable body, as being one
which desires to please God, who is over all
things ; whereas the assembly •♦ of the Athenians
is given to sedition, and is not at all to be com-
pared to the Church of God in that city. And
you may say the same thing of the Church of
God at Corinth, and of the assembly of the Cor-
inthian people ; and also of the Church of God
at Alexandria, and of the assembly of the people
of Alexandria. And if he who hears this be a
candid man, and one who investigates things
with a desire to ascertain the truth, he will be
filled with admiration of Him who not only con-
ceived the design, but also was able to secure in
all places the establishment of Churches of God
alongside 5 of the assemblies of the people in
each city. In Uke manner, also, in comparing
the council^ of the Church of God with the
council in any city, you would find that certain
councillors 7 of the Church are worthy to rule in
the city of God, if tliere be any such city in the
whole world ; ** whereas the councillors in all
other places exhibit in their characters no quality
worthy of the conventional 9 superiority which
they appear to enjoy over their fellow-citizens.
And so, too, you must compare the ruler of the
Chia'ch in each city with the ruler of the people
of the city, in order to observe that even amongst
those councillors and rulers of the Church of
God who come very far short of their duty, and
who lead more indolent lives than others who


' TOiaura ^ap Ta Tsa.vTa.\o\i jroAcTeudfiei'a iv Tats €KKA7)o-iai! Ttui'
TToAetof TrArj^yj.

2 (^coo-TTJpf?. [Phil. ii. 15. Very_ noteworthy are the details of
this and the following chapter, and their defiant comparisons.]

■* e'icKArjcria.

5 7rapoiKou<ras.

6 pouArjr.

7 ^ouAeuTat.

8 €wpoi9 0.V TiVes pXv T^s iKKky\<jiaK /SouAeural aftot cio-iv, ei ti?
e<TTLv iv Tco TrapTi Trdyis ToO ©eoO, ev eKeivrj iroAiTeueaflac. Boherel-
lus conjectures eiJpois av on rire? ij.ev, k.t.A.

9 Tijs eic KaTardlews i/irepox^S.


are more energetic, it is nevertheless possible to
discover a general superiority in what relates to
the progress of virtue over the characters of the
councillors and rulers in the various cities. '°


CHAP. XXXI.

Now if these things be so, why should it not
be consistent with reason to hold with regard to
Jesus, who was able to effect results so great,
that there dwelt in I/hn no ordinary divinity?
while this was not the case either with the Pro-
connesian Aristeas (although Apollo would have
him regarded as a god), or with the other indi-
viduals enumerated by Celsus when he says,
" No one regards Abaris the Hyperborean as a
god, who was possessed of such power as to be
borne along like an arrow from a bow." " For
with what object did the deity who bestowed
upon this Hyperborean Abaris the power of be-
ing carried along like an arrow, confer upon him
such a gift? Was it that the human race might
be benefited thereby,'^ or did he himself obtain
any advantage from the possession of such a
power ? — always supposing it to be conceded
that these statements are not wholly inventions,
but that the thing actually happened through the
co-operation of some demon. But if it be re-
corded that my Jesus was received up into glory,'^
I perceive the divine arrangement '^ in such an
act, viz., because God, who brought this to pass,
commends in this way the Teacher to those who
witnessed it, in order that as men who are con-
tending not for human doctrine, but for divine
teaching, they n)ay devote themselves as far as
possible to the God who is over all, and may do
all things in order to please Him, as those who
are to receive in the divine judgment the reward
of the good or evil which they have wrought in
this life.

CHAP. XXXII.

But as Celsus next mentions the case of the
Clazomenian, subjoining to the story about him
this remark, " Do they not report that his soul
frequently quitted his body, and flitted about in
an incorporeal form ? and yet men did not regard
him as a god," we have to answer that probably
certain wicked demons contrived that such state-
ments should be committed to writing (for I do
not believe that they contrived that such a thing
should actually lal'e place) , in order that the pre-
dictions regarding Jesus, and the discourses ut-


'° oTi Kai eTTi TO)!/ c(j>6Spa aTTOTvyxavoixevtov PovKevTuiv xai apxov-
Tii>v eKKAi)<Tca; ©eoO, Kai paOvfiOTepov Trapa Tous eiiTOvioTeptos Ptovy-
Ta?, ov&ev riTTOv ecmi' fvpelv to! iniirav iinepoxv'', ''■')•' ^^ "^fl 5f' '''.°'
apifTa? npoKOTTrf, Trapa Ta eGr) tmv ev Tais 7r6Ae<7t ^ouAeuT<I»'Kai opx"*'"
Tuii'. Boherellus conjectures paBvixorepioi'.

II (ucrre oiaT^i ^eAei a-Ujii<^epe<reat. Spencer and Bohereau would
delete SeAei as a gloss.

■2 Guietus would insert ^ before Iva ri w(|)€At)0(J. This emendation
is adopted in the translation.

•3 Cf. I Tim. iii. 16.

^^ Tqy ot/coi'op.tai'.


Chap. XXXIV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


477


tered by Him, might either .be evil spoken of, as
inventions Hke these, or might excite no' surprise,
as not being more remarkable than other occur-
rences. But my Jesus said regarding His own
soul (which was separated from the body, not by
virtue of any human necessity, but by the miracu-
lous power which was given Him also for this
purpose): " No one taketh my life from Me, but
I lay it down of Myself I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it again." ' For
as He had power to lay it down. He laid it down
when He 'said, " Father, why hast Thou forsaken
Me ? And when He had cried with a loud voice,
He gave up the ghost," ^ anticipating the public
executioners of the crucified, who break the legs
of the victims, and who do so in order that their
punishment may not be further prolonged. And
He " took His life," when He manifested Him-
self to His disciples, having in their presence
foretold to the unbelieving Jews, " Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it up
again," 3 and " He spake this of the temple of
His body ; " the prophets, moreover, having pre-
dicted such a result in many other passages of
their writings, and in this, " My flesh also shall
rest in hope : for Thou wilt not leave my soul in
hell, neither wilt Thou suffer Thine Holy One to
see corruption." ■*

CHAP. XXXIII.

Celsus, however, shows that he has read a
good many Grecian histories, when he quotes
further what is told of Cleomedes of Astypalaea,
"who," he relates, "entered into an ark, and
although shut up within it, was not found therein,
but through some arrangement of the divinity,
flew out, when certain persons had cut open the
ark in order to apprehend him." Now this
story, if an invention, as it appears to be, cannot
be compared with what is related of Jesus, since
in the lives of such men there is found no indi-
cation of their possessing the divinity which is
ascribed to them ; whereas the divinity of Jesus
is established both by the existence of the
Churches of the saved, 5 and by the prophecies
uttered concerning Him, and by the cures
wrought in His name, and by the wisdom and
knowledge which are in Him, and the deeper
truths which are discovered by those who know
how to ascend from a simple faith, and to inves-
tigate the meaning which lies in the divine Scrip-
tures, agreeably to the injunctions of Jesus, who
said, " Search the Scriptures," ^ and to the wish
of Paul, who taught that " we ought to know how
to answer every man ; " ^ nay, also of him who


j said, " Be ready always to give an answer to
every man that asketh of you a reason of the
I faith * that is in you." 9 If he wishes to have
J it conceded, however, that it is not a fiction, let
him show with what object this supernatural
power made him, through some arrangement of
the divinity, flee from the ark. For if he will
adduce any reason worthy of consideration, and
point out any purpose worthy of God in confer-
ring such a power on Cleomedes, we will decide
on the answer which we ought to give ; but if
he fail to say anything convincing on the point,
clearly because no reason can be discovered,
then we shall either speak slightingly of the story
to those who have not accepted it, and charge it
with being false, or we shall say that some de-
moniac power, casting a glamour over the eyes,
produced, in the case of the Astypalaean, a result
like that which is produced by the performers
of juggling tricks,'° while Celsus thinks that with
respect to him he has spoken like an oracle,
when he said that " by some divine arrangement
he flew away from the ark."


CHAP, xxxrv.

I am, however, of opinion that these individ-
uals are the only instances with which Celsus
was acquainted. And yet, that he might appear
voluntarily to pass by other similar cases, he
says, " And one might name many others of the
same kind." Let it be granted, then, that many
such persons have existed who conferred no
benefit upon the human race : what would each
one of their acts be found to amount to in com-
parison with the work of Jesus, and the miracles
related of Him, of which we have already spoken
at considerable length ? He nekt imagines that,
" in worshipping him who," as he says, " was
taken prisoner and put to death, we are acting
like the Getse who worship Zamolxis, and the
Cilicians who worship Mopsus, and the Acarna-
nians who pay divine honours to Amphilochus,
and like the Thebans who do the same to Am-
phiaraus, and the Lebadians to Trophonius,"
Now in these instances we shall prove that he
has compared us to the foregoing without good
grounds. For these different tribes erected tem-
ples and statues to those individuals above enu-
merated^ whereas we have refrained from offering
to the Divinity honour by any such means (see-
ing they are adapted rather to demons, which
are somehow fixed in a certain place which they
prefer to any other, or which take up their dwell-


» Cf. John X. 1 8.
2 Cf. Matt, x.xvii
^ Cf. John ii, 19.
* Ps. xvi. 9, 10.
5 Tujt/ u>(i)eAou)u.et
'^ John V. 39.
^ Cf. Col Iv. 6.


46-50


8 JTlffTeo)?.

9 I Pet. iii. 15. ... ,

'° ^Toc fta/SaAoOjuef roes outtjv \i.r\ irapaSe^aiitvoii;^ xaX cyxoAc-
trofjiev TJj laTopia w^ ovk olAtj^cI, tj Sat^xouioi* Tt <itrj(TOfxtv napa*
TrAijcrioi' roit ejriflfi/ci'UTrei'Oi? ydijati' airar-j 6<l>9aJi.niJiv TrfTroirjKivai
KaL nepi toc 'A<TTvrTa\ai.tia. Spencer in his edition includes u>) in
brackets, and renders, " Aut cos incusabimus, qui istam virtutem
admiserint."


478


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


ing, as it were, after being removed (from one
place to another) by certain rites and incanta-
tions), and are lost in reverential wonder at
Jesus, who has recalled our minds from all sen-
sible things, as being not only corruptible, but
destined to corruption, and elevated them to
honour the God who is over all with prayers and
a righteous life, which we offer to Him as being
intermediate between the nature of the uncre-
ated and that of all created things,' and who
bestows upon us the benefits which come from
the Father, and who as High Priest conveys our
prayers to the supreme God.

CHAP. XXXV.

But I should like, in answer to him who for
some unknown reason advances such statements
as the above, to make in a conversational way ^
some such remarks as the following, which seem
not inappropriate to him. Are then those per-
sons whom you have mentioned nonentities, and
is there no power in Lebadea connected with
Trophonius, nor in Thebes with the temple of
Amphiaraus, nor in Acarnania with Amphilochus,
nor in Cilicia with Mopsus ? Or is there in such
persons some being, either a demon, or a hero,
or even a god, working works which are beyond
the reach of man ? For if he answer that there
is nothing either demoniacal or divine about
these individuals more than others, then let him
at once make known his own opinion, as being
that of an Epicurean, and of one who does not
hold the same views with the Greeks, and who
neither recognises demons nor worships gods as
do the Greeks ; and let it be shown that it was
to no purpose that he adduced the instances
previously enumerated (as if he believed them
to be true), together with those which he adds
in the following pages. But if he will assert
that the persons spoken of are either demons, or
heroes, or even gods, let him notice that he will
establish by what he has admitted a result which
he does not desire, viz., that Jesus also was some
such being ; for which reason, too, he was able
to demonstrate to not a few that He had come
down from God to visit the human race. And
if he once admit this, see whether he will not be
forced to confess that He is mightier than those
individuals with whom he classed Him, seeing
none of the latter forbids the offering of honour
to the others ; while He, having confidence in
Himself, because He is more powerful than all
those others, forbids them to be received as
divine ^ because they are wicked demons, who


^ &s Trpo<ra.yotJL€v avTw, w9 Sia fxera^b nvTo<; T>j? tov ayevqrov
(cai Trjs Tiov yci/rjTwv jrdi'Tcoi' (i>u<7fui<r. " Hoeschel (itemque Spen-
cerus ad marg.) suspicabatur legendum: w? 6r) iieju^o oi'tos. Male.
Nihil mutari necesse est. Agitur quippe de precibiis, qiias ofierimiis
Deo ' per eum qui veluii medius est inter increatam naturara et crea-
tam ' '' — Rumbus.

^ Tas TOUTiui' a.noSo)^di.


have taken possession of places on earth, through
inability to rise to the purer and diviner region,
whither the grossnesses of earth and its countless
evils cannot reach.

CHAP. XXXVI.

But as he next introduces the case of the
favourite of Adrian (I refer to the accounts re-
garding the youth Antinous, and the honours
paid him by the inhabitants of the city of Anti-
nous in Egypt), and imagines that the honour
paid to him falls little short of that which we
render to Jesus, let us show in what a spirit of
hostility this statement is made. For what is
there in common between a life lived among
the favourites of Adrian, by one who did not
abstain even from unnatural lusts, and that of
the venerable Jesus, against whom even they who
brought countless other charges, and who told
so many falsehoods, were not able to allege that
He manifested, even in the slightest degree, any
tendency to what was licentious ? ■♦ Nay, further,
if one were to investigate, in a spirit of truth and
impartiality, the stories relating to Antinous, he
would find that it was due to the magical arts
and rites of the Egyptians that there was even the
appearance of his performing anything (marvel-
lous) in the city which bears his name, and that
too only after his decease, — an effect which is
said to have been produced in other temples by
the Egyptians, and those who are skilled in the
arts which they practise. For they set up in
certain places demons claiming prophetic or
healing power, and which frequently torture
those who seem to have committed any mistake
about ordinary kinds of food, or about touching
the dead body of a man, that they may have
the appearance of alarming the uneducated mul-
titude. Of this nature is the being that is con-
sidered to be a god in Antinoopolis in Egypt,
whose (reputed) virtues are the lying inventions
of some who live by the gain derived there-
from ; 5 while others, deceived by the demon
placed there, and others again convicted by a
weak conscience, actually think that they are
paying a divine penalty inflicted by Antinous.
Of such a nature also are the mysteries which
they perform, and the seeming predictions which
they utter. Far different from such are those
of Jesus. For it was no company of sorcerers,
paying court to a king or ruler at his bidding,
who seemed to have made him a god ; but the
Architect of the universe Himself, in keeping
with the marvellously persuasive power of His
words,^ commended Him as worthy of honour,
not only to those men who were well disposed,
but to demons also, and other unseen powers,


w? Ktxv TO tv\ov a.KoKa.(jia.<i Kav en oAiyov yev(Taixevov ;
:>v apeTdi oi fj-ev Tive^ KvjievTLKMTepOf ^livTes KaTa^ev&ovTai,.
ixoAoiiflws TJj iv Tui Acycti" TepatrTiws TrtcTTiKn fii't'oi^tei.


Chap. XXXVIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


479


which even at the present time show that they
either fear the name of Jesus as that of a being
of superior power, or reverentially accept Him
as their legal ruler.' For if the commendation
had not been given Him by God, the demons
would not have withdrawn from those whom
they had assailed, in obedience to the mere
mention of His name.

CH.^P. XXXVII.

The Egyptians, then, having been taught to
worship Antinous, will, if you compare him with
Apollo or Zeus, endure such a comparison, Anti-
nous being magnified in their estimation through
being classed with these deities ; for Celsus is
clearly convicted of falsehood when he says,
" that they will not endure his being compared
with Apollo or Zeus." Whereas Christians (who
have learned that their eternal life consists in
knowing the only true God, who is over all, and
Jesus Christ, whom He has sent ; and who have
learned also that all the gods of the heathen are
greedy demons, which flit around sacrifices and
blood, and other sacrificial accompaniments,^ in
order to deceive those who have not taken ref-
uge with the God who is over all, but that the
divine and holy angels of God are of a different
nature and will ^ from all the demons on earth,
and that they are known to those exceedingly
few persons who have carefully and intelligendy
investigated these matters) will not endure a
comparison to be made between them and
Apollo or Zeus, or any being worshipped with
odour and blood and sacrifices ; some of them,
so acting from their extreme simplicity, not being
able to give a reason for their conduct, but sin-
cerely observing the precepts which they have
received ; others, again, for reasons not to be
lightly regarded, nay, even of a profound de-
scription, and (as a Greek would say) drawn
from the inner nature of things ; •* and amongst
the latter of these God is a frequent subject of
conversation, and those who are honoured by
God, through His only-begotten Word, with
participation in His divinity, and therefore also
in His name. They speak much, too, both
regarding the angels of God and those who are
opposed to the truth, but have been deceived ;
and who, in consequence of being deceived,
call them gods or angels of God, or good de-
mons, or heroes who have become such by the
transference into them of a good human soul.s
And such Christians will also show, that as in
philosophy there are many who appear to be in
possession of the truth, who have yet either de-


lu? Kara i-o/iou? avTu>v ap\ovTO';.

a7ro<i>opa?.

TrpoatpeVetu?,

eo'toTeptKwt' Kai CTTOTTTiicaiv,

)j >)pwas ex ficToPoA^? avaTavTai ayaBrj^ av6pu)nivri^ ^vxv'!-


ceived themselves by plausible arguments, or by
rashly assenting to what was brought forward
and discovered by others ; so also, among those
souls which exist apart from bodies, both angels
and demons, there are some Avhich have been
induced by plausible reasons to declare them-
selves gods. And because it was impossible that
the reasons of such things could be discovered
by men with perfect exactness, it was deemed
safe that no mortal should entrust himself to any
being as to God, with the exception of Jesus
Christ, who is, as it were, the Ruler over all
things, and who both beheld these weighty se-
crets, and made them known to a few.

CHAP. XXXVIII.

The belief, then, in Antinous,^ or any other
such person, whether among the Egyptians or
the Greeks, is, so to speak, unfortunate ; while
the belief in Jesus would seem to be either a
fortunate one, or the result of thorough investi-
gation, having the appearance of the former to
the multitude, and of the latter to exceedingly
few.7 And when I speak of a certain belief
being, as the multitude would call it, unfortu-
nate, I in such a case refer the cause to God,
who knows the reasons of the various fates al-
lotted to each one who enters human life. The
Greeks, moreover, will admit that even amongst
those who are considered to be most largely en-
dowed with wisdom, good fortune has had much
to do, as in the choice of teachers of one kind
rather than another, and in meeting with a better
class of instructors (there being teachers who
taught the most opposite doctrines), and in
being brought up in better circumstances ; for
the bringing up of many has been amid sur-
roundings of such a kind, that they were pre-
vented from ever receiving any idea of better
things, but constantly passed their life, from
their earliest youth, either as the favourites of
licentious men or of tyrants, or in some other
wretched condition which forbade the soul to
look upwards. And the causes of these varied
fortunes, according to all probability, are to be
found in the reasons of providence, though it is
not easy for men to ascertain these ; but I have
said what I have done by way of digression from
the main body of my subject, on account of the
proverb, that " such is the power of faith, be-
cause it seizes that which first presents itself." ^
For it was necessary, owing to the different
methods of education, to speak of the differ-
ences of belief among men, some of whom are
more, others less fortunate in their belief; and

6 [See vol. ii. p. 185, and the stinging reference of Justin, vol. i.
p. 172, this series.]

7 n-tpc 6i Tou ' irjiTOt' ^Toi Jc'facro av c'l-ai €VTVXV'!, ^ *<" |9«P<»-
iTavL(riJLfi'u>( e'f rjTaCT/ueVr), SoKoixra fiiv evTV)(j]<; napa TOi? ttoAAois,
l^e|ia(7avla^^Jt■iv^^^ 6< t^qTafffjavrj napa ndvv oAi-yu>TaTotv.

' TocrovToi' jroiei 7ri<TTi5, oiroia 4r) npoKaTaa\ov(ra,


48o


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


from this to proceed to show that what is termed
good or bad fortune would appear to contribute,
even in the case of the most talented, to their
appearing to be more fully endowed with reason,
and to give their assent on grounds of reason to
the majority of human opinions. But enough on
these points.

CHAP. XXXIX.

We must notice the remarks which Celsus
next makes, when he says to us, that " faith,
having taken possession of our minds, makes us
yield the assent which we give to the doctrine
of Jesus ; " for of a truth it is faith which does
produce such an assent. Observe, however,
whether that faith does not of itself exhibit what
is worthy of praise, seeing we entrust ourselves
to the God who is over all, acknowledging our
gratitude to Him who has led us to such a faith,
and declaring that He could not have attempted
or accomplished such a result without the divine
assistance. And we have confidence also in the
intentions of the writers of the Gospels, observ-
ing their piety and conscientiousness, manifested
in their writings, which contain nothing that is
spurious, or deceptive,' or false, or cunning ; for
it is evident to us that souls unacquainted with
those artifices which are taught by the cunning
sophistry of the Greeks (which is characterized
by great plausibility and acuteness), and by the
kind of rhetoric in vogue in the courts of justice,
would not have been able thus to invent occur-
rences which are fitted of themselves to conduct
to faith, and to a life in keeping with faith. And
I am of opinion that it was on this account that
Jesus wished to employ such persons as teachers
of His doctrines, viz., that there might be no
ground for any suspicion of plausible sophistry,
but that it might clearly appear to all who were
capable of understanding, that the guileless pur-
pose of the writers being, so to speak, marked
with great simplicity, was deemed worthy of
being accompanied by a diviner power, which
accomplished far more than it seemed possible
could be accomplished by a periphrasis of words,
and a weaving of sentences, accompanied by all
the distinctions of Grecian art.


But observe whether the principles of our
faith, harmonizing with the general ideas im-
planted in our minds at birth, do not produce
a change upon those who listen candidly to its
statements ; for although a perverted view of
things, with the aid of much instruction to the
same effect, has been able to implant in the
minds of the multitude the belief that images
are gods, and that things made of gold, and
silver, and ivory, and stone are deserving of wor-


ship, yet common sense ^ forbids the supposition
that God is at all a piece of corruptible matter,
or is honoured when made to assume by men a
form embodied in dead matter, fashioned ac-
cording to some image or symbol of His appear-
ance. And therefore we say at once of images
that they are not gods, and of such creations
(of art) that they are not to be compared with
the Creator, but are small in contrast with the God
who is over all, and who created, and upholds,
and governs the universe. And the rational soul
recognising, as it were, its relationship (to the
divine), at once rejects what it for a time sup-
posed to be gods, and resumes its natural love ^
for its Creator ; and because of its affection
towards Him, receives Him also who first pre-
sented these truths to all nations through the
disciples whom He had appointed, and whom
He sent forth, furnished with divine power and
authority, to proclaim the doctrine regarding
God and His kingdom.


But since he has charged us, I know not how
often already, "with regarding this Jesus, who
was but a mortal body, as a God, and with sup-
posing that we act piously in so doing," it is
superfluous to say any more in answer to this,
as a great deal has been said in the preceding
pages. And yet let those who make this charge
understand that He whom we regard and believe
to have been from the beginning God, and the
Son of God, is the very Logos, and the very
Wisdom, and the very Truth ; and with respect
to His mortal body, and the human soul which
it contained, we assert that not by their com-
munion merely with Him, but by their unity and
intermixture,'* they received the highest powers,
and after participating in His divinity, were
changed into God. And if any one should feel
a difficulty at our saying this regarding His body,
let him attend to what is said by the Greeks re-
garding matter, which, properly speaking, being
without quaUties, receives such as the Creator
desires to invest it with, and which frequendy
divests itself of those which it formerly possessed,
and assumes others of a difierent and higher
kind. And if these opinions be correct, what is
there wonderful in this, that the mortal quality of
the body of Jesus, if the providence of God has
so willed it, should have been changed into one
that was ethereal and divine ? 5


^ 7) KQi.V1\ tvvo{.a..
3 t}>L\TpOl* ipVaLKOV,

■♦ a\Ka Ka\ evuicreL Koi avaicpacreL,

5 [" By means of Origen the idea of a proper reasonable soul in
Christ received a new dogmatical importance. This point, which up
to this time had been altogether untouched with controversy with the
Patripassians, was now for the first time expressly brought forward in
a synod held against Beryllus of Bostra, a.d. 244, and the doctrine ot
a reasonable human soul m Christ settled as a doctrine of the Church.
— Neander's History {ut supra), vo\. ii. p. 309, with the references
there. See also Waterland's Works, vol. i. pp. 330, 331. S.J


Chap. XLIV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


481


Celsus, then, does not speak as a good rea-
soner,' when he compares the mortal flesh of
Jesus to gold, and silver, and stone, asserting
that the former is more liable to corruption than
the latter. For, to speak correctly, that which
is incorruptible is not more free from corruption
than another thing which is incorruptible, nor
that which is corruptible more liable to corrup-
tion than another corruptible thing. But, ad-
mitting that there are degrees of corruptibility,
we can say in answer, that if it is possible for the
matter which underlies all qualities to exchange
some of them, how should it be impossible for
the flesh of Jesus also to exchange qualities, and
to become such as it was proper for a body to
be which had its abode in the ether and the
regions above it, and possessing no longer the
infirmities belonging to the flesh, and those prop-
erties which Celsus terms "impurities," and in
so terming them, speaks unlike a philosopher?
For that which is properly impure, is so because
of its wickedness. Now the nature of body is
not impure ; for in so far as it is bodily nature,
it does not possess vice, which is the generative
principle of impurity. But, as he had a sus-
picion of the answer which we would return, he
says with respect to the change of the body of
Jesus, " Well, after he has laid aside these quali-
ties, he will be a God : " (and if so), why not
rather ^sculapius, and Dionysus, and Hercules ?
To which we reply, "What great deed hasyEscu-
lapius, or Dionysus, or Hercules wrought ? " And
what individuals will they be able to point out
as having been improved in character, and made
better by their words and lives, so that they may
make good their claim to be gods ? For let us
peruse the many narratives regarding them, and
see whether they were free from licentiousness,
or injustice, or folly, or cowardice. And if
nothing of that kind be found in them, the argu-
ment of Celsus might have force, which places
the forenamed individuals upon an equality with
Ijesus. But if it is certain that, although some
jthings are reported of them as reputable, they are
irecorded, nevertheless, to have done innumer-
able things which are contrary to right reason,
how could you any longer say, with any show of

I'eason, that these men, on putting aside their
nortal body, became gods rather than Jesus?
CHAP. XLIII.

I He next says of us, that " we ridicule those
l^'ho worship Jupiter, because his tomb is pointed
j>ut in the island of Crete ; and yet we worship
iim who rose from the tomb,^ although ignorant
if the grounds ^ on which the Cretans observe


CiaAeicTlKOS.

Tof anb ToO Taii)Ov,


such a custom." Observe now that he thus
undertakes the defence of the Cretans, and of
Jupiter, and of his tomb, alluding obscurely to
the allegorical notions, in conformity with which
the myth regarding Jupiter is said to have been
invented ; while he assails us who acknowledge
that our Jesus has been buried, indeed, but who
maintain that He has also been raised from the
tomb, — a statement which the Cretans have not
yet made regarding Jupiter. But since he ap-
pears to admit that the tomb of Jupiter is in
Crete, when he says that " we are ignorant of the
grounds on which the Cretans observe such a
custom," we reply that Callimachus the Cyre-
nian, who had read innumerable poetic compo-
sitions, and nearly the whole of Greek history,
was not acquainted with any allegorical meaning
which was contained in the stories about Jupiter
and his tomb ; and accordingly he accuses the
Cretans in his hymn addressed to Jupiter, in the
words : * —

"The Cretans are always liars : for thy tomb, O king,
The Cretans have reared; and yet thou didst not die,
For thou ever livest."

Now he who said, " Thou didst not die, for thou
ever livest," in denying that Jupiter's tomb was in
Crete, records nevertheless that in Jupiter there
was the beginning of death. 5 But birth upon
earth is the beginning of death. And his words
run : —

" And Rhea bore thee among the Parrhasians ; " —
whereas he ought to have seen, after denying
that the birth of Jupiter took place in Crete be-
cause of his tomb, that it was quite congruous
with his birth in Arcadia that he who was born
should also die. And the following is the man-
ner in which Callimachus speaks of these things :
" O Jupiter, some say that thou wert born on the
mountains of Ida, others in Arcadia. Which of
them, O father, have lied? The Cretans are
always liars," etc. Now it is Celsus who made
us discuss these topics, by the unfair manner in
which he deals with Jesus, in giving his assent to
what is related about His death and burial, but
regarding as an invention His resurrection from
the dead, although this was not only foretold by
innumerable prophets, but many proofs also were
given of His having appeared after death.

CHAP. XLIV.

After these points Celsus quotes some objec-
tions against the doctrine of Jesus, made by a
very few individuals who are considered Chris-
tians, not of the more intelligent, as he supposes,
but of the more ignorant class, and asserts that
" the following are the rules laid down by them.
Let no one come to us who has been instructed,


Cf Callimach., Hymn, i. Cf. also Tit. i. 12.
Tijc iip\t}v tah 9a.va.tav yeyoftVoi rrepi toi' ,^ta.


482


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


or who is wise or prudent (for such qualifications
are deemed evil by us) ; but if there be any
ignorant, or unintelligent, or uninstructed, or
foolish persons, let them come with confidence.
By which words, acknowledging that such indi-
viduals are worthy of their God, they manifestly
show that they desire and are able to gain over
only the silly, and the mean, and the stupid,
with women and children." ■ In reply to which,
we say that, as if, while Jesus teaches continence,
and says, " Whosoever looketh upon a woman to
lust after her, hath already committed adultery
with her in his heart," one were to behold a few
of those who are deemed to be Christians living
licentiously, he would most justly blame them
for living contrary to the teaching of Jesus, but
would act most unreasonably if he were to charge
the Gospel with their censurable conduct ; so, if
he found nevertheless that the doctrine of the
Christians invites men to wisdom, the blame then
must remain with those who rest in their own
ignorance, and who utter, not what Celsus relates
(for although some of them are simple and
ignorant, they do not speak so shamelessly as he
alleges), but other things of much less serious
import, which, however, serve to turn aside men
from the practice of v/isdom.

CHAP. XLV.

But that the object of Christianity ^ is that we
should become wise, can be proved not only
from the ancient Jewish writings, which %ve also
use, but especially from those which were com-
posed after the time of Jesus, and which are
believed among the Churches to be divine.
Now, in the fiftieth Psalm, David is described as
saying in his prayer to God these words : " The
unseen and secret things of Thy wisdom Thou
hast manifested to me." ^ Solomon, too, be-
cause he asked for wisdom, received it ; and if
any one were to peruse the Psalms, he would
find the book filled with many maxims of wis-
dom ; and the evidences of his wisdom may be
seen in his treatises, which contain a great amount
of wisdom expressed in few words, and in which
you will find many laudations of wisdom, and
encouragements towards obtaining it. So wise,
moreover, was Solomon, that " the queen of
Sheba, having heard his name, and the name
of the Lord, came to try him with difficult ques-
tions, and spake to him all things, whatsoever
were in her heart ; and Solomon answered her all
her questions. There was no question omitted


' [The sarcastic raillery of Celsus in regard to the ignorance and
low social scale of the early converts to Christianity is in keeping
with his whole tone and manner. On the special value of the evi-
dence of early Christian writers, such as Justin Martyr, Clement,
Origen, etc., to the truth and power, among men of all classes, of the
Gospel of our Lord, see Rawlinson's Bampton Lectures, The His-
torical Evidences of the Truth 0/ the Scripture Records, Lect.
viii. pp. 207, 420, et seqq. (Amer. ed. i860). S.j

2 6 Aoyo?.

3 Ta ahy\Ka Koi To. Kpv^ia Trji 0"0<^ias aov efijjAwcra? ^01,


by the king which he did not answer her. And
the queen of Sheba saw all the wisdom of Solo-
mon, and the possessions which he had,* and
there was no more spirit in her.s And she said
to the king, The report is true which I heard
in mine own land regarding thee and thy wis-
dom ; and I believed not them who told me,
until I had come, and mine eyes have seen it.
And, lo, they did not tell me the half. Thou
hast added wisdom and possessions above all the
report which I heard." ^ It is recorded also of
him, that " God gave Solomon wisdom and
understanding exceeding much, and largeness
of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea-
shore. And the wisdom that was in Solomon
greatly excelled the wisdom of all the ancients,
and of all the wise men of Egypt ; and he was
wiser than all men, even than Gethan the Ezra-
hite, and Emad, and Chalcadi, and Aradab, the
sons of Madi. And he was famous among all
the nations round about. And Solomon spake
three thousand proverbs, and his songs were five
thousand. And he spake of trees, from the
cedar that is in Lebanon even to the hyssop
which springeth out of the wall ; and also of
fishes and of beasts. And all nations came to
hear the wisdom of Solomon, and from all the
kings of the earth who had heard of the fame
of his wisdom." 7

And to such a degree does the Gospel desire
that there should be wise men among believers,
that for the sake of exercising the understand-
ing of its hearers, it has spoken certain truths in
enigmas, others in what are called " dark " say-
ings, others in parables, and others in problems.*
And one of the prophets — Hosea — says at the
end of his prophecies : " Who is wise, and he
will understand these things? or prudent, and
he shall know them?""? Daniel, moreover, and
his fellow-captives, made such progress in the
learning which the wise men around the king in
Babylon cultivated, that they were shown to
excel all of them in a tenfold degree. And in
the book of Ezekiel it is said to the ruler of
Tyre, who greatly prided himself on his wisdom,
" Art thou wiser than Daniel ? Every secret was
not revealed to thee." '°

CHAP. XLVL

And if you come to the books written after
the time of Jesus, you will find that those multi-
tudes of believers who hear the parables are, as
it were, " without," and worthy only of exoteric
doctrines, while the disciples learn in private the
explanation of the parables. For, privately, to


4 Ta KaT avToy,

5 Koi (^ avTYi^ iydvero.
* Cf. I Kings X. 1-9.

7 Cf. I Kings iv. 29-34. The text reads, »repi n-ai'Tuii'
TiKetuv T7)5 yr)?, for which napa has been substituted.

8 icrti dWa Sid jrpo|3AT)/idTiov.

9 Hos. xiv. 9.

'° Cf. Ezek. xxviii. 3.


Chap. XLVIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


4S3


His own disciples did Jesus open up all things,
esteeming above the multitudes those who desired
to know His wisdom. And He promises to those
who believe upon Him to send them wise men
and scribes, saying, "Behold, I will send unto
you wise men and scribes, and some of them
they shall kill and crucify." ■ And Paul also, in
the catalogue of "charismata " bestowed by God,
placed first " the word of wisdom," and second,
as being inferior to it, "the word of knowledge,"
but third, and lower down, " faith." ^ And be-
cause he regarded " the word " as higher than
miraculous powers, he for that reason places
" workings of miracles " and '• gifts of healings "
in a lower place than the gifts of the word. And
in the Acts of the Apostles Stephen bears wit-
ness to the great learning of Moses, which he
had obtained wholly from ancient writings not
accessible to the multitude. For he says : "And
Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians." ^ And therefore, with respect to his
miracles, it was suspected that he wrought them
perhaps, not in virtue of his professing to come
from God, but by means of his Egyptian knowl-
edge, in which he was well versed. For the
king, entertaining such a suspicion, summoned
the Egyptian magicians, and wise men, and en-
chanters, who were found to be of no avail as
against the wisdom of Moses, which proved su-
perior to all the wisdom of the Egyptians.

CHAP. XLVII.

But it is probable that what is written by Paul

in the first Epistle to the Corinthians,'* as being

I addressed to Greeks who prided themselves

I greatly on their Grecian wisdom, has moved

some to believe that it was not the object of the

Gospel to win wise men. Now. let him who is

of this opinion understand that the Gospel, as

censuring wicked men, says of them that they

are wise not in things which relate to the under-

j standing, and which are unseen and eternal ; but

j that in busying themselves about things of sense

alone, and regarding these as all-important, they

are wise men of the world : for as there are in

existence a multitude of opinions, some of them

espousing the cause of matter and bodies,^ and

asserting that everything is corporeal which has

a substantial existence,^ and that besides these

j nothing else exists, whether it be called invisi-

ble or incorporeal, it says also that these consti-

I tute the wisdom of the world, which perishes

j and fades away, and belongs only to this age,

I while those opinions which raise the soul from

I things here to the blessedness which is with God,

I and to His kingdom, and which teach men to


despise all sensible and visible things as existing
only for a season, and to hasten on to things
invisible, and to have regard to those things
which are not seen, — these, it says, constitute
the wisdom of God. But Paul, as a lover of
truth, says of certain wise men among the Greeks, i
when their statements are true, that " although
they knew God, they glorified Him not as God,
neither were thankful." ^ And he bears witness
that they knew God, and says, too, that this did
not happen to them without divine permission,
in these words : " For God showed it unto
them ; " ^ dimly alluding, I think, to those who
ascend from things of sense to those of the un-
derstanding, when he adds, " For the invisible
things of God from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even His eternal power and Godhead ;
so that they are without excuse : because that,
when they knew God, they glorified Him not as
God, neither were thankful." 9


CHAP. XLVIII.


xiii. 34.


' Cf. Matt.

2 Cf I Cor. xii. B.

3 Acts vii. 22.

* Cf. I Cor. i. 18, etc.

5 Ta ^^.*iV O'fl'a'yo^ei-'Dl'rc


And perhaps also from the words, " For ye
see your calling, brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble, are called : but God hath chosen
the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise ; and the base things, and the things which
are despised, hath God chosen, and things which
are not, to bring to nought things that are, that
no flesh may glory in His presence ; '° some have
been led to suppose that no one who is in-
structed, or wise, or prudent, embraces the Gos-
pel. Now, in answer to such an one, we would
say that it has not been stated that " no wise
man according to the flesh," but that "not many
wise men according to the flesh," are called. It
is manifest, further, that amongst the character-
istic qualifications of those who are termed
" bishops," Paul, in describing what kind of
man the bishop ought to be, lays down as a
qualification that he should also be a teacher,
saying that he ought to be able to convince the
gainsayers, that by the wisdom which is in him
he may stop the mouths of foolish talkers and
deceivers." And as he selects for the ei)isco-
pate a man who has been once married '- rather
than he who has twice entered the married state, '^
and a man of blameless life rather than one who
is liable to censure, and a sober man rather than
one who is not such, and a prudent man rather


7 Cf. Rom. i. 21.

8 Rom. i. 19.

9 Cf. Rom. 1. 20-22.
•° Cf I Cor. i. 26-28.
" Cf. Tit. i. 9, 10.

12 Moi/dya/nof. Cf. Can. Apost., C. xvii.: "o tvcX yafioii trvy.-
ttAokcIs iJ-tTo. TO pdiTTiaixa, J) Tra\\aKr)v (CTijo-a/AtfO?, oil Swarai
(Ivai €rri<TKOiro<;, jj 7rpe<7/3vTfpo?, r) SiaKoi'o^, r) 6A<o? toO KoiTaXoyov
ToO iepaTiKoO." Cf. note in Benedictine ed.

'3 [Origen agrees with Tcrtiillian, /asstm, on this subject. Hip-
polytus makes Callistus, Bishop of Rome, the first to depart from li.is
principle, — accepting " digamists and trigamists."]


484


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


than one who is not prudent, and a man whose
behaviour is decorous rather than he who is open
to the charge even of the slightest indecorum,
so he desires that he who is to be chosen by pref-
erence for the office of a bishop should be apt to
teach, and able to convince the gainsayers. How
then can Celsus jusdy charge us with saying, " Let
no one come to us who is ' instructed,' or ' wise,'
or 'prudent? ' " Nay, let him who wills come to
us " instructed," and " wise," and " prudent ; "
and none the less, if any one be ignorant and
unintelligent, and uninstructed and foolish, let
him also come : for it is these whom the Gospel
promises to cure, when they come, by rendering
them all worthy of God.

CHAP. XLIX.

This statement also is untrue, that it is " only
foolish and low individuals, and persons devoid
of perception, and slaves, and women, and chil-
dren, of whom the teachers of the divine word
wish to make converts." Such indeed does the
Gospel invite, in order to make them better ;
but it invites also others who are very different
from these, since Christ is the Saviour of all
men, and especially of them that believe, whether
they be intelligent or simple ; and " He is the
propitiation with the Father for our sins ; and
not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole world." ' After this it is superfluous for
us to wish to offer a reply to such statements of
Celsus as the following : " For why is it an evil
to have been educated, and to have studied the
best opinions, and to have both the reality and
appearance of wisdom? What hindrance does
this offer to the knowledge of God ? AVhy should
it not rather be an assistance, and a means by
which one might be better able to arrive at the
truth?" Truly it is no evil to have been edu-
cated, for education is the way to virtue ; but to
rank those amongst the number of the educated
who hold erroneous opinions is what even the
wise men among the Greeks would not do. On
the other hand, who would not admit that to
have studied the best opinions is a blessing?
But what shall we call the best, save those which
are true, and which incite men to virtue ? More-
over, it is an excellent thing for a man to be
wise, but not to seetn so, as Celsus says. And
it is no hindrance to the knowledge of God,
but an assistance, to have been educated, and to
have studied the best opinions, and to be wise.
And it becomes us rather than Celsus to say
this, especially if it be shown that he is an Epi-
curean.

CHAP. L.

But let us see what those statements of his
are which follow next in these words : " Nay, we


J Cf. I John ii.


see, indeed, that even those individuals, who in
the market-places perform the most disgraceful
tricks, and who gather crowds around them,
would never approach an assembly of wise men,
nor dare to exhibit their arts among them ; but
wherever they see young men, and a mob of
slaves, and a gathering of unintelligent persons,
thither they thrust themselves in, and show them-
selves off." Observe, now, how he slanders us
in these words, comparing us to those who in
the market-places perform the most disreputable
tricks, and gather crowds around them ! What
disreputable tricks, pray, do we perform? Or
what is there in our conduct that resembles
theirs, seeing that by means of readings, and
explanations of the things read, we lead men to
the worship of the God of the universe, and
to the cognate virtues, and turn them away from
contemning Deity, and from all things contrary
to right reason ? Philosophers verily would wish
to collect together such hearers of their dis-
courses as exhort men to virtue, — a practice
which certain of the Cynics especially have fol-
lowed, who converse publicly with those whom
they happen to meet. Will they maintain, then,
that these who do not gather together persons
who are considered to have been educated, but
who invite and assemble hearers from the public
street, resemble those who in the market-places
perform the most disreputable tricks, and gather
crowds around them ? Neither Celsus, however,
nor any one who holds the same opinions, will
blame those who, agreeably to what they regard
as a feeling of philanthropy, address their argu-
ments to the ignorant populace.


And if they are not to be blamed for so doing,
let us see whether Christians do not exhort mul-
titudes to the practice of virtue in a greater and
better degree than they. For the philosophers
who converse in public do not pick and choose
their hearers, but he who likes stands and lis-
tens. The Christians, however, having previ-
ously, so far as possible, tested the souls of those
who wish to become their hearers, and having
previously instructed^ them in private, when
they appear (before entering the community)
to have sufficiently evinced their desire towards
a virtuous life, introduce them then, and not
before, privately forming one class of those who
are beginners, and are receiving admission, but
who have not yet obtained the mark of complete
purification ; and another of those who have
manifested to the best of their ability their inten-
tion to desire no other things than are approved
by Christians ; and among these there are cer-
tain persons appointed to make inquiries regard


■npoiTHfaa-vTii,


i


Chap. LIV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


485


ing the lives and behaviour of those who join
them, in order that they may prevent those who
commit acts of infamy from coming into their
pubHc assembly, while those of a different char-
acter they receive with their whole heart, in
order that they may daily make them better.
And this is their method of procedure, both with
those who are sinners, and especially with those
who lead dissolute lives, whom they exclude
from their community, although, according to
Celsus, they resemble those who in the market-
places perform the most shameful tricks. Now
the venerable school of the Pythagoreans used
to erect a cenotaph to those who had apostatized
from their system of philosophy, treating them
as dead ; but the Christians lament as dead
those who have been vanquished by licentious-
ness or any other sin, because they are lost and
dead to God, and as being risen from the dead
(if they manifest a becoming change) they re-
ceive them afterwards, at some future time, after
a greater interval than in the case of those who
were admitted at first, but not placing in any
office or post of rank in the Church of God
those who, after professing the Gospel, lapsed
and fell.


Observe now with regard to the following
statement of Celsus, " We see also those per-
sons who in the market-places perform most
disreputable tricks, and collect crowds around
them," whether a manifest falsehood has not
been uttered, and things compared which have
no resemblance. He says that these individuals,
to whom he compares us, who " perform the
most disreputable tricks in the market-places
and collect crowds, would never approach an
assembly of wise men, nor dare to show off their
tricks before them ; but wherever they see young
men, and a mob of slaves, and a gathering of
foolish people, thither do they thrust themselves
in and make a display." Now, in speaking thus
he does nothing else than simply load us with
abuse, like the women upon the public streets,
whose object is to slander one another ; for we
do everything in our power to secure that our
meetings should be composed of wise men, and
those things among us which are especially ex-
cellent and divine we then venture to bring for-
ward publicly in our discussions when we have
an abundance of intelligent hearers, while we con-
ceal and pass by in silence the truths of deeper
import when we see that our audience is com-
posed of simpler minds, which need such in-
struction as is figuratively termed " milk."


For the word is used by our Paul in writing to
the Corinthians, who were Greeks, and not yet


purified in their morals : " I have fed you with
milk, not with meat ; for hitherto ye were not
able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able, for
ye are yet carnal : for whereas there is among
you envying and strife, are ye not carnal, and
walk as men ? " ' Now the same writer,^ know-
ing that there was a certain kind of nourishment
better adapted for the soul, and that the food of
those young 3 persons who were admitted was
compared to milk, continues : " And ye are be-
come such as have need of milk, and not of
strong meat. For every one that useth milk is
unskilful in the word of righteousness ; for he
is a babe. But strong meat belongeth to them
that are of full age, even those who by reason
of use have their senses exercised to discern
both good and evil." '* Would then those who
believe these words to be well spoken, suppose
that the noble doctrines of our faith would never
be mentioned in an assembly of wise men, but
that wherever (our instructors) see young men,
and a mob of slaves, and a collection of foolish
individuals, they bring publicly forward divine
and venerable truths, and before such persons
make a display of themselves in treating of
them? But it is clear to him who examines the
whole spirit of our writings, that Celsus is ani-
mated with a hatred against the human race re-
sembling that of the ignorant populace, and gives
utterance to these falsehoods without examina-
tion.

CHAP. LIV.

We acknowledge, however, although Celsus
will not have it so, that we do desire to instruct
all men in the word of God, so as to give to
young men the exhortations which are aj^propri-
ate to them, and to show to slaves how they
may recover freedom of thought,' and be enno-
bled by the word. And those amongst us who
are the ambassadors of Christianity sufficiently
declare that they are debtors^ to Greeks and
Barbarians, to wise men and fools, (for they do
not deny their obligation to cure the souls even
of foolish persons,) in order that as far as possi-
ble they may lay aside their ignorance, and en-
deavour to obtain greater prudence, by listening
also to the words of Solomon : " Oh, ye fools,
be of an understanding heart," ^ and " Who is
the most simple among you, let him turn unto
me ; " ^ and wisdom exhorts those who are de-
void of understanding in the words, " Come, eat
of my bread, and drink of the wine which I
have mixed for you. Forsake folly that ye may


1 f I Cor. iii. 2, 3. S.]

2 [See note supra, p. 239. S.]

■• Heb. v! 12-14.

5 eAf iCepoi/ o.v<xKa■^ov^i<i <i>p6vriiJLa.

b Cf. Rom. i. 14.

7 Cf. Prov. viii. s-

8 Cf. Prov. ix. 4.


486


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


live, and correct understanding in knowledge." '
This too would I say (seeing it bears on the
point),- in answer to the statement of Celsus :
Do not philosophers invite young men to their
lectures ? and do they not encourage young men
to exchange a wicked life for a better? and do
they not desire slaves to learn philosophy? Must
we find fault, then, with philosophers who have |
exhorted slaves to th« practice of virtue ? with
Pythagoras for having so done with Zamolxis,
Zeno with Perseus, and with those who recently
encouraged Epictetus to the study of philoso-
phy? Is it indeed permissible for you, O Greeks,
to call youths and slaves and foolish persons to
the study of philosophy, but if lue do so, we do
not act from philanthropic motives in wishing
to heal every rational nature with the medicine
of reason, and to bring them into fellowship
with God, the Creator of all things ? These re-
marks, then, may suffice in answer to what are
slanders rather than accusations ^ on the part of
Celsus.

CHAP. LV.

But as Celsus dehghts to heap up calumnies
against us, and, in addition to those which he
has already uttered, has added others, let us ex-
amine these also, and see whether it be the Chris-
tians or Celsus who have reason to be ashamed
of what is said. He asserts, " We see, indeed,
in private houses workers in wool and leather,
and fullers, and persons of the most uninstructed
and rustic character, not venturing to utter a
word in tl^ presence of their elders and wiser
masters ; ^ but when they get hold of the children
privately, and certain women as ignorant as them-
selves, they pour forth wonderful statements, to
the effect that they ought not to give heed to
their father and to their teachers, but should
obey them ; that the former are foolish and stu-
pid, and neither know nor can perform anything
that is really good, being preoccupied with empty
trifles ; that they alone know how men ought to
live, and that, if the children obey them, they
will both be happy themselves, and will make
their home happy also. And while thus speak-
ing, if they see one of the instructors of youth
approaching, or one of the more intelligent class,
or even the father himself, the more timid among
them become afraid, while the more forward in-
cite the children to throw off the yoke, whisper-
ing that in the presence of father and teachers
they neither will nor can explain to them any
good thing, seeing they turn away with aversion


' Cf. Prov. ix. 5, 6.

3 Aot6opta? fj.a\Kov rj KaTTjyopta?.

''■ The allusion is to the practice of wealthy Greeks and Romans
having among their slaves artificers of various kinds, for whose ser-
vice there was constant demand in the houses and villas of the rich,
and who therefore had their residence in or near the dwelling of their
master. Many of these artificers seem, from the language of Celsus,
to have been converts to Christianity.


from the silliness and stupidity of such persons
as being altogether corrupt, and far advanced in
wickedness, and such as would inflict punishment
upon them ; but that if they wish (to avail them-
selves of their aid,) they must leave their father
and their instructors, and go with the women
and their playfellows to the women's apartments,
or to the leather shop, or to the fuller's shop,
that they may attain to perfection ; — and by
words Uke these they gain them over."

CHAP. LVI.

Observe now how by such statements he de-
preciates those amongst us who are teachers of
the word, and who strive in every way to raise
the soul to the Creator of all things, and who
show that we ought to despise things "sensible,"
and " temporal," and " visible," and to do our
utmost to reach communion with God, and the
contemplation of things that are " intelligent,"
and " invisible," and a blessed life with God,
and the friends of God ; comparing them to
" workers in wool in private houses, and to
leather-cutters, and to fullers, and to the most
rustic of mankind, who carefully incite young
boys to wickedness, and women to forsake their
fathers and teachers, and follow them." Now
let Celsus point out from what wise parent, or
from what teachers, we keep away children and
women, and let him ascertain by comparison
among those children and women who are ad-
herents of our doctrine, whether any of the
opinions which they formerly heard are better
than ours, and in what manner we draw away
children and women from npble and venerable
studies, and incite them to worse things. But
he will not be able to make good any such
charge against us, seeing that, on the contrary, we
turn away women from a dissolute life, and from
being at variance with those with whom they
live, from all mad desires after theatres and
dancing, and from superstition ; while we train
to habits of self-restraint boys just reaching the
age of puberty, and feeling a desire for sexual
pleasures, pointing out to them not only the dis-
grace which attends those sins, but also the state
to which the soul of the wicked is reduced
through practices of that kind, and the judg-
ments which it will suffer, and the punishments
which will be inflicted.

CHAP. LVII.

But who are the teachers whom we call triflers
and fools, whose defence is undertaken by Cel-
sus, as of those who teach better things? (I
know not,) unless he deem those to be good
instructors of women, and no triflers, who invite
them to superstition and to unchaste spectacles,
and those, moreover, to be teachers not devoid


Chap. LIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


487


of sense who lead and drag the young men to
all those disorderly acts which we know are
often committed by them. We indeed call
away these also, as far as we can, from the dog-
mas of philosophy to our worship of God, by
showing forth its excellence aud purity. But as
Celsus, by his statements, has declared that we
do not do so, but that we call only the foolish,
I would say to him, " If you had charged us
with withdrawing from the study of philosophy
those who were already preoccupied with it, you
would not have spoken the truth, and yet your
charge would have had an appearance of proba-
bility ; but when you now say that we draw
away our adherents from good teachers, show
who are those other teachers save the teachers of
philosophy, or those who have been appointed
to give instruction in some useful branch of
study." '

He will be unable, however, to show any
such ; while we promise, openly and not in se-
cret, that they will be happy who live according
to the word of God, and who look to Him in all
things, and who do everything, whatever it is, as
if in the presence of God. Are these the in-
structions of workers in wool, and of leather-
cutters, and fullers, and uneducated rustics?
But such an assertion he cannot make good.

CHAP. LVIII.

But those who, in the opinion of Celsus, re-
semble the workers in wool in private houses,
and the leather-cutters, and fullers, and unedu-
cated rustics, will, he alleges, in the presence of
father or teachers be unwilling to speak, or una-
ble to explain to the boys anything that is good.
In answer to which, we would say. What kind of
father, my good sir, and what kind of teacher, do
you mean? If you mean one who approves of
virtue, and turns away from vice, and welcomes
what is better, then know, that with the greatest
boldness will we declare our opinions to the chil-
dren, because we will be in good repute with
such a judge. But if, in the presence of a fa-
ther who has a hatred of virtue and goodness,
we keep silence, and also before those who teach
what is contrary to sound doctrine, do not blame
us for so doing, since you will blame us without
good reason. You, at all events, in a case where
fathers deemed the mysteries of philosophy an
idle and unprofitable occupation for their sons,
and for young men in general, would not, in
teaching philosophy, make known its secrets
before worthless parents ; but, desiring to keep
apart those sons of wicked parents who had been
turned towards the study of philosophy, you
would observe the proper seasons, in order that


' napd(7TT70'Oi' T0U5 fitfiaa-KaAou? aAAou? irapa Toy? (/)tAo(70*/>ta9


the doctrines of philosophy might reach the
minds of the young men. And we say the same
regarding our teachers. For if we turn (our
hearers) away from those instructors who teach
obscene comedies and Hcentious iambics, and
many other things which neither improve the
speaker nor benefit the hearers (because the
latter do not know how to listen to poetry in a
philosophic frame of mind, nor the former how
to say to each of the young men what tends to
his profit), we are not, in following such a
course, ashamed to confess what we do. But if
you will show me teachers who train young men
for philosophy, and who exercise them in it, I
will not from such turn away young men, but
will try to raise them, as those who have been
previously exercised in the whole circle of learn-
ing and in philosophical subjects, to the venera-
ble and lofty height of eloquence which lies hid'
from the multitude of Christians, where are dis-
cussed topics of the greatest importance, and
where it is demonstrated and shown that they
have been treated philosophically both by the
prophets of God and the apostles of Jesus.


Immediately after this, Celsus, perceiving that
he has slandered us with too great bitterness, as
if by way of defence expresses himself as fol-
lows : " That I bring no heavier charge than
what the truth compels me, any one may see
from the following remarks. Those who invite
to participation in other mysteries, make procla-
mation as follows : ' Every one who has clean
hands, and a prudent tongue ; ' ^ others again
thus : ' He who is pure from all pollution, and
wliose soul is conscious of no evil, and who has
lived well and justly.' Such is the proclamation
made by those who promise purification from
sins.3 But let us hear what kind of persons
these Christians invite. Every one, they say,
who is a sinner, who is devoid of understand-
ing, who is a child, and, to speak generally,
whoever is unfortunate, him will the kingdom of
God receive. Do you not call him a sinner,
then, who is unjust, and a thief, and a house-
breaker, and a poisoner, and a committer of sac-
rilege, and a robber of the dead ? What others
would a man invite if he were issuing a procla-
mation for an assembly of robbers?" Now, in
answer to such statements, we say that it is not
the same thing to invite those who arc sick in
soul to be CKi-cii, and those who are /// health to
the knowledge and study of divine things. We,
however, keeping both these things in view, at
first invite all men to be healed, and exhort those


2 i,mvr\v truvtrft';.

J [Much is to be Rathered from this and the following chapters,
of the evangelical character of primitive preaching and discipline.]


488


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


who are sinners to come to the consideration of
the doctrines which teach men not to sin, and
those who are devoid of understanding to those
which beget wisdom, and those who are children
to rise in their thoughts to manhood, and those
who are simply ' unfortunate to good fortune,^ or
— which is the more appropriate term to use —
to blessedness.3 And when those who have been
turned towards virtue have made progress, and
have shown that they have been purified by the
word, and have led as far as they can a better
life, then and not before do we invite them to
participation in our mysteries. " For we speak
wisdom among them that are perfect." *


And as we teach, moreover, that " wisdom will
not enter into the soul of a base man, nor dwell
in a body that is involved in sin," 5 we say, Who-
ever has clean hands, and therefore lifts up holy
hands to God, and by reason of being occupied
with elevated and heavenly things, can say, "The
liftingiip of my hands is as the evening sacri-
fice,' ^et him come to us ; and whoever has a
wise tongue through meditating on the law of
the Lord day and night, and by " reason of habit
has his senses exercised to discern between good
and evil," let him have no reluctance in coming
to the strong and rational sustenance which is
adapted to those who are athletes in piety and
every virtue. And since the grace of God is
with all those who love with a pure affection the
teacher of the doctrines of immortality, whoever
is pure not only from all defilement, but from
what are regarded as lesser transgressions, let
him be boldly initiated in the mysteries of Jesus,
which properly are made known only to the holy
and the pure. The initiated of Celsus accord-
ingly says, " Let him whose soul is conscious of
no evil come." But he who acts as initiator,
according to the precepts of Jesus, will say to
those who have been purified in heart, " He
whose soul has, for a long time, been conscious
of no evil, and especially since he yielded him-
self to the healing of the word, let such an one
hear the doctrines which were spoken in private
by Jesus to His genuine disciples." Therefore
in the comparison which he institutes between
the procedure of the initiators into the Grecian
mysteries, and the teachers of the doctrine of
Jesus, he does not know the difference between
inviting the wicked to be healed, and initiat-
ing those already purified into the sacred mys-
teries !


2 fiiSaLfioviav.

3 /LtaKapioTT/Ta.

•♦ Cf. I Cor ii. 6.

5 Wisd. Solom. i. 4.

6 Cf. Ps. cxli. 2.


Not to participation in mysteries, then, and to
fellowship in the wisdom hidden in a mystery,
which God ordained before the world to the glory
of His saints,'' do we invite the wicked man, and
the thief, and the housebreaker, and the poisoner,
and the committer of sacrilege, and iht plunderer
of the dead, and all those others whom Celsus
may enumerate in his exaggerating style, but
such as these we invite to be healed. For there
are in the divinity of the word some helps
towards the cure of those who are sick, respect-
ing which the word says, " They that be whole
need not a physician, but they that are sick ; " *
others, again, which to the pure in soul and body
exhibit " the revelation of the mystery, which
was kept secret since the world began, but now
is made manifest by the Scriptures of the proph-
ets," 9 and " by the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ," '° which " appearing " is manifested to
each one of those who are perfect, and which
enlightens the reason" in the true '^ knowledge
of things. But as he exaggerates the charges
against us, adding, after his list of those vile in-
dividuals whom he has mentioned, this remark,
" What other persons would a robber summon to
himself by proclamation?" we answer such a
question by saying that a robber summons around
him individuals of such a character, in order to
make use of their villany against the men whom
they desire to slay and plunder. A Christian,
on the other hand, even though he invite those
whom the robber invites, invites them to a very
different vocation, viz., to bind up these wounds
by His word, and to apply to the soul, festering
amid evils, the drugs obtained from the word,
and which are analogous to the wine and oil, and
plasters, and other healing appliances which be-
long to the art of medicine.

CHAP. LXII.

In the next place, throwing a slur '^ upon the
exhortations spoken and written to those who
have led wicked lives, and which invite them to
repentance and reformation of heart, he asserts
that we say " that it was to sinners that God
has been sent." Now this statement of his is
much the same as if he were to find 'fault with
certain persons for saying that on account of the
sick who were living in a city, a physician had
been sent them by a very benevolent monarch.'*
God the Word was sent, indeed, as a physician


7 Cf. I Cor. ii. 7.

^ Matt. ix. 12.

9 Roin. xvi. 25, 26.
'° Cf. 2 Tim. i. 10.
'^ TO riyet^oviKov,

'3 a-vKoi^avrHiv,

^* [The reproaches of the scoffer are very instructive as to the real
nature of the primitive dealing with sinners and with sin. J


I


Chap. LXIV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


489


to sinners, but as a teacher of divine mysteries
to those who are already pure and who sin no
more. But Celsus, unable to see this distinc-
tion,— for he had no desire to be animated with
a love of truth, — remarks, " Why was he not
sent to those who were without sin? What evil
is it not to have committed sin? " To which we
reply, that if by those " who were without sin "
he means those who sin no more, then our Sav-
iour Jesus was sent even to such, but not as a
physician. While if by those " who were with-
out sin " he means such as have never at any
time sinned, — for he made no distinction in his
statement, — we reply that it is impossible for a
man thus to be without sin. And this we say,
excepting, of course, the man understood to be
in Christ Jesus,' who "did no sin." It is with
a malicious intent, indeed, that Celsus says of
us that we assert that " God will receive the
unrighteousness man if he humble himself on
account of his wickedness, but that He will not
receive the righteous man, although he look up
to Him, (adorned) with virtue from the begin-
ning." Now we assert that it is impossible for a
man to look up to God (adorned) with virtue
from the beginning. For wickedness must ne-
cessarily first exist in men. As Paul also says,
"When the commandment came, sin revived,
and I died."^ Moreover, we do not teach re-
garding the unrighteous man, that it is sufficient
for him to humble himself on account of his
wickedness in order to his being accepted by
God, but that God will accept him if, after pass-
ing condemnation upon himself for his past con-
duct, he walk humbly on account of it, and in a
becoming manner for the time to come.

CHAP. Lxrir.

After this, not understanding how it has been
said that "every one who exalted himself shall
be abased; "3 nor (although taught even by
jPlato) that " the good and virtuous man walketh
[humbly and orderly ; " and ignorant, moreover,
.that we give the injunction, " Humble your-
selves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God,
jthat He may exalt you in due time ; " •♦ he says
j:hat " those persons who preside properly over a
trial make those individuals who bewail before
[hern their evil deeds to cease from their piteous
mailings, lest their decisions should be deter-
nined rather by compassion than by a regard to
ruth ; whereas God does not decide in accord-
nce with truth, but in accordance with flat-
Jry." s Now, what words of flattery and piteous
^ailing are contained in the Holy Scriptures


when the sinner says in his prayers to God, " I
have acknowledged my sin, and mine iniquity
I have I not hid. I said, I will confess my trans-
j gression to the Lord," etc., etc. ? For is he able
i to show that a procedure of this kind is not
adapted to the conversion of sinners, who hum-
ble themselves in their prayers under the hand
of God ? And, becoming confused by his efforts
to accuse us, he contradicts himself; appearing
at one time to know a man " without sin," and
"a righteous man, who can look up to God
(adorned) with virtue from the beginning ; "
' and at another time accepting our statement
that there is no man altogether righteous, or
I without sin ;^ for, as if he admitted its truth, he
remarks, " This is indeed apparently true, that
somehow the human race is naturally inclined to
sin." In the next place, as if all men were not
invited by the word, he says, "All men. then,
without distinction, ought to be invited, since all
indeed are sinners." And yet, in the preceding
pages, we have pointed out the words of Jesus :
" Come unto Me, a// ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest." 7 A//
men, therefore, labouring and being heavy laden
on account of the nature of sin, are invited to
the rest spoken of in the word of God, " for God
sent His word, and healed them, and delivered
them from their destructions." *


CHAP. LXIV.

But since he says, in addition to this, " What
is this preference of sinners over others?" and
makes other remarks of a similar nature, we have
to reply that absolutely a sinner is not preferred
before one who is not a sinner ; but that some-
times a sinner, who has become conscious of his
own sin, and for that reason comes to repent-
ance, being humbled on account of his sins, is
preferred before one who is accounted a lesser
sinner, but who does not consider himself one,
but exalts himself on the ground of certain good
qualities which he thinks he possesses, and is
greatly elated on their account. And this is
manifest to those who are willing to peruse the
Gospels in a spirit of fairness, by the parable of
the publican, who said, " Be merciful to me a
sinner," 9 and of the Pharisee who boasted with
a certain wicked self-conceit in the words, " I
thank Thee that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
publican." '° For Jesus subjoins to his narrative
of them both the words : " This man went down


uffefatpo/ieVou ToO Kara Toi' 'lijcrovv voovft-ivov avBpuinov
\ * Rom. vii. Q.
I 3 Cf. Matt xxiii. 12.

* 1 Pet. V. 6.

5 npos KoAoxeiac.


<> In the text it is put interrogatively: W? aiflpiuiTo<; rcAeo)?
5iicaio?; I) Ti? ai'ajiapTTjTo?; The allusion seems to be to Job xv. 14
(Sept.): T15 yap iov jSpoTo?, oTi eiTToi ajaefiirro?; i; lu? e<r6ixcyot
6iKa^o^; yerriiTbt yvvaiKO^;

7 Matt. xi. 28.

* Ps. cvii. 20.

9 Luke xviii. 13.
■° Luke xviii. 11.


490


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


to his house justified rather than the other : for
every one that exalteth himself shall be abased ;
and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." ■
We utter no blasphemy, then, against God,
neither are we guilty of falsehood, when we
teach that every man, whoever he may be, is
conscious of human infirmity in comparison with
the greatness of God, and that we must ever
ask from Him, who alone is able to supply our
deficiencies, what is wanting to our (mortal)
nature.

CHAP. LXV.

He imagines, however, that we utter these ex-
hortations for the conversion of sinners, because
we are able to gain over no one who is really
good and righteous, and therefore open our
gates to the most unholy and abandoned of men.
But if any one will fairly observe our assemblies,
we can present a greater number of those who
have been converted from not a very wicked life,
than of those who have committed the most
abominable sins. For naturally those who are
conscious to themselves of better things, desire
that those promises may be true which are de-
clared by God regarding the reward of the
righteous, and thus assent more readily to the
statements (of Scripture) than those do who
have led very wicked lives, and who are pre-
vented by their very consciousness (of evil) from
admitting that they will be punished by the
Judge of all with such punishment as befits those
who have sinned so greatly, and as would not be
inflicted by the Judge of all contrary to right
reason.* Sometimes, also, when very abandoned
men are willing to accept the doctrine of (future)
punishment, on account of the hope which is
based upon repentance, they are prevented from
so doing by their habit of sinning, being con-
stantly dipped,^ and, as it were, dyed ■* in wicked-
ness, and possessing no longer the power to turn
from it easily to a proper life, and one regulated
according to right reason. And although Celsus
observes this, he nevertheless, I know not why,
expresses himself in the following terms : " And
yet, indeed, it is manifest to every one that no
one by chastisement, much less by merciful treat-
ment, could effect a complete change in those
who are sinners both by nature and custom, for
to change nature is an exceedingly difficult thing.
But they who are without sin are partakers of a
better life."

CHAP. LXVI.

Now here Celsus appears to me to have
committed a great error, in refusing to those


' Luke xviii. 14.

2 Kai ov wapa tov opBov Xoyov TTpotrayoiro irjrb Tou kirX -rracn
SiKacTTov. [See infra, book iv. cap. Ixxix, and Elucidations there
named.]

^ [t'lri^di/ojs ^e^a;lx;u.e■^'Ol. S.]

* [locTTreyel i>ivcfO■^o\.y\Stv^i^ uffb t^s xaKias. S.]


who are sinners by nature, and also by habit,
the possibility of a complete transformation,
alleging that they cannot be cured even by
punishment. For it clearly appears that all
men are inclined to sin by nature,5 and some
not only by nature but by practice, while not all
men are incapable of an entire transformation.
For there are found in every philosophical sect,
and in the word of God, persons who are related
to have undergone so great a change that they
may be proposed as a model of excellence of
life. Among the names of the heroic age some
mention Hercules and Ulysses, among those of
later times, Socrates, and of those who have
lived very recently, Musonius,^ Not only against
us, then, did Celsus utter the calumny, when he
said that " it was manifest to every one that
those who were given to sin by nature and habit
could not by any means — even by punishments
— be completely changed for the better," but
also against the noblest names in philosophy,
who have not denied that the recovery of virtue
was a possible thing for men. But although he
did not express his meaning with exactness, we
shall nevertheless, though giving his words a
more favourable construction, convict him of
unsound reasoning. For his words were : " Those
who are inclined to sin by. nature and habit, no
one could completely reform even by chastise-
ment ; " and his words, as we understood them,
we refuted to the best of our ability. ^

CHAP. LXVII.

It is probable, however, that he meant to con-
vey some such meaning as this, that those who
were both by nature and habit given to the com-
mission of those sins which are committed by
the most abandoned of men, could not be com-
pletely transformed even by punishment. And
yet this is shown to be false from the history of
certain philosophers. For who is there that
would not rank among the mast abandoned of
men the individual who somehow submitted to
yield himself to his master, when he placed him
in a brothel,^ that he might allow himself to be
polluted by any one who liked ? And yet such
a circumstance is related of Pheedo ! And who
will not agree that he who burst, accompanied
with a flute-player and a party of revellers, his
profligate associates, into the school of the ven-
erable Xenocrates, to insult a man who was
the admiration of his friends, was not one of
the greatest miscreants ^ among mankind ? Yet,
notwithstanding this, reason was powerful enough


i [Let us note this in passing, as balancing some other expres-
sions which could not have been used after the Pelagian controversy-J

6 He is .said to have been either a Babylonian or Tyrrhenian, and
to have lived in the rein of Nero. Cf. Philostratus, iv. 12 — Ri;^us.

7 (cat TO i^a.it.ov6)i.(.vov a-no T^s At Jeuj?, ojs ivva^ov rifi.i.v, ive-
Tpe\pafj.ev.

8 en'i Teyovq. [" Ut qnidam scripserunt," says Hoffmann.J

9 fj.LaLpu}Ta.Tov ai'^pajTrtur.


Chap. LXIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


491


to effect their conversion, and to enable tliem to
make sucli progress in pliilosophy, that the one
was deemed worthy by Plato to recount the dis-
course of Socrates on immortality, and to record
his firmness in prison, when he evinced his con-
tempt of the hemlock, and with all fearlessness
and tranquillity of mind treated of subjects so
numerous and important, that it is difficult even
for those to follow them who are giving their
utmost attention, and who are disturbed by no
distraction ; while Polemon, on the other hand,
who from a profligate became a man of most
temperate life, was successor in the school of
Xenocrates, so celebrated for his venerable char-
acter. Celsus then does not speak the truth
when he says " that sinners by nature and habit
cannot be completely reformed even by chastise-
ment."

CHAP. LXVIII.

That philosophical discourses, however, dis-
tinguished by orderly arrangement and elegant
expression,' should produce such results in the
case of those individuals just enumerated, and
upon others ^ who have led wicked lives, is
not at all to be wondered at. But when we
consider that those discourses, which Celsus
terms " vulgar," ^ are filled with power, as if
they were spells, and see that they at once con-
vert multitudes from a life of licentiousness to
one of extreme regularity,'' and from a life of
wickedness to a better, and from a state of cow-
ardice or unmanliness to one of such high-toned
courage as to lead men to despise even death
through the piety which shows itself within them,
why should we not justly admire the power which
they contain ? For the words of those who at
the first assumed the office of (Christian) am-
bassadors, and who gave their labours to rear
up the Churches of God, — nay, their preach
ing also, — were accompanied with a persuasive
power, though not like that found among those
who profess the philosophy of Plato, or of any
.other merely human philosopher, which possesses
no other qualities than those of human nature.
But the demonstration which followed the words
of the apostles of Jesus was given from God, and
was accredited 5 by the Spirit and by power.
And therefore their \\ot(\ ran swiftly and speedily,
ior rather the word of God through their instru-
jmentality, transformed numbers of persons who
had been sinners both by nature and habit, whom
mo one could have reformed by punishment, but
iwho were changed by the word, which moulded
lind transformed them according to its pleasure.


' 'AAAd jr\v fxkv Toi^ii' Koi (TvuditXLU Kai (fipdaLf Twv ctTrb (^lAo-
0(i)ia<; Ao-yuii'.

' The reading in the text is aAAw?, for which aAAov? has been
onjectured by Ruasus and Hoherellus, and which has been adopted
u the translation.


CHAP. LXIX.

Celsus continues in his usual manner, assert-
ing that " to change a nature entirely is exceed-
ingly difficult." We, however, who know of only
one nature in every rational soul, and who main-
tain that none has been created evil by the Author
of all things, but that many have become wicked
through education, and perverse example, and
surrounding influences,'^ so that wickedness has
been naturalized ^ in some individuals, are per-
suaded that for the word of God to change a
nature in which evil has been naturali/.ed is not
only not impossible, but is even a work of no
very great difficulty, if a man only believe that
he must entrust himself to the God of all things,
and do everything with a view to please Him
with whom it cannot be *^ that

" Both good and bad are in the same honour,
Or that the idle man and he who laboured much
Perish alike." 9

But even if it be exceedingly difficult to effect a
change in some persons, the cause must be held
to lie in their own will, which is reluctant to
accept the belief that the God over all things is
a just Judge of all the deeds done during life.
For deliberate choice and practice '° avail much
towards the accomplishment of things which
appear to be very difficult, and, to speak hyper-
bolically, almost impossible. Has the nature of
man, when desiring to walk along a rope extended
in the air through the middle of the theatre, and
to carry at the same time numerous and heavy
weights, been able by practice and attention to
accomplish such a feat; but when desiring to
live in conformity with the practice of virtue,
does it find it impossible to do so, although
formerly it may have been exceedingly wicked ?
See whether he who holds such views does not
bring a charge against the nature of the Creator
of the rational animal" rather than against the
creature, if He has formed the nature of man
with powers for the attainment of things of such
difficulty, and of no utility whatever, but has
rendered it incapable of securing its own bless-
edness. But these remarks may suffice as an
answer to the assertion that " entirely to change
a nature is exceedingly difficult." He alleges,
in the next place, that " they who are without
sin are partakers of a better life ; " not making
it clear what he means by " those who are with-
out sin," whether those who are so from the
beginning (of their lives), or those who become
so by a transformation. Of those ^\•ho were so
from the beginning of their lives, there cannot
possibly be any ; while those who are so after a

ical Tas ficaaTpoi/>ds, Kai Ta? 7repiTjx»jo-e«.


* euaTaflto-xaTO
5 iriffTtici) o-Tt'o


^ Trapa Ta? di'aTpo</>

7 <bv(rim9i)i'aL. _

8 [Trap' <0 OVK €<TTtl'.

9 Cf.


s.]


///«(/, ix. 319, 32
7rpoaiptcri?_icai a<TK>|(ris.
ToO KoyiKOV ^loou.


492


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


transformation (of heart) are found to be few in
number, being those who have become so after
giving in their allegiance to the saving word.
And they were not such when they gave in their
allegiance. For, apart from the aid of the word,
and that too the word of perfection, it is impos-
sible for a man to become free from sin.


In the next place, he objects to the statement,
as if it were maintained by us, that " God will
be able to do all things," not seeing even here
how these words are meant, and what " the all
things " are which are included in it, and how it
is said that God " will be able." But on these
matters it is not necessary now to speak ; for
although he might with a show of reason have
opposed this proposition, he has not done so.
Perhaps he did not understand the arguments
which might be plausibly used against it, or if
he did, he saw the answers that might be re-
turned. Now in our judgment God can do
everything which it is possible for Him to do
without ceasing to be God, and good, and wise.
But Celsus asserts — not comprehending the
meaning of the expression " God can do all
things " — " that He will not desire to do any-
thing wicked," admitting that He has ^\\q power,
but not the will, to commit evil. We, on the
contrary, maintain that as that which by nature
possesses the property of sweetening other things
through its own inherent sweetness cannot pro-
duce bitterness contrary to its own peculiar na-
ture,' nor that whose nature it is to produce
light through its being light can cause darkness ;
so neither is God able to commit wickedness, for
the power of doing evil is contrary to His deity
and its omnipotence. Whereas if any one among
existing things is able to commit wickedness from
being inclined to vvickedness by nature, it does
so from not having in its nature the ability not
to do evil.

CHAP. LXXI.

He next assumes what is not granted by the
more rational class of believers, but what per-
haps is considered to be true by some who are
devoid of intelligence, — viz., that " God, like
those who are overcome with pity, being Him-
self overcome, alleviates the sufferings of the
wicked through pity for their wailings, and casts
off the good, who do nothing of that kind, which
is the height of injustice." Now, in our judg-
ment, God lightens the suffering of no wicked
man who has not betaken himself to a virtuous
life, and casts off no one who is already good,
nor yet alleviates the suffering of any one who
mourns, simply because he utters lamentation, or


* loo-irep oil Siivarat to irec^uKcur yKvKa.iv(.i.v Tu y\vKU Tuyx'i'''"'
iriKpa^eiv, 7r;ipa Trjv aiiTov (noi-iji' aiTiav,


takes pity upon him, to use the word pity in its
more common acceptation.^ But those who
have passed severe condemnation upon them-
selves because of their sins, and who, as on that
account, lament and bewail themselves as lost,
so far as their previous conduct is concerned, and
who have manifested a satisfactory change, are
received by God on account of their repentance,
as those who have undergone a transformation
from a life of great wickedness. For virtue, tak-
ing up her abode in the souls of these persons,
and expelling the wickedness which had previous
possession of them, produces an oblivion of the
past. And even although virtue do not effect
an entrance, yet if a considerable progress take
place in the soul, even that is sufficient, in the
proportion that it is progressive, to drive out
and destroy the flood of wickedness, so that it
almost ceases to remain in the soul.

CHAP. LXXII.

In the next place, speaking as in the person
of a teacher of our doctrine, he expresses him-
self as follows : " Wise men reject what we say,
being led into error, and ensnared by their wis-
dom." In reply to which we say that, since
wisdom is the knowledge of divine and human
things and of their causes, or, as it is defined by
the word of God, " the breath of the power of
God, and a pure influence flowing from the glory
of the Almighty ; and the brightness of the ever-
lasting light, and the unspotted mirror of the
power of God, and the image of His goodness," ^
no one who was really wise would reject what is
said by a Christian acquainted with the princi-
ples of Christianity, or would be led into error,
or ensnared by it. For true wisdom does not
mislead, but ignorance does, while of existing
things knowledge alone is permanent, and the
truth which is derived from wisdom. But if,
contrary to the definition of wisdom, you call
any one whatever who dogmatizes with sophisti-
cal opinions wise, we answer that in conformity.
with what you call wisdom, such an one rejects
the words of God, being misled and ensnared
by plausible sophisms. And since, according to
our doctrine, wisdom is not the knowledge of
evil, but the knowledge of evil, so to speak, is
in those who hold false opinions and who are
deceived by them, I would therefore in such
persons term it ignorance rather than wisdom.

CHAP. LXXIII.

After this he again slanders the ambassador
of Christianity, and gives out regarding him that
he relates " ridiculous things," although he does
not show or clearly point out what are the things


2 iva KoivoTepov Tuj sAe'et ^p>}(r<<ifiai.

3 Cf. Wisd. of Solom. vii. 25, 26.


J


Chap. LXXV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


493


which he calls " ridiculous." And in his slan-
ders he says that " no wise man believes the
tospel, being driven away by the multitudes
who adhere to it." And in this he acts like one
who should say that owing to the multitude of
those ignorant persons who are brought into sub-
jection to the laws, no wise man would yield
obedience to Solon, for example, or to Lycurgus,
I or Zaleucus, or any other legislator, and espe-
i cially if by wise man he means one who is wise
(by living) in conformity with virtue. For, as
with regard to these ignorant persons, the legis-
lators, according to their ideas of utility, caused
them to be surrounded with appropriate guid-
ance and laws, so God, legislating through Jesus
Christ for men in all parts of the world, brings
to Himself even those who are not wise in the
way in which it is possible for such persons to
be brought to a better life. And God, well
knowing this, as we have already shown in the
preceding pages, says in the books of Moses :
"They have moved Me to jealousy with that
which is not God ; they have provoked Me to
anger with their idols : and I will move them
to jealousy with those which are not a people ; I
will provoke them to anger with a foolish na-
tion." ' And Paul also, knowing this, said, " But
God hath chosen the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise," ^ calling, in a general way,
wise all who appear to have made advances in
knowledge, but have fallen into an atheistic poly-
theism, since " professing themselves to be wise
they became fools, and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed
beasts, and creeping things." ^

CHAP. LXXIV.

He accuses the Christian teacher, moreover,
of " seeking after the unintelligent." In answer,
we ask, Whom do you mean by the " unintelli-
gent?" For, to speak accurately, every wicked
man is " unintelligent." If then by " unintelli-
gent" you mean the wicked, do you, in drawing
men to philosophy, seek to gain the wicked or
the virtuous?"* But it is impossible to gain the
virtuous, because they have already given them-
selves to philosophy. The wicked, then, (you
try to gain;) but if they are wicked, are they
"unintelligent?" And many such you seek to
win over to philosophy, and you therefore seek
the " unintelligent." But if I seek after those
who are thus termed " unintelligent," I act like
a benevolent physician, who should seek after the
sick in order to help and cure them. If, how-
ever, by " unintelligent " you mean persons who


are not clever,5 but the inferior class of men
intellectually,^ I shall answer that I endeavour to
improve such also to the best of my ability,
although I would not desire to build up the
Christian community out of such materials. For
I seek in preference those who are more clever
and acute, because they are able to comprehend
the meaning of the hard sayings, and of those
passages in the law, and prophecies, and Gos-
pels, which are expressed with obscurity, and
which you have despised as not containing any-
thing worthy of notice, because you have not
ascertained the meaning which they contain, nor
tried to enter into the aim of the writers.

CHAP. LXXV.

But as he afterwards says that " the teacher of
Christianity acts like a person who promises to
restore patients to bodily health, but who pre-
vents them from consulting skilled physicians,
by whom his ignorance would be exposed," we
shall inquire in reply, " What are the physicians
to whom you refer, from whom we turn away
ignorant individuals? For you do not suppose
that we exhort those to embrace the Gospel who
are devoted to philosophy, so that you would re-
gard the latter as the physicians from whom we
keep away such as we invite to come to the word
of God." He indeed will make no answer, be-
cause he cannot name the physicians ; or else
he will be obliged to betake himself to those of
them who are ignorant, and who of their own
accord servilely yield themselves to the worship
of many gods, and to whatever other opinions
are entertained by ignorant individuals. In
either case, then, he will be shown to have em-
ployed to no purpose in his argument the illus-
tration of " one who keeps others away from
skilled physicians." But if, in order to preserve
from the philosophy of Epicurus, and from such
as are considered physicians after his system,
I those who are deceived by them, why should we
I not be acting most reasonably in keeping such
! away from a dangerous disease caused by the
physicians of Celsus, — that, viz., which leads to
' the annihilation of providence, and the introduc-
j tion of pleasure as a good ? But let it be con-
j ceded that we do keep away those whom we
encourage to become our disciples from other
philosopher-physicians, — from the Peripatetics,
I for example, who deny the existence of provi-
I dence and the relation of Deity to man, — why
! shall we not piously train 7 and heal those who
I have been thus encouraged, persuading them to
devote themselves to the God of all things, and


' Cf. Deut. xxxii. ai.
" Cf. : Cor. i. 27.
' Rom. i. 22, 23.


5 Tni'i< ^T) fiTpfX<iT.

6 The reading in the text is rfpartoSfcTT^pou?, of which Ruacus
remarks, " Hie nullum h,^bet locum." KaTn^.tartpovt has been
conjectured instead, and has been adopted in the translation.

' For iucr</3«U in the text, Boherellus conjectures «utf-«/Jut.


494


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


free those who yield obedience to us from
the great wounds inflicted by the words of such
as are deemed to be philosophers? Nay, let it
also be admitted that we turn away from physi-
cians of the sect of the Stoics, who introduce a
corruptible god, and assert that his essence con-
sists of a body, which is capable of being changed
and altered in all its parts,' and who also main-
tain that all things will one day perish, and that
God alone will be left ; why shall we not even
thus emancipate our subjects from evils, and
bring them by pious arguments to devote them-
selves to the Creator, and to admire the Father
of the Christian system, who has so arranged
that instruction of the most benevolent kind, and
fitted for the conversion of souls,^ should be
distributed throughout the whole human race?
Nay, if we should cure those who have fallen
into the folly of believing in the transmigration
of souls through the teaching of physicians, who
will have it that the rational nature descends
sometimes into all kinds of irrational animals,
and sometimes into that state of being which is
incapable of using the imagination,^ why should
we not improve the souls of our subjects by
means of a doctrine which does not teach that
a state of insensibility or irrationalism is produced
in the wicked instead of punishment, but which
shows that the labours and chastisements inflicted
upon the wicked by God are a kind of medicines
leading to conversion ? For those who are intel-
ligent Christians,^ keeping this in view, deal with
the simple-minded, as parents do with very
young 5 children. We do not betake ourselves
then to young persons and silly rustics, saying to 1
them, " Flee from physicians." Nor do. we say,
" See that none of you lay hold of knowledge ; "
nor do we assert that " knowledge is an evil ; "
nor are we mad enough to say that " knowledge
causes men to lose their soundness of mind."
We would not even say that any one ever per-
ished through wisdom ; and although we give
instruction, we never say, " Give heed to me,"
but " Give heed to the God of all things, and to
Jesus, the giver of instruction concerning Him."
And none of us is so great a braggart ^ as to say
what Celsus put in the mouth of one of our
teachers to his acquaintances, " I alone will save
you." Observe here the lies which he utters
against us ! Moreover, we do not assert that


• 9e.'ov rf>0apTov eia-ayovTuiv, Kal rrjv ovcriav avTOv kiyovriav trtotia
TpenToi' SloAou Kat aAAottoTov Kal fj.eTaj3\Tr]T6v,

2_The words in the text are, (tuAavefxunoTaTa iiriaTpeitTiKoy, Ka\
ijjvx^v fia6qij.aTa oiicovo|U.)j<rarTa, for which we have adopted in the
translation the emendation of Boherellus, (t>i\ai'6pujnoTaTa xai kIivxujv
€7rio-Tpe7rTl(ca ixa6riiJ.aTa.

3 aAAct Kav Toi'S TmrovdoTa^ ttji' Trept T^? p.cT€vtroifxaTui(T€tj}^ avoiav
airb iaTpuiv, tmv KaTa^i^a^ovruiv Trji' Aoyiictir' i^uati' ore p-Cr eiii Trji'
dAo-yoi' TTacraj'. ore §€ ^ai cttI tjjj' a.4}dvTa(TT0U,

* Instead of oi ibpnf' uo<; Xpio-rtaroi ^(bi'rf<;,as in the text, Rua;Js
and Boherellus conjecture o. (^povi/aws XpKrTtaniofTes, etc.

5 Tous KO/xt6y/ yijnLOVS,

6 aAa^u)^.


" true physicians destroy those whom they prom-
ise to cure."

CHAP. LXXVI.

And he produces a second illustration to our
disadvantage, saying that " our teacher acts like
a drunken man, who, entering a company of
drunkards, should accuse those who are sober
of being drunk." But let him show, say from
the writings of Paul, that the apostle of Jesus
gave way to drunkenness, and that his words
were not those of soberness ; or from the writ-
ings of John, that his thoughts do not breathe
a spirit of temperance and of freedom from the
intoxication of evil. No one, then, who is of
sound mind, and teaches the doctrines of Chris-
tianity, gets drunk with wine ; but Celsus utters
these calumnies against us in a spirit very unlike
that of a philosopher. Moreover, let Celsus say
who those " sober " persons are whom the am-
bassadors of Christianity accuse. For in our
judgment all are intoxicated who address them-
selves to inanimate objects as to God. And why
do I say " intoxicated ? " " Insane " would be
the more appropriate word for those who hasten
to temples and worship images or animals as
divinities. And they too are not less insane who
think that images, fashioned by men of worthless
and sometimes most wicked character, confer
any honour upon genuine divinities.^

CHAP. LXXVII.

He next likens our teacher to one suffering
from ophthalmia, and his disciples to those sulTer-
ing from the same disease, and says that " such
an one amongst a company of those who are
afflicted with ophthalmia, accuses those who are
sharp-sighted of being blind." Who, then, would
we ask, O Greeks, are they who in our judgment
do not see, save those who are unable to look
up from the exceeding greatness of the world
and its contents, and from the beauty of created
things, and to see that they ought to worship,
and admire, and reverence Him alone who made
these things, and that it is not befitting to treat
with reverence anything contrived by man, and
applied to the honour of God, whether it be
without a reference to the Creator, or with one?**
For, to compare with that illimitable excellence,
which surpasses all created being, things which
ought not to be brought into comparison with it,
is the act of those whose understanding is dark-
ened. We do not then say that those who are


7 [See vol. iii. Elucidation I. p. 76, this series: and as against the
insanity of the Deutero-Nicene Council (a.d 787) note this pro-
phetic protest. Condemned at Frankfort (a.d. 794) by Anglicans
and Galileans. See Sir W. Palmer, Treatise on the Church, part


IV. 10, sect. 4. The Council of Frankfort is the pivot of history m^
the division between East and West, the rise of Gallicanism, and of the
.Anglican Reformation.]

^ etTe \^^ip\.<i ToO btjixLOvpyov 0eov


J


Chap. LXXX.]


ORIGEN ACxAINST CELSUS.


495


sharp-sighted are suffering from ophthalmia or
blindness ; but we assert that those who, in igno-
rance of Ood, give themselves to temples and
images, and so-called sacred seasons,' are blinded
in their minds, and especially when, in addition
to their impiety, they live also in licentiousness, '
not even inciuiring after any honourable work
whatever, but doing everything that is of a dis-
graceful character.

CHAP. LXXVIII,

After having brought against us charges of so
serious a kind, he wishes to make it appear that,
although he has others to adduce, he passes
them by in silence. His words are as follows :
" These charges I have to bring against them,
and others of a similar nature, not to enumerate
them one by one, and I affirm that they are in
error, and that they act insolently towards God,
in order to lead on wicked men by empty hopes,
and to persuade them to despise better things,
saying that if they refrain from them it will be
better for them." In answer to which, it might
be said that from the power which shows itself
in those who are converted to Christianity, it is
not at all the " wicked " who are won over to
the Gospel, as' the more simple class of persons,
and, as many would term them, the " unpol-
ished." ^ For such individuals, through fear of
the punishments that are threatened, which
arouses and exhorts them to refrain from those
actions which are followed by punishments,
strive to yield themselves up to the Christian !
religion, being influenced by the power of the i
word to such a degree, that through fear of what
are called in the word " everlasting punish-
ments," they despise all the tortures which are
devised against them among men, — even death
itself, with countless other evils, — which no
wise man would say is the act of persons of
wicked mind. How can temperance and sober-
mindedness, or benevolence and liberality, be
practised by a man of wicked mind ? Nay, even
I the fear of God cannot be felt by such an one,
\ with respect to which, because it is useful to the
I many, the Gospel encourages those who are not [
1 yet able to choose that which ought to be chosen |
I for its own sake, to select it as the greatest bless- j
i ing, and one above all promise ; for this princi-
1 pie cannot be implanted in him who preters to ;
live in wickedness.

j CHAP. LXXIX.

1 But if in these matters any one were to ima-
I gine that it is superstition rather than wickedness
j which appears in the multitude of those who be-
I lieve the word, and should charge our doctrine


'^ ifpofiiji'ia?.

- The reading in the text is kojuiJ/oi, which is so opposed to the
sense of the pass:>ge, th.it the conjecture of Guietus, axo/un/yoi, has
beta aJoptcJ in the translation.


with making men superstitious, we shall answer
him by saying that, as a certain legislator-^ replied
to the question of one who asked him whether
he had enacted for his citizens the best laws,
that he had not given them absolutely the best,
but the best which they were capable of receiv-
ing ; so it might be said by the Father of the
Christian doctrine, I have given the best laws
and instruction for the improvement of morals
of which the many were capable, not threatening
sinners with imaginary labours and chastisements,
but with such as are real, and necessary to be
applied for the correction of those who offer re-
sistance, although they do not at all understand
the object of him who inflicts the punishment,
nor the effect of the labours. For the doctrine
of punishment is both attended with utility, and
is agreeable to truth, and is stated in olDscure
terms with advantage.-* Moreover, as for the
most part it is not the wicked whom the ambas-
sadors of Christianity gain over, neither do we
insult God. For we speak regarding Him both
what is true, and what appears to be clear to
the multitude, but not so clear to them as it is
to those few who investigate the truths of the
Gospel in a philosophical manner.

CHAP. LXXX.

Seeing, however, that Celsus alleges that
" Christians are won over by us through vain
hopes," we thus reply to him when he finds
fault with our doctrine of the blessed life, and
of communion with God : "As for you, good sir,
they also are won over by vain hopes who have
accepted the doctrine of Pythagoras and Plato
regarding the soul, that it is its nature to ascend
to the vaults of heaven, and in the super-celestial
space to behold the sights which are seen by the
ble jsed spectators above. According to you, O
Celsus, they also who have accepted the doctrine
of the duration of the soul (after death), and
who lead a life through which they become
heroes, and make their abodes with the gods,
are won over by vain hopes. Probably also they
who are persuaded that the soul comes (into the
body) from without, and that it will be with-
drawn from the power of death,-' would be said
by Celsus to be won over by empty hopes. Let
him then come forth to the contest, no longer
concealing the sect to which he belongs, but


3 [i.e., Solon. S.l

* [See Gieseler's ChurcJi History, vol. i. p. 212 (also 313), with
references there. I!ut see Elucidation IV. p. 77, vol. iii., this series,
and Elucidation at close of this book. See also Robertson's History
of the Church, vol. i. p. 156. S.]

* To)(a hi (toi oi -niiaSivrK; ntpi. ToC 9vpa8(f vov, w? Savarov
KaLi'ov &L(^aytoyr)v tfoi'To<;, etc. Locus certe obscurus, cui lucem
afferre conatur Boherellus, Icgendo divisim io<; daiarov Kai vou
Stf^ayujyriv efovTo?, ut sensus sit " morti etiam inentcm subductum
iri." Nam si fli/poeev ijicfi foO?, con.sequens est ut SttioToi) xm I'ou?
bK^ayujyrtv «xn. Cf. Aristot., lib. ii. c. 3, </<• ^iiteratioiu
liitin. — Sl'ENCER.


496


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book III.


confessing himself to be an Epicurean, and let
him meet the arguments, which are not lightly
advanced among Greeks and Barbarians, regard-
ing the immortality of the soul, or its duration
(after death), or the immortality of the thinking
principle ; ' and let him prove that these are
words which deceive with empty hopes those
who give their assent to them ; but that the ad-
herents of his philosophical system are pure from
empty hopes, and that they indeed lead to hopes
of good, or — what is more in keeping with his
opinions — give birth to no hope at all, on ac-
count of the immediate and complete destruc-
tion of the soul (after death). Unless, perhaps,
Celsus and the Epicureans will deny that it is a
vain hope which they entertain regarding their
end, — pleasure, — which, according to them, is
the supreme good, and which consists in the
permanent health of the body, and the hope
regarding it which is entertained by Epicurus.^

CHAP. LXXXI.

And do not suppose that it is not in keeping
with the Christian feligion for me to have ac-
cepted, against Celsus, the opinions of those
philosophers who have treated of the immortality
or after-duration of the soul ; for, holding certain
views in common with them, we shall more con-
veniently establish our position, that the future
life of blessedness shall be for those only who
have accepted the religion which is according to
Jesus, and that devotion towards the Creator of
all things which is pure and sincere, and un-
mingled with any created thing whatever. And
let him who likes show what " better things " we


* 1] Tq'; Tov vov auavaaia^,

2 Ei n'r) opa KeAcros xai oi 'Emicovpetot ov if>^crou<Ti Koucfuji'
elvai i\inSa. Tr)v Trepi Tou TeAous avTwi' T^? rj^ov^?, fJTts KaT
avTOu? icTL TO ayaObv, to Trjs aapicbs €v<TTa0ii KaTdaTrjiia, KoX
TO Trepi TavTJjs ttk/toi' 'Em,KOvpi^ «Ajrt(r/xo.


persuade men to despise, and let him compare
the blessed end with God in Christ, — that is,
the word, and the wisdom, and all virtue, —
which, according to our view, shall be bestowed,
by the gift of God, on those who have lived a
pure and blameless life, and who have felt a
single and undivided love for the God of all
things, with that end which is to follow accord-
ing to the teaching of each philosophic sect,
whether it be Greek or Barbarian, or according
to the professions of religious mysteries ; ^ and
let him prove that the end which is predicted
by any of the others is superior to that which we
promise, and consequently that that is true, and
ours not befitting the gift of God, nor those who
have lived a good life ; or let him prove that
these words were not spoken by the divine Spirit,
who filled the souls of the holy prophets. And
let him who likes show that those words which
are acknowledged among all men to be human,
are superior to those which are proved to be
divine, and uttered by inspiration.* And what
are the " better " things from which we teach
those who receive them that it would be better
to abstain? For if it be not arrogant so to
speak, it is self-evident that nothing can be
denied which is better than to entrust oneself to
the God of all, and yield oneself up to the doc-
trine which raises us above all created things,
and brings us, through the animate and living
word — which is also living wisdom and the Son
of God — to God who is over all. However, as
the third book of our answers to the treatise of
Celsus has extended to a sufficient length, we
shall here bring our present remarks to a close,
and in what is to follow shall meet what Celsus
has subsequently written.


3 Toj Ka9' exdcTTTji' <t>iKo<T6(j>u)t> aip((Tiv iv 'EAArjo
ri iiV(TT-qpiojSr^ enayyeAiay, Te'Aft.

* [Note the testimony to divine inspiration.]


1 ^ap^ipow,


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.

BOOK IV.


Having, in the three preceding books, fully
stated what occurred to us by way of answer to
the treatise of Celsus, we now, reverend Am-
brosius, with prayer to God through Christ, offer
this fourth book as a reply to what follows. And
we pray that words may be given us, as it is
written in the book of Jeremiah that the Lord
said to the prophet : " Behold, I have put My
words in thy mouth as fire. See, I have set thee
this day over the nations, and over the king-
doms, to root out and to pull down, and to de-
stroy, and to throw down, and to build and to
plant." ' For we need words now which will
root out of every wounded soul the reproaches
uttered against the truth by this treatise of Cel-
sus, or which proceed from opinions like his.
And we need'also thoughts which will pull down
all edifices based on false opinions, and espe-
cially the edifice raised by Celsus in his work,
i which resembles the building of those who said,
" Come, let us build us a city, and a tower whose
top shall reach to heaven."^ Yea, we even re-
quire a wisdom which will throw down all high
things that rise against the knowledge of God,3
and especially that height of arrogance which
Celsus displays against us. And in the next
place, as we must not stop with rooting out and
pulling down the hindrances which have just
been mentioned, but must, in room of what has
been rooted out, plant 'the plants of "God's hus-
bandry ; " 4 and in place of what has been pulled
down, rear up the building of God, and the
temple of His glory, — we must for that reason
pray also to the Lord, who bestowed the gifts
jnamed in the book of Jeremiah, that He may
jgrant even to us words adapted both for building
bp the (temple) of Christ, and for planting the
Spiritual law, and the prophetic words referring
|:o the same.5 And above all is it necessary to

' Cf Jer. i. 9, lo.

^ Cf Gen. XI. 4.

1 3 Cf. 2 Cor. X. 5.

* Cf. I Cor. iii. 9.

* Toil? di'dAoyoi' avTu 7rpo</)T)n(coi/j \6yovi.


show, as against the assertions of Celsus which
follow those he has already made, that the
prophecies regarding Christ are true predictions.
For, arraying himself at the same time against
both parties — against the Jews on the one hand,
who deny that the advent of Christ has taken
place, but who expect it as future, and against
Christians on the other, who acknowledge that
Jesus is the Christ spoken of in prophecy — he
makes the following statement : —


"But that certain Christians and (all) Jews
should maintain, the former that there /las al-
ready descended, the latter that there w/// de-
scend, upon the earth a certain God, or Son of
a God, who will make the inhabitants of the
earth righteous,^ is a most shameless assertion,
and one the refutation of which does not need
many words." Now here he appears to pro-
nounce correctly regarding not " certain " of the
Jews, but «// of them, that they imagine that
there is a certain (God) who will descend upon
the earth; and with regard to Christians, that
cei'tain of them say that He has already come
down. For he means those who prove from the
Jewish Scriptures that the advent of Christ has
already taken place, and he seems to know that
there are certain heretical sects which deny that
Christ Jesus was predicted by the prophets. In
the preceding pages, however, we have already
discussed, to the best of our ability, the question
of Christ having been the subject of prophecy,
and therefore, to avoid tautology, we do not re-
peat much that might be advanced upon this
head. Observe, now, that if he had wished
with a kind of apparent force ^ to subvert faith
in the prophetic writings, either with regard to
the future or past advent of Christ, he ought to
have set forth the prophecies themselves which
we Christians and Jews quote in our discussions
with each other. For in this way he would have


6 fiticaitoT^?.
' aKoAovdia;.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


appeared to turn aside those who are carried
away by the plausible character ' of the prophetic i
statements, as he regards it, from assenting to
their truth, and from believing, on account of,
these prophecies, that Jesus is the Christ ;
whereas now, being unable to answer the proph-
ecies relating to Christ, or else not knowing at
all what are the prophecies relating to Him, he
brings forward no prophetic declaration, although
there are countless numbers which refer to
Christ ; but he thinks that he prefers an accusa-
tion against the prophetic Scriptures, while he
does not even state what he himself would call
their " plausible character ! " He is not, how-
ever, aware that it is not at all the Jews who say
that Christ will descend as a God, or the Son of
a God, as we have shown in the foregoing pages.
And when he asserts that " he is said by us to
have already come, but by the Jews that his
advent as Messiah^ is still future," he appears
by the very charge to censure our statement as
one that is most shameless, and which needs no
lengthened refutation.


And he continues : " What is the meaning of
such a descent upon the part of God?" not
observing that, according to our teaching, the
meaning of the descent is pre-eminently to con-
vert what are called in the Gospel the lost "sheep
of the house of Israel ; " and secondly, to take
away from them, on account of their disobe-
dience, what is called the " kingdom of God,"
and to give to other husbandmen than the an-
cient Jews, viz., to the Christians, who will render
to God the fruits of His kingdom in due season
(each action being a " fruit of the kingdom ").3
We shall therefore, out of a greater number, se-
lect a k\v remarks by way of answer to the ques-
tion of Celsus, when he says, "What is the mean-
ing of such a descent upon the part of God?"
And Celsus here returns to himself an answer
which would have been given neither by Jews
nor by us, when he asks, " Was it in order to
learn \yhat goes on amongst men ? " For not one
of us asserts that it was in order to learn what
goes on amongst men that Christ entered into
this life. Immediately after, however, as if some
would reply that it was " in order to learn what
goes on among men," he makes this objection
to his own statement : " Does he not know all
things?" Then, as if we were to answer that
He (foes know all things, he raises a new ques-
tion, saying, "Then he does know, but does
not make (men) better, nor is it possible for
him by means of his divine power to make


(men) better." Now all this on his part is silly
talk ; ^ for God, by means of His word, which
is continually passing from generation to genera-
tion into holy souls, and constituting them friends
of God and prophets, does improve those who
listen to His words ; and by the coming of Christ
He improves, through the doctrine of Chris-
tianity, not those who are unwilling, but those
who have chosen the better life, and that which
is pleasing to God. I do not know, moreover,
what kind of improvement Celsus wished to take
place when he raised the objection, asking, " Is
it then not possible for him, by means of his
divine power, to make (men) better, unless he
send some one for that special purpose? "s
Would he then have the improvement to take
place by God's filling the minds of men with
new ideas, removing at once the (inherent)
wickedness, and implanting virtue (in its stead) ?^
Another person now would inquire whether this
was not inconsistent or impossible in the very
nature of things ; we, however, would say,
" Grant it to be so, and let it be possible."
Where, then, is our free will?? and what credit
is there in assenting to the truth ? or how is the
rejection of what is false praiseworthy? But
even if it were once granted that such a course
was not only possible, but could be accomplished
with propriety (by God), why would not one
rather inquire (asking a question like that of
Celsus) why it was not possible for God, by
means of His divine power, to create men who
needed no improvement, but who were of them-
selves virtuous and perfect, evil being altogether
non-existent? These questions may perplex ig-
norant and foolish individuals, but not him who
sees into the nature of things ; for if you take
away the spontaneity of virtue, you destroy its
essence. But it would need an entire treatise
to discuss these matters ; and on this subject the
Greeks have expressed themselves at great length
in their works on providence. They truly would
not say what Celsus has expressed in words, that
" God knows (all things) indeed, but does not
make (men) better, nor is able to do so by His
divine power." We ourselves have spoken in
many parts of our writings on these points to
the best of our ability, and the Holy Scriptures
have established the same to those who are able
to understand them.

CHAP. IV.

The argument which Celsus employs against
us and the Jews will be turned against himself


* TTiifavoTrjro';,

2 AiKaitoTtjs, not AiKO(rT))s.

3 Tov<; KapTTOu? tt)? toO 0eou /SatrtXei'a? airoSit>(TOV<Ti tuJ ©e<p, €v
TOis cKdcTTT)? Trpafeios ov<Tr)i KapiTOv Tij? jSacrtAcias Koipoit.


5 The word (Juo-ei which is found in the text seems out ol place,
and has'been omitted in the translation, agreeably to the emendation
of Boherellus. • ■ r> -

6 'Apa ydp ijetAe <f>avTa(Tiovixevoi.<: roU oi'Spoln-ot? viro Weoi/,
<i7reiAr)(/)6TOS ixiv oflpoius Tiji' Ko/ciav, «/n</)uoi'Tos &i Trjv dptTiJC, TiJC
iTrav6p6u><Ti.v yevitrdai. ;

' rrov ovp to e<j)' r^xlv ;


i


Chap. VI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


499


thus : My good sir, does the God who is over
all things know what takes place among men, or
does He not know? Now if you admit the
existence of a God and of providence, as your
treatise indicates. He must of necessity know.
And if He does know, why does He not make j
(men) better? Is it obligatory, then, on us to
defend God's procedure in not making men
better, although He knows their state, but not
equally binding on you, who do not distinctly
show by your treatise that you are an Epicurean,
but pretend to recognise a providence, to ex-
plain why God, although knowing all that takes
place among men, does not make them better,
nor by divine power liberate all men from evil ?
We are not ashamed, however, to say that God
is constantly sending (instructors) in order to
make men better ; for there are to be found
amongst men reasons ' given by God which
exhort them to enter on a better hfe. But there
are many diversities amongst those who serve
God, and they are few in number who are per-
fect and pure ambassadors of the truth, and who
produce a complete reformation, as did Moses
and the prophets. But above all these, great
was the reformation effected by Jesus, who de-
sired to heal not only those who hved in one
corner of the world, but as far as in Him lay,
men in every country, for He came as the
Saviour of all men.


The illustrious ^ Celsus, taking occasion I
know not from what, next raises an additional
objection against us, as if we asserted that " God
Himself will come down to men." He imagines
also that it follows from this, that " He has left
His own abode ; " for he does not know the
power of God, and that " the Spirit of the Lord
filleth the world, and that which upholdeth all
things hath knowledge of the voice." ^ Nor is
he able to understand the words, •' Do I not fill
heaven and earth? saith the Lord." * Nor does
he see that, according to the doctrine of Chris-
tianity, we all " in Him live, and move, and have
our being," s as Paul also taught in his address
to the Athenians ; and therefore, although the
God of the universe should through His own
power descend with Jesus into the life of men,
and although the Word which was in the begin-
ning with God, which is also God Himself, should
come to us. He does not give His place or vacate
His own seat, so that one place should be empty
of Him, and another which did not formerly
contain Him be filled. But the power and


01 yap (TTi. Ta )3e'ATi<TTa TrpoKaAoufiei'
fie^uKOTo?, (icriv iv i.vQpmnoi';.
2 ■yei'i'ttioTaTO?.
3_Wisd. Solom. i. 7, xal to <ruvix°v ">

* Cf. Jer. xxiii. 24.
5 Cf. Acts .wii. 28.


Aoyot, 0eoO outou?


TTai'Ta yi'cuai


divinity of God comes through him whom God
chooses, and resides in him in whom it finds a
place, not changing its situation, nor leaving its
own place empty and filling another : for, in
speaking of His quitting one place and occupy-
ing another, we do not mean such expressions,
to be taken topically ; but we say that the soul
of the bad man, and of him who is overwhelmed
in wickedness, is abandoned by God, while we
mean that the soul of him who wishes to live
virtuously, or of him who is making progress (in
a virtuous life), or who is already living conform-
ably thereto, is filled with or becomes a partaker
of the Divine Spirit. It is not necessary, then,
for the descent of Christ, or for the coming of
God to men, that He should abandon a greater
seat, and that things on earth should be changed,
as Celsus imagines when he says, " If you were
to change a single one, even the least, of things
on earth, all things would be overturned and
disappear." And if we must speak of a change
in any one by the appearing of the power of
God, and by the entrance of the word among
men, we shall not be reluctant to speak of chan-
ging from a wicked to a virtuous, from a disso-
lute to a temperate, and from a superstitious to
a religious life, the person who has allowed the
word of God to find entrance into his soul.


But if you will have us to meet the most
ridiculous among the charges of Celsus, listen
to him when he says : " Now God, being un-
known amongst men, and deeming himself on
that account to have less than his due,*^ would
desire to make himself known, and to make
trial both of those who believe upon him and of
those who do not, like those of mankind who
have recently come into the possession of riches,
and who make a display of their wealth ; and
thus they testify to an excessive but very mortal
ambition on the part of God." ^ We answer,
then, that God, not being known by wicked
men, would desire to make Himself known, not
because He thinks that He meets with less than
His due, but because the knowledge of Him
will free the possessor from unhappiness. Nay,
not even with the desire to try those who do or
who do not believe upon Him, does He, by His
unspeakable and divine power. Himself take up
His abode in certain individuals, or send His
Christ ; but He does this in order to liberate
from all their wretchedness those who do believe
upon Him, and who accept His divinity, and
that those who do not believe may no longer
have this as a ground of excuse, viz., that their
unbelief is the consequence of their not having


toi Trapa toOt iKa-nov i\ti.v hoKuiv.

<addn€p ot i/cottAovtoi Twr avSpionwv imSfLKTtioi'Tfv, rroAAi^i'

coi Trdvv 9vTi)Ty)V <()iAoTinioi' tou Weoi) KaTafxapTvpouai..


500


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


heard the word of instruction. What argument,
then, proves that it follows from our views that
God, according to our representations, is " like
those of mankind who have recently come into
the possession of riches, and who make a display
of their wealth ? " For God makes no display
towards us, from a desire that we should under-
stand and consider His pre-eminence ; but de-
siring that the blessedness which results from
His being known by us should be implanted in
our souls. He brings it to pass through Christ,
and His ever-indwelling word, that we come to
an intimate fellowship ' with Him. No mortal
ambition, then, does the Christian doctrine tes-
tify as existing on the part of God.


I do not know how it is, that after the foolish
remarks which he has made upon the subject
which we have just been discussing, he should
add the following, that " God does not desire to
make himself known for his own sake, but be-
cause he wishes to bestow upon us the knowl-
edge of himself for the sake of our salvation, in
order that those who accept it may become vir-
tuous and be saved, while those who do - not
accept may be shown to be wicked and be pun-
ished." And yet, after making such a statement,
he raises a new objection, saying : "After so long
a period of time,^ then, did God now bethink
himself of making men live righteous lives,^ but
neglect to do so before?" To which we an-
swer, that there never was a time when God did
not wish to make men live righteous lives ; but
He continually evinced His care for the im-
provement of the rational animal,^ by affording
him occasions for the exercise of virtue. For
in every generation the wisdom of God, passing
into those souls which it ascertains to be holy,
converts them into friends and prophets of God.
And there may be found in the sacred book (the
names of) those who in each generation were
holy, and were recipients of the Divine Spirit,
and who strove to convert their contemporaries
so far as in their power.

CHAP. VIII.

And it is not matter of surprise that in certain
generations there have existed prophets who, in
the reception of divine influence, 5 surpassed, by
means of their stronger and more powerful (re-
hgious) life, other prophets who were their con-
temporaries, and others also who lived before
and after them. And so it is not at all wonder-
ful that there should also have been a time when


» OIKCIMO-IV.

3 SiKaLuicraL.

4 TO X.OyLKinf ^U30V,

5 iv T17 irapaSoxfl t^? SeidnjTos.


something of surpassing excellence ^ took up its
abode among the human race, and which was
distinguished above all that preceded or even
that followed. But there is an element of pro-
found mystery in the account of these things,
and one which is incapable of being received by
the popular understanding. And in order that
these difficulties should be made to disappear,
and that the objections raised against the advent
of Christ should be answered — viz., that, "after
so long a period of time, then, did God now be-
think himself of making men live righteous lives,
but neglect to do so before? " — it is necessary
to touch upon the narrative of the divisions (of
the nations), and to make it evident why it was,
that "when the Most High divided the nations,
when He separated the sons of Adam, He set
the bounds of the nations according to the num-
ber of the angels of God, and the portion of the
Lord was His people Jacob, Israel the cord of
His inheritance ; " ? and it will be necessary to
state the reason why the birth of each man took
place within each particular boundary, under
him who obtained the boundary by lot, and
how it rightly happened that " the portion of the
Lord was His people Jacob, and Israel the cord
of His inheritance," and why formerly the por-
tion of the Lord was His people Jacob, and
Israel the cord of His inheritance. But with
respect to those who come after, it is said to the
Saviour by the Father, " Ask of Me, and I will
give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy
possession." ^ For there are certain connected
and related reasons, bearing upon the djfferent
treatment of human souls, which are difficult to
state and to investigate.^


There came, then, although Celsus may not
wish to admit it, after the numerous prophets
who were the reformers of that well-known Israel,
the Christ, the Reformer of the whole world, who
did not need to employ against men whips, and
chains, and tortures, as was the case under
the former economy. For when the sower went
forth to sow, the doctrine sufficed to sow the
word everywhere. But if there is a time coming
which will necessarily circumscribe the duration
of the world, by reason of its having had a be-
ginning, and if there is to be an end to the world,
and after the end a just judgment of all things, it
will be incumbent on him who treats the decla-
rations of the Gospels philosophically, to estab-
lish these doctrines by arguments of all kinds,


6 efaipfToi/ Ti XPWa.

7 Deut. xxxii. 8, q (according to the LXX.).

8 Cf. Ps. ii. 8.

9 Eicrl yap Tit-es flp/xol Kal aKoXov9iai attarot Koi avexSf^yilTOl
nepi rr)i Kara Tas a.v6pu>nivai i^/vxas Sioi(j)6pov oiKovo/iias.


Chap. XII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


501


not only derived directly from the sacred Scrip-
tures, but also by inferences deducible from
them ; while the more numerous and simpler
class of believers, and those who are unable
to comprehend the many varied aspects of the
divine wisdom, must entrust themselves to God^
and to the Saviour of our race, and be con-
tented with His " ipse di.xit," ' instead of this or
any other demonstration whatever.


In the next place, Celsus, as is his custom,
having neither proved nor established anything,
proceeds to say, as if we talked of God in a man-
ner that was neither holy nor pious, that " it is
perfectly manifest that they babble about God in
a way that is neither holy nor reverential ; " and
he imagines that we do these things to excite
the astonishment of the ignorant, and that we do
not speak the truth regarding the necessity of
punishments for those who have sinned. And
accordingly he likens us to those who " in the
Bacchic mysteries introduce phantoms and ob-
jects of terror." With respect to the mysteries
of Bacchus, whether there is any trustworthy '
account of them, or none that is such, let the
Greeks tell, and let Celsus and his boon-com-
panions ^ listen. But we defend our own pro-
cedure, when we say that our object is to reform
the human race, either by the threats of punish-
ments which we are persuaded are necessary for
the whole world, ■♦ and which perhaps are not
without use 5 to those who are to endure them ;
or by the promises made to those who have lived
virtuous lives, and in which are contained the
statements regarding the blessed termination
which is to be found in the kingdom of God,
reserved for those who are worthy of becoming
His subjects.

CHAP. XI.

After this, being desirous to show that it is
nothing either wonderful or new which we state
regarding floods or conflagrations, but that, from
misunderstanding the accounts of these things
which are current among Greeks or barbarous
nations, we have accorded our belief to our own
Scriptures when treating of them, he writes as
follows : " The belief has spread among them,
from a misunderstanding of the accounts of these
occurrences, that after lengthened cycles of time,
and the returns and conjunctions of planets, con-
flagrations and floods are wont to happen, and
because after the last flood, which took place in
the time of Deucalion, the lapse of time, agreeably


' avTOq eiia.

2 [The word " reliable" is used here. I cannot let it stand, and
have supplied an English word instead].

3 cvyeiatriirai.

* TIU WaVTL.

5 ovK a;^p>j(TTou?. On Origen's views respecting rewards and
punishments, cf. Huet's Origeniana, book ii. question xi.


to the vicissitude of all things, requires a con-
flagration ; and this made them give utterance
to the erroneous opinion that God will descend,
bringing fire like a torturer." Now in answer to
this we say, that I do not understand how Celsus,
who has read a great deal, and who shows that
he has perused many histories, had not his atten-
tion arrested ^ by the antiquity of Moses, who is
related by certain Greek historians to have lived
about the time of Inachus the son of Phoroneus,
and is acknowledged by the Egyptians to be a
man of great antiquity, as well as by those who
have studied the history of the Phoenicians. And
any one who likes may peruse the two books of
Flavins Josephus on the antiquities of the Jews,
in order that he may see in what way Moses was
more ancient than those who asserted that floods
and conflagrations take place in the world after
long intervals of time ; which statement Celsus
alleges the Jews and Christians to have misun-
derstood, and, not comprehending what was said
about a conflagration, to have declared that
" God will descend, bringing fire like a torturer." ^


Whether, then, there are cycles of time, and
floods, or conflagrations which occur periodically
or not, and whether the Scripture is aware of
this, not only in many passages, but especially
where Solomon '^ says, " ^Vhat is the thing which
hath been? Even that which shall be. And
what is the thing which hath been done ? Even
that which shall be clone," 9 etc., etc., belongs
not to the present occasion to discuss. For it is
sufficient only to observe, that Moses and certain
of the prophets, being men of very great antiq-
uity, did not receive from others the statements
relating to the (future) conflagration of the
world ; but, on the contrary (if we must attend
to the matter of time '°), others rather misunder-
standing them, and not inquiring accurately into
their statements, invented the fiction of the same
events recurring at certain intervals, and differing
neither in their essential nor accidental (jualities."
But we do not refer either the deluge or the con-
flagration to cycles and planetary periods ; but
the cause of them we declare to be the exten-
sive prevalence of wickedness,'^ and its (conse-
quent) removal by a deluge or a conflagration.
And if the voices of the prophets say that God
" comes down," who has said, " Do I not fill
heaven and earth? saith the Lord," '^ the term


6 OVK CTre'crTTj.

7 fiiKT\v ^aaaviaTOV nvp <l>epiav.

8 [Note this testimony to the authorship of Kohdeth, and that it
is Scripture.]

9 Cf. Eccles. i. 9.

'o ei \pr^ eKidTTjaai'Ta Tor? xpovoii; tiTrfir.

I' ai't'jrAao-ai' Kara nepioSov; Tai;TdT7)Ta<;, Kai aTTOpaAAo

Toic 161015 JTOloi? Kai Toi? <Tvp.^ffi-nK6<TI.V aUTOlS.

'= KaKiav eirl irAtioi' xeopiiirn'.
'3 Cf. Jer. xxiii. 24.


50-


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


is used in a figurative sense. For God " comes
down " from His own height and greatness when
He arranges the affairs of men, and especially
those of the wicked. And as custom leads men
to say that teachers " condescend " ' to children,
and wise men to those youths who have just be-
taken themselves to philosophy, not by "descend-
ing " in a bodily manner; so, if God is said
anywhere in the holy Scriptures to " come
down," it is understood as spoken in conformity
with the usage which so employs the word, and
in like manner also with the expression " go
up.''^*

CHAP. XIII.

But as it is in mockery that Celsus says we
speak of " God coming down hke a torturer
bearing fire," and thus compels us unseasonably
to investigate words of deeper meaning, we shall
make a few remarks, sufficient to enable our
hearers to form an idea 3 of the defence which
disposes of the ridicule of Celsus against us, and
then we shall turn to what follows. The divine
word says that our God is " a consuming fire," +
and that " He draws rivers of fire before Him ; " 5
nay, that He even entereth in as "a refiner's fire,
and as a fuller's herb," ^ to purify His own peo-
ple. But when He is said to be a " consuming
fire," we inquire what are the things which are
appropriate to be consumed by God. And we
assert that they are wickedness, and the works
which result from it, and which, being figuratively
called " wood, hay, stubble," ^ God consumes as
a fire. The wicked man, accordingly, is said to
build up on the previously-laid foundation of
reason, "wood, and hay, and stubble." If, then,
any one can show that these words were differ-
ently understood by the writer, and can prove
that the wicked man literally'^ builds up "wood,
or hay, or stubble," it is evident that the fire
must be (understood to be material, and an object
of sense. But if, on the contrary, the works of
the wicked man are spoken of figuratively under
the names of " wood, or hay, or stubble," why
does it not at once occur (to inquire) in what
sense the word " fire " is to be taken, so that
"wood" of such a kind should be consumed?
for (the Scripture) says : "The fire will try each
man's work of what sort it is. If any man's work
abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward. If any man's work be burned,
he shall suffer loss." 9 But what work can be
spoken of in these words as being " burned,"
save all that results from wickedness? There-


2 [On this figure {anthropopathy) see vol. ii. p. 363, this series.]

3 yeOo-ai.

■• Cf. Deut. iv. 24, ix. 3.

5 Cf. Dan. vii. 10.

6 Cf. Mai. iii. 2.

^ Cf. I Cor. iii. 12.

^ (Tw/ixaTLKa)?.

9 Cf. I Cor. iii. 13-15.


fore our God is a " consuming fire " in the sense
in which we have taken the word \ and thus He
enters in as a " refiner's fire," to refine the ra-
tional nature, which has been filled with the lead
of wickedness, and to free it from the other im-
pure materials, which adulterate the natural gold
or silver, so to speak, of the soul.'° And, in like
manner, " rivers of fire " are said to be before
God, who will thoroughly cleanse away the evil
which is intermingled throughout the whole soul."
But these remarks are sufficient in answer to the
assertion, " that thus they were made to give
expression to the erroneous opinion that God
will come down bearing fire like a torturer."

CHAP. XIV.

But let us look at what Celsus next with great
ostentation announces in the following fashion :
"And again," he says, "let us resume the sub-
ject from the beginning, with a larger array of
proofs. And I make no new statement, but say
what has been long settled. God is good, and
beautiful, and blessed, and that in the best and
most beautiful degree.'^ But if he come down
among men, he must undergo a change, and a
change from good to evil, from virtue to vice,
from happiness to misery, and from best to
worst. Who, then, would make choice of such
a change ? It is the nature of a mortal, indeed,
to undergo change and remoulding, but of an
immortal to remain the same and unaltered.
God, then, could not admit of such a change."
Now it appears to me that the fitting answer has
been returned to these objections, when I have
related what is called in Scripture the " conde-
scension " '3 of God to human affairs ; for which
purpose He did not need to undergo a transfor-
mation, as Celsus thinks we assert, nor a change
from good to evil, nor from virtue to vice, nor
from happiness to misery, nor from best to worst.
For, continuing unchangeable in His essence.
He condescends to human affairs by the econo-
my of His providence. '•» We show, accordingly,
that the holy Scriptures represent God as un-
changeable, both by such words as " Thou art
the same," '5 and " I change not ; " '^ whereas the
gods of Epicurus, being composed of atoms, and,
so far as their structure is concerned, capable
of dissolution, endeavour to throw off the atoms
which contain the elements of destrucdon. Nay,
even the god of the Stoics, as being corporeal, at
one time has his whole essence composed of the
guiding principle '7 when the conflagration (of the


apyiipov, SoAtiJcrai/Twi',

'' [See note supra, cap. x. S.] _ .

'2 'o ©eos (xya.06<i ecTi, (cal KoAb;, Kal euSai'/oiMi', (cal ei' T<i)
KaWiarif) xai apC<TTu>.

^3 Kara^affcr.


** T7] TTpOl'OLa

15 Ps. cii. 27!

16 Mai. iii. 6.

17 rjyeixoviKOV.


TJJ OlKOVOflt


Chap. XVII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


503


world) takes place ; and at another, when a re-
arrangement of things occurs, he again becomes
partly material.' For even the Stoics were un-
able distinctly to comprehend the natural idea
of God, as of a being altogether incorruptible
and simple, and uncompounded and indivisible.

CHAP. XV.

And with respect to His having descended
among men, He was " previously in the form of
God ; " ^ and through benevolence, divested Him-
self (of His glory), that He might be capable
of being received by men. But He did not, I
imagine, undergo any change from " good to
evil," for " He did no sin; "^ nor from "virtue
to vice," for " He knew no sin." ^ Nor did He
pass from " happiness to misery," but He hum-
bled Himself, and nevertheless was blessed, even
when His humiliation was undergone in order to
benefit our race. Nor was there any change in
Him from " best to worst," for how can good-
ness and benevolence be of "the worst?" Is
it befitting to say of the physician, vvho looks on
dreadful sights and handles unsightly objects in
order to cure the sufferers, that he passes from
"good to evil," or from "virtue to vice," or from
"happiness to misery?" And yet the physician,
in looking on dreadful sights and handling un-
sightly objects, does not wholly escape the possi-
bility of being involved in the same fate. But
He who heals the wounds of our souls, through
the word of God that is in Him, is Himself in-
capable of admitting any wickedness. But if
the immortal God — the Word s — by assuming
a mortal body and a human soul, appears to
Celsus to undergo a change and transformation,
let him learn that the Word, still remaining
essentially the Word, suffers none of those things
which are suffered by the body or the soul ; but,
condescending occasionally to (the weakness of)
him who is unable to look upon the splendours
and brilliancy of Deity, He becomes as it were
flesh, speaking with a literal voice, until he who
has received Him in such a form is able, through
being elevated in some slight degree by the
teaching of the Word, to gaze upon what is, so
to speak, His real and pre-eminent appearance.^

CHAP. XVI.

For there are different appearances, as it were,
of the Word, according as He shows Himself to
each one of those who come to His doctrine ;


' The reading in the text is, en-l ^e'pou? yiverai auTTJs, which is
thus corrected by Guietus: €7riuepnc viverai aiiToc.

^ Cf. Phil. ii. 6, 7. ^

3 Cf. I Pet. ii. 22.

" Cf. 2 Cor. V. 21.
' 5 [Gieseler cites this chapter (and cap. xix. infra) to show that

' Origen taught that the Logos did not assume a human body. Could
I words be stronger to the contrary? "He becomes, as it were,
Jlesh," IS used below to guard against transmutation.]

° TrpoTi]yovixivr\v,


and this in a manner corresponding to the con-
dition of him who is just becoming a disciple, or
of him who has made a little progress, or of him
who has advanced further, or of him who has
already ?iear/y attained to virtue, or who has
even already attained it. And hence it is not
the case, as Celsus and those like him would
have it, that our God was transformed, and as-
cending the lofty mountain, showed that His real
appearance was something different, and far more
excellent than what those who remained below,
and were unable to follow Him on high, beheld.
For those below did not possess eyes capable of
seeing the transformation of the Word into His
glorious and more divine condition. But with
difficulty were they able to receive Him as He
was ; so that it might be said of Him by those
who were unable to behold His more excellent
nature : " We saw Him, and He had no form
nor comeliness ; but His form was mean,7 and
inferior to that of the sons of men." ^ And let
these remarks be an answer to the suppositions
of Celsus, who does not understand the changes
or transformations of Jesus, as related in the
histories, nor His mortal and immortal nature.^


But will not those narratives, especially when
they are understood in their proper sense, appear
far more worthy of respect than the story that
Dionysus was deceived by the Titans, and ex-
pelled from the throne of Jupiter, and torn in
pieces by them, and his remains being after-
wards put together again, he returned as it were
once more to life, and ascended to heaven ? Or
are the Greeks at liberty to refer such stories to
the doctrine of the soul, and to interpret them
figuratively, while the door of a consistent ex-
planation, and one everywhere in accord and
harmony with the writings of the Divine Spirit,
who had His abode in pure souls, is closed
against us ? Celsus, then, is altogether ignorant
of the purpose of our writings, and it is there-
fore upon his own acceptation of them that he
casts discredit, and not upon their real meaning ;
whereas, if he had reflected on what is appro-
priate '° to a soul which is to enjoy an everlasting
life, and on the opinion which we are to form of
its essence and principles, he would not so have
ridiculed the entrance of the immortal into a
mortal body, which took place not according
to the metempsychosis of Plato, but agreeably to
another and higher view of things. And he
would have observed one "descent," distin-
guished by its great benevolence, undertaken to
convert (as the Scripture mystically terms them)


9 [The transfiguration did not conflict with his mortal nature,
nor the incarnation with his immortality. \
'° Ti oKoAoueei.


504


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


the "lost sheep of the house of Israel," which
had strayed down from the mountains, and to
which the Shepherd is said in certain parables
to have gone down, leaving on the mountains
those "which had not strayed."

CHAP. XVIII.

But Celsus, lingering over matters which he
does not understand, leads us to be guilty of
tautology, as we do not wish even in appear-
ance to leave any one of his objections unex-
amined. He proceeds, accordingly, as follows :
" God either really changes himself, as these as-
sert, into a mortal body, and the impossibility
of that has been already declared ; or else he
does not undergo a change, but only causes the
beholders to imagine so, and thus deceives
them, and is guilty of falsehood. Now deceit
and falsehood are nothing but evils, and would
only be employed as a medicine, either in the
case of sick and lunatic friends, with a view to
their cure, or in that of enemies when one is
taking measures to escape danger. But no sick
man or lunatic is a friend of God, nor does God
fear any one to such a degree as to shun danger
by leading him into error." Now the answer
to these statements might have respect partly to
the nature of the Divine Word, who is God,
and partly to the soul of Jesus. As respects
the nature of the Word, in the same way as the
quality of the food changes in the nurse into
milk with reference to the nature of the child,
or is arranged by the physician with a view to
the good of his health in the case of a sick man,
or (is specially) prepared for a stronger man,
because he possesses greater vigour, so does God
appropriately change, in the case of each indi-
vidual, the power of the Word to which belongs
the natural property of nourishing the human
soul. And to one is given, as the Scripture terms
it, " the sincere milk of the word ; " and to an-
other, who is weaker, as it were, " herbs ; " and
to another who is full-grown, " strong meat."
And the Word does not, I imagine, prove false
to His own nature, in contributing nourishment
to each one, according as he is capable of re-
ceiving Him.' Nor does He mislead or prove
false. But if one were to take the change as
referring to the soul of Jesus after it had entered
the body, we would inquire in what sense the
term " change " is used. For if it be meant to
apply to its essence, such a supposition is inad-
missible, not only in relation to the soul of Jesus,
but also to the rational soul of any other being.
And if it be alleged that it suffers anything from
the body when united with it, or from the place
to which it has come, then what inconvenience ^


can happen to the Word who, in great benevo-
lence, brought down a Saviour to the human
race ? — seeing none of those who formerly pro-
fessed to effect a cure could accomplish so much
as that soul showed // could do, by what it per-
formed, even by voluntarily descending to the
level of human destinies for the benefit of our
race. And the Divine Word, well knowing this,
speaks to that effect in many passages of Scrip-
ture, although it is sufficient at present to quote
one testimony of Paul to the following eflect :
" Let this mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus ; who, being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but
made Himself of no reputation, and took upon
Him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men ; and being found in fashion as
a man, He humbled Himself, and became obe-
dient unto death, even the death of the cross.
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him,
and given Him a name which is above every
name." ^

CHAP. XIX.

Others, then, may concede to Celsus that God
does not undergo a change, but leads the specta-
tors to imagine that He does ; whereas we who
are persuaded that the advent of Jesus among
men was no mere appearance, but a real mani-
festation, are not affected by this charge of Cel-
sus. We nevertheless will attempt a reply,
because you assert, Celsus, do you not, that it
is sometimes allowable to employ deceit and
falsehood by way, as it were, of medicine?*
Where, then, is the absurdity, if such a saving
result were to be accomplished, that some such
events should have taken place? For certain
words, when savouring of falsehood, produce
upon such characters a corrective effect (hke
the similar declarations of physicians to their
patients), rather than when spoken in the spirit
of truth. This, however, must be our defence
against other opponents. For there is no absurd-
ity in Him who healed sick friends, healing the
dear human race by means of such remedies as
He would not employ preferentially, but only
according to circumstances.s The human race,
moreover, when in a state of mental alienation,
had to be cured by methods which the Word
saw would aid in bringing back those so afflicted
to a sound state of mind. But Celsus says also,
that " one acts thus towards enemies when tak-
ing measures to escape danger. But God does
not fear any one, so as to escape danger by lead-
ing into error those who conspire against him."
Now it is altogether unnecessary and absurd to
answer a charge which is advanced by no one


■ [Such are the accommodations reflected upon by Gieseler.
See Book III. cap. Ixxix., supra.}
2 ri uTo-nov,


Phil. ii. 5-9.

la, oTi oir 4>ri<;, u> Kf'Ao-e, los iv (fiap/J-aKOV


3 Phil. 11. 5-9.

4 6)Liujs 6' aTTo\oyrj(x6tJ.€da^ otl ov (^fl?» w KcAcre, (09 e
/ioipa Ti-OTe Si&OTai. XpijfSai Tip jrKavav Koi Tip i//eu£eo-9ai

5 iTporjyoviJ.iviai, oAA' ex 7repi<rTa<reu)S.


Chap. XXI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


505


against our Saviour. And we have already re-
plied, when answering other charges, to the state-
ment that " no one who is either in a state of
sickness or mental alienation is a friend of God."
For the answer is, that such arrangements have
been made, not for the sake of those who, being
already friends, afterwards fell sick or became
afflicted with mental disease, but in order that
those who were still enemies through sick-
ness of the soul, and alienation of the natural
reason, might become the friends of God. For
it is distinctly stated that Jesus endured all '
things on behalf of sinners, that He might free
them from sin, and convert them to righteous-
ness.

CHAP. XX.

In the next place, as he represents the Jews
accounting in a way peculiar to themselves for j
their belief that the advent of Christ among
them is still in the future, and the Christians as j
maintaining in their way that the coming of the |
Son of God into the life of men has already j
taken place, let us, as far as we can, briefly con- I
sider these points. According to Celsus, the 1
Jews say that " (human) life, being filled with |
all wickedness, needed one sent from God, that j
the wicked might be punished, and all things
purified in a manner analogous to the first deluge
which happened." And as the Christians are
said to make statements additional to this, it is
evident that he alleges that they admit these. '
Now, where is the absurdity in the coming of
one who is, on account of the prevailing flood
of wickedness, to purify the world, and to treat
every one according to his deserts? For it is
not in keeping with the character of God that
the diffusion of wickedness should not cease,
and all things be renewed. The Greeks, more-
over, know of the earth's being purified at cer-
tain times by a deluge or a fire, as Plato, too,
says somewhere to this eff'ect : " xA.nd when the
gods overwhelm the earth, purifying it with
water, some of them on the mountains," ' etc.,
etc. Must it be said, then, that if the Greeks
make such assertions, they are to be deemed
worthy of respect and consideration, but that if
kve too maintain certain of these views, which
ire (juoted with approval by the Greeks, they
:ease to be honourable ? And yet they who care

0 attend to the connection and truth of all our
ecords, will endeavour to establish not only the
intitiuity of the writers, but the venerable nature
)f their writings, and the consistency of their
leveral parts.

i CHAP. XXI.

1 But I do not understand how he can imagine
|he overturning of the tower (of Babel) to have
[appened with a similar object to that of the


' Cf. Plato in the Timceus, and book iii., de Legibus.


deluge, which effected a purification of the earth,
according to the accounts both of Jews and
Christians. For, in order that the narrative con-
tained in Genesis respecting the tower may be
held to convey no secret meaning, but, as Celsus
supposes, may be taken as true to the letter,^
the event does not on such a view appear to
have taken place for the purpose of purifying
the earth ; unless, indeed, he imagines that the
so-called confusion of tongues is such a purifica-
tory process. But on this point, he who has the
opportunity will treat more seasonably when his
object is to show not only what is the meaning
of the narrative in its historical connection, but
what metaphorical meaning may be deduced
from it.3 Seeing that he imagines, however, that
Moses, who wrote the account of the tower, and
the confusion of tongues, has perverted the story
of the sons of Aloeus,+ and referred it to the
tower, we must remark that I do not think any
one prior to the time of Homer s has mentioned
the sons of Aloeus, while I am persuaded that
what is related about the tower has been recorded
by Moses as being much older noj; only than
Homer, but even than the invention of letters
among the Greeks. Who, then, are the per-
verters of each other's narratives? Whether do
they who relate the story of the Aloadae pervert
the history of the time, or he who wrote the ac-
count of the tower and the confusion of tongues
the story of the Aloadje? Now to impartial
hearers Moses appears to be more ancient than
Homer. The destruction by fire, moreover, of
Sodom and Gomorrah on account of. their sins,
related by Moses in Genesis, is compared by
Celsus to the story of Phaethon, — all these
statements of his resulting from one blunder,
viz., his not attending to the (greater) antiquity
of Moses.'' For they who relate the story of
Phaethon seem to be younger even than Homer,
who, again, is much younger than Moses. We
do not deny, then, that the purificatory fire and
the destruction of the world took place in order
that evil might be swept away, and all things
be renewed ; for we assert that we have learned
these things from the sacred books of. the
prophets. But since, as we have said in the
preceding pages, the prophets, in uttering many
predictions regarding future events, show that
they have spoken the truth concerning many
things that are past, and thus give evidence of
the indwelling of the Divine Spirit, it is manifest
that, with respect to things still future, we should
repose faith in them, or rather in the Divine
Spirit that is in them.


2 <ra</)r)9.

3 'ETTai- TO TrpoKii\i.ivov }5 TrapacTT^crai Kol rd t^? kolto. t'ov t<
LO'i'Opta? rlva. €\ot Ao-yoi', xal Ta T»)? Trtpi ai/TOv avaywyrj*;,

* Otiis and Ephialtes. Cf. Smith's £>:ci. of Myth, ami I^iog.,

5 Cf. Horn., Odyss., xi. 305.

*> [Demonstrated by Justin, vol. i. pp. 277, 278, this series.]


5o6


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


CHAP. XXII.

But, according to Celsus, " the Christians,
making certain additional statements to those of
the Jews, assert that the Son of God has been
already sent on account of the sins of the Jews ;
and that the Jews having chastised Jesus, and
given him gall to drink, have brought upon them-
selves the divine wrath." And any one who likes
may convict this statement of falsehood, if it be
not the case that the whole Jewish nation was
overthrown within one single generation after
Jesus had undergone these sufferings at their
hands. For forty and two years, I think, after
the date of the crucifixion of Jesus, did the
destruction of Jerusalem take place. Now it
has never been recorded, since the Jewish nation
began to exist, that they have been expelled for
so long a period from their venerable temple-
worship ' and service, and enslaved by more
powerful nations ; for if at any time they ap-
peared to be abandoned because of their sins,
they were notwithstanding visited (by God),-
and returned to their own country, and recov-
ered their possessions, and performed unhindered
the observances of their law. One fact, then,
which proves that Jesus was something divine
and sacred, 3 is this, that Jews should have suf-
fered on His account now for a lengthened time
calamities of such severity. And we say with
confidence that they will never be restored to
their former condition.'* For they committed a
crime of the most unhallowed kind, in conspir-
ing against the Saviour of the human race in
that city wliere they offered up to God a worship
containing the symbols of mighty mysteries. It
accordingly behoved that city where Jesus under-
went these sufferings to perish utterly, and the
Jewish nation to be overthrown, and the invita-
tion to happiness offered them by God to pass to
others, — the Christians, I mean, to whom has
come the doctrine of a pure and holy worship,
and who have obtained new laws, in harmony
with the established constitution in all coun-
tries ; 5 seeing those which were formerly im-
posed, as on a single nation which was ruled by
princes of its own race and of similar manners,^
could not now be observed in all their entireness.

CHAP. XXIII.

In the next place, ridiculing after his usual
style the race of Jews and Christians, he com-
pares them all " to a flight of bats or to a swarm
of ants issuing out of their nest, or to frogs
holding council in a marsh, or to worms crawl-


' a-yto-Tfia?.

2 eTTe(TK0wri9rt(rav,

3 ©etdi' Tt Kai tepbv xprj^xa yeyov^vai Tou *lr](T0vv,

* 0V&' cLTTOKa.Ta.(jTa6ri(Tovra.i.. [A very bold and confident asser-
n this must have seemed sixteen hundred years ago.]

5 Ka'i ap/xo^oiTas t?/ TTavTaxov Ka6ecrTiu<IJj iroAireia.

6 VTTO oiKeiuiy Kal oixorjOtav,


ing together in the corner of a dunghill, and
quarrelling with one another as to which of
them were the greater sinners, and asserting that
God shows and announces to us all things before-
hand ; and that, abandoning the whole world,
and the regions of heaven,^ and this great earth,
he becomes a citizen^ among us alone, and to
us alone makes his intimations, and does not
cease sending and inquiring, in what way we
may be associated with him for ever." And in
his fictitious representation, he compares us to
" worms which assert that there is a God, and
that immediately after him, we who are made by
him are altogether like unto God, and that all
things have been made subject to us, — earth,
and water, and air, and stars, — and that all
things exist for our sake, and are ordained to be
subject to us." And, according to his represen- '\
tation, the worms — that is, we ourselves — say !
that " now, since certain amongst us commit sin, |
God will come or will send his Son to consume
the wicked with fire, that the rest of us may
have eternal life with him." And to all this he
subjoins the remark, that "such wranglings would
be more endurable amongst worms and frogs
than betwixt Jews and Christians."

CHAP. XXIV,

In reply to these, we ask of those who accept
such aspersions as are scattered against us, Do
you regard all men as a collection of bats, or as
frogs, or as worms, in consequence of the pre-
eminence of God? or do you not include the
rest of mankind in this proposed comparison,
but on account of their possession of reason,
and of the established laws, treat fheni as men,
while you hold cheap 9 Christians and Jews,
because their opinions are distasteful to you, i
and compare them to the animals above men- ,
tioned ? And whatever answer you may return ,
to our question, we shall reply by endeavouring "
to show that such assertions are most unbecom-
ing, whether spoken of all men in general, or of
us in particular. For, let it be supposed that
you say justly that all men, as compared with
God, are (rightly) likened to these worthless'"
animals, since their Httleness is not at all to be
compared with the superiority of God, what
then do you mean by littleness? Answer me,
good sirs. If you refer to littleness of body,
know that superiority and inferiority, if truth is
to be judge, are not determined by a bodily
standard." For, on such a view, vultures " and
elephants would be superior to us men ; for they
are larger, and stronger, and longer-lived than


7 Tr)u ovpavLOv ^opav.

8 eni-oAiT€OeTai.

■° «uTeAecri.

^^ OVK ^v CTM^iaTi KptVerat,

12 yiln-es: -ypuTTts?


Chap. XXVL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


507


we. But no sensible person would maintain that

these irrational creatures are superior to rational

beings, merely on account of their bodies : for

the possession of reason raises a rational being

to a vast superiority over all irrational creatures.

Even the race of virtuous and blessed beings

would admit this, whether they are, as ye say,

good demons, or, as we are accustomed to call

them, the angels of God, or any other natures

1 whatever superior to that of man, since the

I rational faculty within them has been made per-

i feet, and endowed with all virtuous qualities."

I CHAP. XXV.

I But if you depreciate the littleness of man,
I not on account of his body, but of his soul,
j regarding it as inferior to that of other rational
beings, and especially of those who are virtuous ;
! and inferior, because evil dwells in it, — why
should those among Christians who are wicked,
' and those among the Jews who lead sinful lives,
be termed a collection of bats, or ants, or
worms, or frogs, rather than those individuals
among other nations who are guilty of wicked-
ness ? — seeing, in this respect, any individual
whatever, especially if carried away by the tide
of evil, is, in comparison with the rest of man-
I kind, a bat, and worm, and frog, and ant. And
although a man may be an orator like Demos-
thenes, yet, if stained with wickedness Hke his,^
and guilty of deeds proceeding, like his, from
a wicked nature ; or an Antiphon, who was also
considered to be indeed an orator, yet who anni-
ihilated the doctrine of providence in his writings,
jwhich were entitled Concerning Truth, like that
[discourse of Celsus, — such individuals are not-
jwithstanding worms, rolling in a corner of the
dung-heap of stupidity and ignorance. Indeed,
whatever be the nature of the rational faculty, it
could not reasonably be compared to a worm,
jbecause it possesses capabilities of virtue.^ For
|these adumbrations 4 towards virtue do not al-
ow of those who possess the power of acquiring
t, and who are incapable of wholly losing its
seeds, to be likened to a worm. It appears,
herefore, that neither can men in general be
leemed worms in comparison with God. For
eason, having its beginning in the reason of
jod, cannot allow of the rational animal being
:onsidered wholly alien from Deity. Nor can
hose among Christians and Jews who are

ticked, and who, in truth, are neither Chris-
ans nor Jews, be compared, more than other
I icked men, to worms rolling in a corner of a


fat KdTa. tzatrav apcrrfv TreTrotajxat.

The allusion may possibly be to his flight from the field of
haeronea, or to his avarice, or to the alleged impurity of his life,
liich is referred to by Plutarch in his Lives 0/ the Ten Orators.
Spencer.

3 a(J)op(iji5 exov wpbs aper^;',
* v]roTV7r(u<rets,


dunghill. And if the nature of reason will not
j permit of such comparisons, it is manifest that
j we must not calumniate human nature, which
j has been formed for virtue, even if it should sin
, through ignorance, nor liken it to animals of the

kind described.

CHAP. XXVI.

But if it is on account of those opinions of
the Christians and Jews which displease Celsus
(and which he does not at all appear to under-
stand) that they are to be regarded as worms
and ants, and the rest of mankind as different,
let us examine the acknowledged opinions of
Christians and Jews,5 and compare them with
those of the rest of mankind, and see whether
it will not appear to those who have once ad-
mitted that certain men are worms and ants, that
they are the worms and ants and frogs who have
fallen away from sound views of God, and, under
a vain appearance of piety,^ worship either irra-
tional animals, or images, or other objects, the
works of men's hands ; ^ whereas, from the
beauty of such, they ought to admire the Maker
of them, and worship Him : while those are
indeed men, and more honourable than men (if
there be anything that is so), who, in obedience
to their reason, are able to ascend from stocks
and stones,^ nay, even from what is reckoned
the most precious of all matter — silver and
gold ; and who ascend up also from the beau-
tiful things in the world to the Maker of all, and
entrust themselves to Him who alone is able to
satisfy 9 all existing things, and to overlook the
thoughts of all, and to hear the prayers of all ;
who send up their prayers to Him, and do all
things as in the presence of Him who beholds
everything, and who are careful, as in the pres-
ence of the Hearer of all things, to say nothing
which might not with propriety be reported to
God. Will not such piety as this — which can
be overcome neither by labours, nor by the dan-
gers of death, nor by logical plausibilities '° — be
of no avail in preventing those who have ob-
tained it from being any longer compared to
worms, even if they had been so represented
before their assumption of a piety so remark-
able ? Will they who subdue that fierce longing
for sexual pleasures w-hich has reduced the souls
of many to a weak and feeble condition, and
who subdue it because they are persuaded that
they cannot otherwise have communion with
God, unless they ascend to Him through the
exercise of tempe;-ance, appear to you to be the
brothers of worms, and relatives of ants, and to

5 TO. avroOev iravi npo<f>aiv6iieva 6oyn.ara XpicTTianui' itai "lou-
Saiiov.

6 t}tavra<ria 5* cucre^eiay.

7 )) Kot TO SritJiLOvpyrifi.aTa,

8 Mduiv Ka'i j uAioi'.

9 iiapKelf.

'° i/n'o AoyiKuif nt.BavonJTuiv,


5o8


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV,


bear 'a likeness to frogs? What ! is the brilliant
quality of justice, which keeps inviolate the rights
common to our neighbour, and our kindred, and
which observes fairness, and benevolence, and
goodness, of no avail in saving him who prac-
tises it from being termed a bird of the night?
And are not they who wallow in dissoluteness,
as do the majority of mankind, and they who
associate promiscuously with common harlots,
and who teach that such practices are not wholly
contrary to propriety, worms who roll in mire? —
especially when they are compared with those
who have been taught not to take the "mem-
bers of Christ," and the body inhabited by the
Word, and make them the " members of a har-
lot j " and who have already learned that the
body of the rational being, as consecrated to the
God of all things, is the temple of the God whom
they worship, becoming such from the pure con-
ceptions which they entertain of the Creator,
and who also, being careful not to corrupt the
temple of God by unlawful pleasure, practise
temperance as constituting piety towards God !

CHAP. XXVII.

And I have not yet spoken of the other evils
which prevail amongst men, from which even
those who have the appearance of philosophers
are not speedily freed, for in philosophy there
are many pretenders. Nor do I say anything on
the point that many such evils are found to exist
among those who are neither Jews nor Christians.
Of a truth, such evil practices do not at all pre-
vail among Christians, if you properly examine
what constitutes a Christian. Or, if any persons
of that kind should be discovered, they are at
least not to be found among those who frequent
the assemblies, and come to the public prayers,
without their being excluded from them, unless
it should happen, and that rarely, that some one
individual of such a character escapes notice in
the crowd. We, then, are not worms who as-
semble together ; who take our stand against
the Jews on those Scriptures which they believe
to be divine, and who show that He who was
spoken of in prophecy has come, and that they
have been abandoned on account of the great-
ness of their sins, and that we who have accepted
the Word have the highest hopes in God, both
because of our faith in Him, and of His ability
to receive us into His communion pure from all
evil and wickedness of life. If a man, then,
should call himself a Jew or a Christian, he
would not say without qualification that God
had made the whole world, and the vault of
heaven ' for us in particular. But if a man is,
as Jesus taught, pure in heart, and meek, and
peaceful, and cheerfully submits to dangers for


the sake of his religion, such an one might
reasonably have confidence in God, and with
a full apprehension of the word contained in
the prophecies, might say this also: "All these
things has God shown beforehand, and an-
nounced to us who believe."

CHAP. XXVIII.

But since he has represented those whom he
regards as worms, viz., the Christians, as saying
that " God, having abandoned the heavenly re-
gions, and despising this great earth, takes up
His abode amongst us alone, and to us alone
makes His announcements, and ceases not His
messages and inquiries as to how we may be-
come His associates for ever," we have to answer
that he attributes to us words which we never
uttered, seeing we both read and know that God
loves all existing things, and loathes^ nothing
which He has made, for He would not have
created anything in hatred. We have, moreover,
read the declaration: "And Thou sparest all
things, because they are Thine, O lover of souls.
For Thine incorruptible Spirit is in all. And
therefore those also who have fallen away for a
little time Thou rebukest, and admonishest, re-
minding them of their sins." ^ How can we
assert that " God, leaving the regions of heaven,
and the whole world, and despising this great
earth, takes up His abode amongst us only,"
when we have found that all thoughtful persons
must say in their prayers, that " the earth is full
of the mercy of the Lord," ^ and that " the
mercy of the Lord is upon all flesh ; " 5 and that
God, being good, " maketh His sun to arise
upon the evil and the good, and sendeth His
rain upon the just and the unjust ; " '^ and that
He encourages us to a similar course of acdon,
in order that we may become His sons, and
teaches us to extend the benefits which we en-
joy, so far as in our power, to all men ? For He
Himself is said to be the Saviour of all men,
especially of them that believe ; ^ and His Christ
to be the " propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole
world." ** And this, then, is our answer to the
allegations of Celsus. Certain other statements,
in keeping with the character of the Jews, might
be made by some of that nation, but certainly
not by the Christians, who have been taught that
" God commendeth His love towards us, in that,
while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us ; " ^
and although " scarcely for a righteous man will
one die, yet peradventure for a good man some


2 pSeAuo-treTot.

3 Cf. Wisd. of Solom. xi. 26, xii,
< Ps. xxxiii. 5.

5 Ecclus. xviii. 13.

6 Cf. Matt. V. 45.

7 Cf. I Tim. iv. 10.

8 Cf. I John ii. 2.

9 Cf. Rom. V. 8.


Chap. XXX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


509


would even dare to die." ' But now is Jesus j
declared to have come for the sake of sinners in
all parts of the world (that they may forsake j
their sin, and entrust themselves to God), being j
called also, agreeably to an ancient custom of
these Scriptures, the " Christ of God."

CHAP. XXIX.

But Celsus perhaps has misunderstood certain
of those whom he has termed " worms," when
they affirm that " God exists, and that we are
next to Him." And he acts like those who
would find fault with an entire sect of philoso-
phers, on account of certain words uttered by
some rash youth who, after a three days' attend-
ance upon the lectures of a philosopher, should
exalt himself above other people as inferior to
himself, and devoid of philosophy. For we know
that there are many creatures more honourable ^
than man ; and we have read that " God standeth
in the congregation of gods," ^ but of gods who
are not worshipped by the nations, " for all the
gods of the nations are idols." ^ We have read
also, that " God, standing in the congregation of
the gods, judgeth among the gods." 5 We know,
moreover, that " though there be that are called
gods, whether in heaven or in earth (as there be
gods many and lords many), but to us there is
one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
and we in Him ; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things, and we by Him."^ And
we know that in this way the angels are superior
to men ; so that men, when made perfect, be-
come like the angels. " For in the resurrection
they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but
the righteous are as the angels in heaven," ^ and
also become " equal to the angels." ^ We know,
too, that in the arrangement of the universe there
are certain beings termed " thrones," and others
"dominions," and others "powers," and others
"principalities ; " and we see that we men, who
are far inferior to these, may entertain the hope
that by a virtuous life, and by acting in all things
agreeably to reason, we may rise to a likeness
with all these. And, lasdy, because "it doth not
yet appear what we shall be ; but we know that
when He shall appear, we shall be like God, and
shall see Him as He is." '? And if any one were
to maintain what is asserted by some (either by
those who possess intelligence or who do not, but
have misconceived sound reason), that "God
exists, and we are next to Him," I would inter-
pret the word "we," by using in its stead, "We


' Cf. Rom. V. 7.

3 Cf. Ps. Ixxxii. I.

* Sai^/oria. Cf. Ps. xcvi. 5.

5 Cf Ps. Ixxxii. I.

6 I Cor. viii. 5, 6.

' Cf Matt. xxii. 30.
' Cf Luke XX. 36.
9 Cf I John iii. 2.


w^ho act according to reason," or rather, "We
virtuous, who act according to reason." '° For,
in our opinion, the same virtue belongs to all
the blessed, so that the virtue of man and of
God is identical." And therefore we are taught
to become " perfect," as our Father in heaven is
perfect.'^ No good and virtuous man, then, is a
" worm rolling in filth," nor is a pious man an
" ant," nor a righteous man a " frog ; " nor could
one whose soul is enlightened with the bright
light of truth be reasonably likened to a " bird
of the night."

CHAP. XXX.

It appears to me that Celsus has also misun-
derstood this statement, " Let Us make man in
Our image and likeness ; " '^ and has therefore
represented the " worms " as saying that, being
created by God, we altogether resemble Him.
If, however, he had known the difference be-
tween man being created " in the image of God"
and " after His likeness," and that God is re-
corded to have said, " Let Us make man after
Our image and likeness," but that He made man
" after the image " of God, but not then also

j " after His likeness," '^ he would not have repre-
sented us as saying that " we are altogether like

I Him." Moreover, we do not assert that the
stars are subject to us ; since the resurrection
which is called the " resurrection of the just,"

I and which is understood by wise men, is com-
pared to the sun, and moon, and stars, by hirn
who said, " There is one glory of the sun, and
another glory of the moon, and another glory of

, the stars ; for one star differeth from another
star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the
dead." '5 Daniel also prophesied long ago re-
garding these things.'^ Celsus says further, that

■ we assert that " all things have been arranged so

' as to be subject to us," having perhaps heard
some of the intelligent among us speaking to
that effect, and perhaps also not understanding
the saying, that " he who is the greatest amongst
us is die servant of all." ^^ And if the Greeks
say, "Then sun and moon are the slaves of mor-
tal men," '^ they express approval of the state-
ment, and give an explanation of its meaning ;
but since such a statement is either not made
at all by us, or is expressed in a different way.


'° Koi T0UT(5 7' OM epjitr)V6uoi(ni, TO " li/u-fis A^yioi' avTi Tou ot
AovtKoi, Kal cTi y.o.\Kov, oi o-jrou6aioi AoyiKoi.

11 w(TT6 K<xi y\ avTr) operr) avBpujiTov Kal ©eoC. Cf Cicero, de
Leg., i.: "Jam vero virtus eadem in homine ac deo est, neque ullo
alio in genio prseterea. Est autcni virtus nihil aliud, quain in se
perfecta, et ad summum perducta natura. Est igitur homini cum
Deo similitude." Cf. also Clemens Alex., Strom., vii. c. 14: Oi)
■yap, Kadanip oi 2twi/co'i, aSeu>?, Trdvv T'r]v avrrfv aperiji' nr6p^-ov
Aeyofifi' tal ©eoO. [See vol. ii. p. 549. S.] Cf. Theodorct,
Serin., xi. — Spencer.

12 Cf Matt. V. 48.
" Cf. Gen. i. 26.
'* Cf. Gen. i. 27.

'S Cf. I Cor. XV. 41, 42.

If- Cf. Dan. xii. 3.

" Cf. Matt. XX. 27.

" Cf. Eurip., P/tientss , 546, 547.


5IO


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV


Celsus here too falsely accuses us. Moreover,
we who, according to Celsus, are " worms," are
represented by him as saying that, " seeing some
among us are guilty of sin, God will come to us,
or will send His own Son, that He may consume
the wicked, and that we other frogs may enjoy
'eternal life with Him." Observe how this ven-
erable philosopher, like a low buffoon,' turns into
ridicule and mockery, and a subject of laughter,
the announcement of a divine judgment, and of
the punishment of the wicked, and of the reward
of the righteous ; and subjoins to all this the
remarky that " such statements would be more
endurable if made by worms and frogs than
by Christians and Jews who quarrel with one
another ! " We shall not, however, imitate his
example, nor say similar things regarding those
philosophers who profess to know the nature of
all things, and who discuss with each other the
manner in which all things were created, and how
the heaven and earth originated, and all things
in them; and how the souls (of men), being
either unbegotten, and not created by God, are
yet governed by Him, and pass from one body
to another ; ^ or being formed at the same time
with the body, exist for ever or pass away. For
instead of treating with respect and accepting
the intention of those who have devoted them-
selves to the investigation of the truth, one might
mockingly and revilingly say that such men were
" worms," who did not measure themselves by
their corner of their dung-heap in human life,
and who accordingly gave forth their opinions
on matters of such importance as if they under-
stood them, and who strenuously assert that they
have obtained a view of those things which can-
not be seen without a higher inspiration and a
diviner power. " For no man knoweth the things
of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him :
even so the things of God knoweth no man, but
the Spirit of God." ^ We are not, however, mad,
nor do we compare such human wisdom (I use
the word " wisdom " in the common accepta-
tion), which busies itself not about the affairs of
the multitude, but in the investigation of truth,
to the wrigglings of worms or any other such
creatures ; but in the spirit of truth, we testify
of certain Greek philosophers that they knew
God, seeing " He manifested Himself to them," +
although " they glorified Him not as God, neither
were thankful, but became vain in their imagina-
tions ; and professing themselves to be wise, they
became foolish, and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed
beasts, and creeping things." 5


CHAP. XXXI.

After this, wishing to prove that there is no
difference between Jews and Christians, and those ;
animals previously enumerated by him, he asserts :
that the Jews were " fugitives from Egypt, who !
never performed anything worthy of note, and ;
never were held in any reputation or account." ^
Now, on the point of their not being fugitives,
nor Egyptians, but Hebrews who settled in Egypt,
we have spoken in the preceding pages. But if
he thinks his statement, that " they were never
held in any reputation or account," to be proved,
because no remarkable event in their history is
found recorded by the Greeks, we would answer,
that if one will examine their polity from its first
beginning, and the arrangement of their laws, he
will find that they were men who represented
upon earth the shadow of a heavenly life, and
that amongst them God is recognised as nothing ,
else, save He who is over all things, and that j i
amongst them no maker of images was permitted ' -
to enjoy the rights of citizenship. ^ For neither
painter nor image-maker existed in their state,
the law expelling all such from it ; that there
might be no pretext for the construction of
images, — an art which attracts the attention
of foolish men, and which drags down the eyes
of the soul from God to earth.^ There was, ,
accordingly, amongst them a law to the following
effect : " Do not transgress the law, and make '
to yourselves a graven image, any likeness of
male or female ; either a likeness of any one
of the creatures that are upon the earth, or a !
likeness of any winged fowl that flieth under the
heaven, or a likeness of any creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth, or a likeness of any of
the fishes which are in the waters under the
earth." 9 The law, indeed, wished them to have i
regard to the truth of each individual thing, and |
not to form representations of things contrary to :
reality, feigning the appearance merely of what
was really male or really female, or the nature <
of animals, or of birds, or of creeping things,
or of fishes. Venerable, too, and grand was this
prohibition of theirs : " Lift not up thine eyes |
unto heaven, lest, when thou seest the sun, and j
the moon, and the stars, and all the host of i
heaven, thou shouldst be led astray to worship
them, and serve them." '° And what a regime"
was that under which the whole nation was
placed, and which rendered it impossible for
any effeminate person to appear in public ; '^ and
worthy of admiration., too, was the arrangement
by which harlots were removed out of the state,


2 *cat afxeiliovfTt. tTutixaTa,

3 Cf. I Cor. ii. II.
* Cf. Rom. i. 19.

5 Rom. i. 21-23.


6 out' 6c \6yu) OUT iv apiSfjiui auTou? TroTe yeyevrifj.evovi.

7 eTToAiTeiieTO. ... ,

8 [See note on Book III. cap. Ixxvi. suj^ra, and to vol. m. p.;"!
this series.]

9 Cf. Deut. iv. 16-18.
'o Cf. Deut. iv. 19.

" TroAireia.

'■* ovSi ^a.iviu9ai. OrjKvSpiav olov T ^v.


Chap. XXXIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


511


those incentives to the passions of the youth ! j
Their courts of justice also were composed of!
men of the strictest integrity, who, after having j
for a lengthened period set the example of an
unstained life, were entrusted with the duty of
presiding over the tribunals, and who, on account
of the superhuman purity of their character,'
were said to be gods, in conformity with an ^
ancient Jewish usage of speech. Here was the :
spectacle of a whole nation devoted to philoso-
phy ; and in. order that there might be leisure
to listen to their sacred laws, the days termed
" Sabbath," and the other festivals which existed
among them, were instituted. And why need I
speak of the orders of their priests and sacrifices,
which contain innumerable indications (of deeper
truths) to those who wish to ascertain the sig-
nification of things?

CH.A.P. XXXII.

But since nothing belonging to human nature
is permanent, this polity also must gradually be
corrupted and changed. And Providence, hav-
ing remodelled their venerable system where it
needed to be changed, so as to adapt it to men
of all countries, gave to believers of all nations,
in place of the Jews, the venerable religion of
Jesus, who, being adorned not only with under-
standing, but also with a share of divinity,- and
having overthrown the doctrine regarding earthly
demons, who delight in frankincense, and blood,
and in the exhalations of sacrificial odours, and
who, like the fabled Titans or Giants, drag down
men from thoughts of God ; and having Himself
disregarded their plots, directed chiefly against
the better class of men, enacted laws which
ensure happiness to those who live according to
them, and who do not flatter the demons by
means of sacrifices, but altogether despise them,
through help of the word of God, which aids
those who look upwards to Him. And as it was
the will of God that the doctrine of Jesus should
prevail amongst men, the demons could effect
nothing, although straining every nerve ^ to ac-
complish the destruction of Christians ; for they
stirred up both princes, and senates, and rulers
in every place, — nay, even nations themselves,
who did not perceive the irrational and wicked
procedure of the demons, — against the word,
and those who believed in it ; yet, notwithstand-
ing, the word of God, which is more powerful
than all other things, even when meeting with
opposition, deriving from the opposition, as it
[were, a means of increase, advanced onwards,
and won many souls, such being the will of God.
And we have offered these remarks by way of a
necessary digression. For we wished to answer


the assertion of Celsus concerning the Jews, that
they were " fugitives from Egypt, and that these
men, beloved by God, never accomplished any-
thing worthy of note." And further, in answer
to the statement that " they were never held in
any reputation or account," we say, that living
apart as a " chosen nation and a royal priest-
hood," and shunning intercourse with the many
nations around them, in order that their morals
might escape corruption, they enjoyed the pro-
tection of the divine power, neither coveting like
the most of mankind the acquisition of other
kingdoms, nor yet being abandoned so as to
become, on account of their smallness, an easy
object of attack to others, and thus be altogether
destroyed ; and this lasted so long as they were
worthy of the divine protection. But when it
became necessary for them, as a nation wholly
given to sin, to be brought back by their suffer-
ings to their God, they were abandoned (by
Him), sometimes for a longer, sometimes for a
shorter .period, until in the time of the Romans,
having committed the greatest of sins in putting
Jesus to death, they were completely deserted.

CHAP. XXXIII.

Immediately after this, Celsus, assailing the
contents of the first book of Moses, which is
entitled " Genesis," asserts that " the Jews ac-
cordingly endeavoured to derive their origin
from the first race of jugglers and deceivers,-*
appealing to the testimony of dark and ambig-
uous words, whose meaning was veiled in ob-
scurity, and which they misinterpreted s to the
unlearned and ignorant, and that, too, when such
a point had never been called in question dur-
ing the long preceding period." Now Celsus
appears to me in these words to have expressed
very obscurely the meaning which he intended
to convey. It is probable, indeed, that his ob-
scurity on this subject is intentional, inasmuch
as he saw the strength of the argument which
, establishes the descent of the Jews from their
[ ancestors ; while again, on the other hand, he
j wished not to appear ignorant that the question
I regarding the Jews and their descent was one
I that could not be lightly disposed of. It is cer-
tain, however, that the Jews trace their gene-
i alogy back to the three fathers, Abraham, Isaac,
I and Jacob. And the names of these individuals
j possess such efiicacy, when united with the name
of God. that not only do those belonging to the
nation employ in their prayers to God, and in
the exorcising of demons, the words, " God of
Abraham,^ and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob,"


' o't Tives 6ia TO Kadapbv ^8oi, Kai to virep audpum

* Beicf (noipo.

3 (caiToiye TravTa Ka.\iav KivrjaavTei ,


* an'o irpuJTr)? aTTOpo? yo^Tiov Kai nMi'tov oi'Spiuirwr.

5 iraoefrjYOVMfoi.

<> [This formula he regards as an adumhration of the Triad (see
our vol. ii. p. loi): thus, "the God of Abraham "=: Fatherhood:
"of Isaac " = Sonship; " of Jacob " = Wisdom, and the Founder of
the New Isr.iel.]


512


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


but so also do almost all those who occupy
themselves with incantations and magical rites.
For there is found in treatises on magic in many
countries such an invocation of God, and as-
sumption of the divine name, as implies a famil-
iar use of it by these men in their dealings with
demons. These facts, then — adduced by Jews
and Christians to prove the sacred character of
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, the fathers of
the Jewish race — appear to me not to have
been altogether unknown to Celsus, but not to
have been distinctly set forth by him, because
he was unable to answer the argument which
might be founded on them.

CHAP. XXXIV.

For we inquire of all those who employ such
invocations of God, saying : Tell us, friends, who
was Abraham, and what sort of person was Isaac,
and what power did Jacob possess, that the ap-
pellation " God," when joined with their name,
could effect such wonders? And from whom
have you learned, or can you learn, the facts
relating to these individuals? And who has
occupied himself with writing a history about
them, either directly magnifying these men by
ascribing to them mysterious powers, or hinting
obscurely at their possession of certain great
and marvellous qualities, patent to those who
are qualified to see them ? ' And when, in an-
swer to our inquiry, no one can show from what
history — whether Greek or Barbarian — or, if
not a history, yet at least from what mystical
narrative,^ the accounts of these men are de-
rived, we shall bring forward the book entitled
" Genesis," which contains the acts of these
men, and the divine oracles addressed to them,
and will say. Does not the use by you of the
names of these three ancestors of the race, es-
tablishing in the clearest manner that effects not
to be lightly regarded are produced by the in-
vocation of them, evidence the divinity of the
men ? ^ And yet we know them from no other
source than the sacred books of the Jews !
Moreover, the phrases, "the God of Israel,"
and " the God of the Hebrews," and " the God
who drowned in the Red Sea the king of Egypt
and the Egyptians," are formi/lcz'^ frequently
employed against demons and certain wicked
powers. And we learn the history of the names
and their interpretation from those Hebrews,
who in their national literature and national


' 61T6 KoX avTodiv <Tt)J.vvvovaav iv ttTToppTJTOis Tous av&pai;, eire
Ka'i 8t VTrovoiHiV atrtcro'ofxeVijv Tiva, jLteyaAa kol davfxa<Tt.a rot?

2 |nviTT(.Kr)s av ay pa<^r}';.

3 epoOp-f V re- brt ^irJTrore to koi v<j)' iiixCiv TrapaXaiJ.pdve(76ai to.
bvoiiaTa riov Tptdi;' tou'twv ■ycrapxiJi' ToO ffli'OVSi TJj. ecapyeia
KaTa\afx^ai'6vTMU, ouk evKa.Ta(f>p6i'i)Ta avvecrdaL e/c tt)! KareTTi-
K\-qa-fw; aiiTwi', Trapt'cTTrjcrt to eeiov Tcoi/ av&piii'; Guietus would
expunge the words rfi evapyeia KaTa\ap.^ai6\'Tiov.

* [See p. 511, supra, on \^^ formula of benediction and exor-
cism, and compare Num. vi. 24.]


tongue dwell with pride upon these things, and
explain their meaning. How, then, should the
Jews attempt to derive their origin from the first
race of those whom Celsus supposed to be jug-
glers and deceivers, and shamelessly endeavour
to trace themselves and their beginning back to
these? — whose names, being Hebrew, are an
evidence to the Hebrews, who have their sacred
books written in the Hebrew language and let-
ters, that their nation is akin to these men. For
up to the present time, the Jewish names be-
longing to the Hebrew language were either
taken from their writings, or generally from
words the meaning of which was made known
by the Hebrew language.

CHAP. XXXV.

And let any one who peruses the treatise of
Celsus observe whether it does not convey some
such insinuation as the above, when he says :
" And they attempted to derive their origin from
the first race of jugglers and deceivers, appeal-
ing to the testimony of dark and ambiguous
words, whose meaning was veiled in obscurity."
For these names are indeed obscure, and not
within the comprehension and knowledge of
many, though not in our opinion of doubtful
meaning, even although assumed by those who
are aliens to our religion ; but as, according to
Celsus, they do not 5 convey any ambiguity, I
am at a loss to know why he has rejected them.
And yet, if he had wished honestly to overturn
the genealogy which he deemed the Jews to
have so shamelessly arrogated, in boasting of
Abraham and his descendants (as- their progeni-
tors), he ought to have quoted a// the passages
bearing on the subject ; and, in the first place,
to have advocated his cause with such arguments
as he thought likely to be convincing, and in the
next to have bravely ^ refuted, by means of what
appeared to him to be the true meaning, and by
arguments in its favour, the errors existing on
the subject. But neither Celsus nor any one
else will be able, by their discussions regarding
the nature of names employed for miraculous
purposes, to lay down the correct doctrine re-
garding them, and to demonstrate that those
men were to be lightly esteemed whose names
merely, not among their countrymen alone, but
also amongst foreigners, could accomplish (such
results). He ought to have shown, moreover,
how we, in misinterpreting ^ the passages in
which these names are found, deceive our hear-
ers, as he imagines, while he himself, who -boasts
that he is not ignorant or unintelligent, gives the
true interpretation of them. And he hazarded


5 (caTtt Se KeAcroc, ou napi.iTT6.vTa. Libri editi ad oram ws

TTOplCTTai'Ta.

7 TTapefrjyou/iiei'Oi.


Chap. XXXVII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


513


the assertion,' in speaking of those names, from
which the Jews deduce their genealogies, that
" never, during the long antecedent period, has
there been any dispute about these names, but
that at the present time the Jews dispute about
them with certain others," wliom he does not
mention. Now, let him who chooses show who
these are that dispute with the Jews, and who
adduce even probable arguments to show that
Jews and Christians do not decide correctly on
the points relating to these names, but that there
are others who have discussed these questions
with the greatest learning and accuracy. But
we are well assured that none can establish any-
thing of the sort, it being manifest that these
names are derived from the Hebrew language,
which is found only among the Jews.

CHAP. XXXVI,

Celsus in the next place, producing from his-
tory other than that of the divine record, those
passages which bear upon the claims to great
antiquity put forth by many nations, as the
Athenians, and Egyptians, and Arcadians, and
Phrygians, who assert that certain individuals
have existed among them who sprang from the
earth, and who each adduce proofs of these
assertions, says : " The Jews, then, leading a
grovelling life ^ in some corner of Palestine, and
being a wholly uneducated people, who had not
heard that these matters had been committed
to verse long ago by Hesiod and innumerable
other inspired men, wove together some most
incredible and insipid stories,^ viz., that a cer-
i tain man was formed by the hands of God, and
j had breathed into him the breath of life, and
I that a woman was taken from his side, and that
God issued certain commands, and that a ser-
pent opposed these, and gained a victory over
the commandments of God ; thus relating cer-
tain old wives' fables, and most impiously repre-
senting God as weak at the very beginning (of
things), and unable to convince even a single
human being whom He Himself had formed."
By these instances, indeed, this deeply read and
learned Celsus, who accuses Jews and Christians
of ignorance and want of instruction, clearly
evinces the accuracy of his knowledge of the
chronology of the respective historians, whether
Greek or Barbarian, since he imagines that He-
iod and the "innumerable" others, whom he
ityles " inspired " men, are older than Moses
md his writings — that very Moses who is shown
p be much older than the time of the Trojan
pr ! It is not the Jews, then, who have com-
j)osed incredible and insipid stories regarding
Ihe birth of man from the earth, but these


TTapepptt^e.
d/iOUffOTaTa.


" inspired " men of Celsus, Hesiod and his other
"innumerable" companions, who, having neither
learned nor heard of the far older and most
venerable accounts existing in Palestine, have
written such histories as their Theogonies, at-
tributing, so far as in their power, " generation "
to their deities, and innumerable other absurdi-
ties. And these are the writers whom Plato
expels from his " State " as being corrupters of
the youth,'' — Homer, viz., and those who have
composed poems of a similar description ! Now
it is evident that Plato did not regard as " in-
spired " those men who had left behind them
such works. But perhaps it was from a desire
to cast reproach upon us, that this Epicurean
Celsus, who is better able to judge than Plato-
(if it be the same Celsus who composed two>
other books against the Christians), called those
individuals " inspired " whom he did not in
reality regard as such.

CHAP. XXXVII.

He charges us, moreover, with introducing
"a man formed by the hands of God," although
the book of Genesis has made no mention of
the " hands " of God, either when relating the
creation or the " fashioning " 5 of the man ; while
it is Job and David who have used the expres-
sion, " Thy hands have made me and fashioned
me ; " ^ with reference to which it would need a
lengthened discourse to point out the sense in
which these words were understood by those who
used them, both as regards the difference between
" making " and " fashioning," and also the
" hands " of God. For those who do not un-
derstand these and similar expressions in the
sacred Scriptures, imagine that we attribute to
the God who is over all things a form ^ such as
that of man ; and according to their concep-
tions, it follows that we consider the body of God
to be furnished with wings, since the Scriptures,
literally understood, attribute such appendages
to God. The subject before us, however, does
not require us to interpret these expressions ; for,
in our explanatory remarks upon the book of
Genesis, these matters have been made, to the
best of our ability, a special subject of investiga-
tion. Observe next the malignity ^ of Celsus in
what follows. For the Scripture, speaking of the
" fashioning " ■? of the man, says, " And breathed
into his face the breath of life, and the man be-
came a living soul." '° Whereon Celsus, wishing
maliciously to ridicule the " inbreathing into his
face of the breath of life," and not understanding


-• Cf. Plato, de Repub., book ii. etc.

S cTTi tt)? TrAatrtoj?.

*'Cf. Job X. 8 and Ps. cxix. 73.

8 KOLKoi\6(i.a.v.

9 TrAoio-cu)?.

"0 Gen. ii. 7; Heb. VDX2, LXX. irpdo-uirof.


5H


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


the sense in which the expression was employed,
states that " they composed a story that a man
was fashioned by the hands of God, and was in-
flated by breath blown into him," ' in order that,
taking the word " inflated " to be used in a similar
way to the inflation of skins, he might ridicule
the statement, " He breathed into his face the
breath of life," — terms which are used figura-
tively, and require to be explained in order to
show that God communicated to man of His
incorruptible Spirit ; as it is said, " For Thine in-
corruptible Spirit is in all things." ^

CHAP. XXXVIII.

In the next place, as it is his object to slander
our Scriptures, he ridicules the following state-
ment : " And God caused a deep sleep to fall
upon Adam, and he slept : and He took one of
his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof.
And the rib, which He had taken from the man,
made He a woman," ^ and so on ; without quot-
ing the words, which would give the hearer the
impression that they are spoken with a figurative
meaning. He would not even , have it appear
that the words were used allegorically, although
he says afterwards, that " the more modest among
Jews and Christians are ashamed of these things,
and endeavour to give them somehow an alle-
gorical signification." Now we might say to
him, Are the statements of your " inspired "
Hesiod, which he makes regarding the woman
in the form of a myth, to be explained allegori-
cally, in the sense that she was given by Jove to
men as an evil thing, and as a retribution for the
theft of " the fire ; " ■* whfle that regarding the
woman who was taken from the side of the man
(after he had been buried in deep slumber) , and
was formed by God, appears to you to be related
without any rational meaning and secret signifi-
cation ? 5 But is it not uncandid, not to ridicule
the former as myths, but to admire them as
philosophical ideas in a mythical dress, and to
treat with contempt ^ the latter, as offending the
understanding, and to declare that they are of no
account? For if, because of the mere phrase-
ology, we are to find fault with what is intended
to have a secret meaning, see whether the follow-
ing lines of Hesiod, a man, as you say, " inspired,"
are not better fitted to excite laughter : —

" ' Son of lapetus ! ' with wrathful heart
Spake the cloud-gatherer : ' Oh, unmatched in art I
Exultest thou in this the flame retrieved,
And dost thou triumph in the god deceived ?
But thou, with the posterity of man,
Shalt rue the fraud whence mightier ills began ;


' eiJiibvtToiuevov.

2 Wisd. of Solom. xii

3 Cf. Gen. ii. 21, 22.

5 ^(cupi? navTOi Ad-yo

6 ixoxe^ieLV.


Tii'O! eiTi.Kpv\j/eu)%.


I will send evil for thy stealthy fire,
While all embrace it, and their bane desire.'
The sire, who rules the earth, and sways the pole,
Had said, and laughter fill'd his secret soul.
He bade the artist-god his hest obey,
And mould with tempering waters ductile clay:
Infuse, as breathing life and form began.
The supple vigour, and the voice of man :
Her aspect fair as goddesses above,
A virgin's likeness, with the brows of love.
He bade Minerva teach the skill that dyes
The web with colours, as the shuttle flies ;
He called the magic of Love's Queen to shed
A nameless grace around her courteous head;
Instil the wish that longs with restless aim.
And cares of dress that feed upon the frame :
Bade Hermes last implant the craft refined
Of artful manners, and a shameless mind.
He said; their king th' inferior powers obeyed:
The fictile likeness of a bashful maid
Rose from the temper'd earth, by Jove's behest,
Under the forming god ; the zone and vest
Were clasp'd and folded by Minerva's hand :
The heaven-born graces, and persuasion bland
Deck'd her round limbs with chains of gold : the hours
Of loose locks twined her temples with spring flowers.
The whole attire Minerva's curious care
Form'd to her shai^e, and fitted to her air.
But in her breast the herald from above,
Full of the counsels of deep thundering Jove,
Wrought artful manners, wrought perfidious lies,
And speech that thrills the blood, and lulls the wise.
Her did th' interpreter of gods proclaim,
And named the woman with Pandora's name ;
^ Since all the gods conferr'd their gifts, to charm.
For man's inventive race, this beauteous harm." '

Moreover, what is said also about the casket is
fitted of itself to excite laughter ; for example : —

" Whilome on earth the sons of men abode
From ills apart, and labour's irksome load,
And sore diseases, bringing age to man;
Now the sad life of mortals is a span.
The woman's hands a mighty casket bear;
She lifts the lid ; she scatters griefs in air :
Alone, beneath the vessel's rims detained,
Hope still within th' unbroken cell remained,
Nor fled abroad ; so will'd cloud-gatherer Jove :
The woman's hand had dropp'd the lid above." ^

Now, to him who would give to these lines a
grave allegorical meaning (whether any such
meaning be contained in them or not), we would
say : Are the Greeks alone at liberty to convey
a philosophic meaning in a secret covering? or
perhaps also the Egyptians, and those of the
Barbarians who pride themselves upon their mys-
teries and the truth (which is concealed within
them) ; while the Jews alone, with their lawgiver
and historians, appear to you the most unintelli-
gent of men ? And is this the only nation which
has not received a share of divine power, and
which yet was so grandly instructed how to rise
upwards to the uncreated natur» of God, and to
gaze on Him alone, and to expect from Him
alone (the fulfilment of) their hopes?


7 Hesiod, IVorks and Days, i. 73-114 (Elton's translation [in
substance. S.] ). . r'

8 Hesiod, U'orks and Days, i. 125-134 (Elton's translation [m
substaijce. S.J).


Chap. XXXIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


515


CH.A.P. XXXIX.


But as Celsus makes a jest also of the serpent,


ually devising contrivances ; both much gi\en to
forethought, and also fertile in resources ;" act-


as counteracting the injunctions given by God to , ™p 'ike a philosopher throughout the whole of
the man, takinij the narrative to be an old wife's his life ; a terrible '- sorcerer, and dealer in drugs,


fable,' and has purposely neither mentioned the
paradise - of God, nor stated that God is said to
have planted it in Eden towards the east, and
that there afterwards sprang up from the earth ^""^ ^g^'" at another time dies, and once more


and a sophist as well ; neither immortal by na-
ture nor yet mortal, but on the same day, at one
time he flourishes and lives when he has plenty,


every tree that was beautiful to the sight, and j '^ recalled to life through possessing the nature
good for food, and the tree of Hfe in the midst i °f ^is father. But the supplies furnished to him
of the paradise, and the tree of the knowledge of, ^^^ always gradually disappearing, so that he is
good and evil, and the other statements which i never at any time in want, nor yet rich ; and, on
follow, which might of themselves lead a candid the other hand, he occupies an intermediate


reader to see that all these things had not inap
propriately an allegorical meaning, let us con-
trast with this the words of Socrates regarding
Eros in the Symposium of Plato, and which are
put in the mouth of Socrates as being more ap-
propriate than what was said regarding him by
all the others at the Symposium. The words of
Plato are as follow : " When Aphrodite was born,
the gods held a banquet, and there was present,
along with the others, Porus the son of Metis.
And after they had dined, Penia 3 came to beg
for something (seeing there was an entertain-
ment), and she stood at the gate. Porus mean-
time, having become intoxicated with the nectar
(for there was then no wine), went into the gar-
den of Zeus, and, being heavy with liquor, lay
down to sleep. Penia accordingly formed a
secret plot, with a view of freeing herself from
her condition of poverty,^ to get a child by Po-
rus, and accordingly lay down beside him, and
became pregnant with Eros. And on this ac-
count Eros has become the follower and attendant
of Aphrodite, having been begotten on her birth


position between wisdom and ignorance." '^ Now,
if those who read these words were to imitate
the malignity of Celsus — which be it far from
Christians to do ! — they would ridicule the
myth, and would turn this great Plato into a
subject of jest ; but if, on investigating in a phil-
osophic spirit what is conveyed in the dress of a
myth, they should be able to discover the mean-
ing of Plato, (they will admire) '^ the manner in
which he was able to conceal, on account of the
multitude, in the form of this myth, the great
ideas which presented themselves to him, and to
speak in a befitting manner to those who know
how to ascertain from the myths the true mean-
ing of him who wove them together. Now I
have brought forward this myth occurring in the
writings of Plato, because of the mention in it
of the garden of Zeus, which appears to bear
some resemblance to the paradise of God, and
of the comparison between Penia and the ser-
pent, and the plot against Porus by Penia, which
may be compared with the plot of the serpent
against the man. It is not very clear, indeed.


day feast,5 and being at the same time by nature ! whether Plato fell in with these stories by chance,
a lover of the beautiful, because Aphrodite too ! °^ whether, as some think, meeting during his
is beautiful. Seeing, then, that Eros is the son ' '^''^it to Egypt with certain individuals who phil-
of Porus and Penia, the following is his condi- | osophized on the Jewish mysteries, and learning
tion.^ In the first place, he is always poor, and ^^^''"'^ things from them, he may have preserved


far from being delicate and beautiful, as most
persons imagine ; but is withered, and sunburnt,^
and unshod, and without a home, sleeping al-


few of their ideas, and thrown others aside,
being careful not to offend the Greeks by a com-
plete adoption of all the points of the' philos-


\\ays upon the ground, and without a covering ; 1 °Phy of the Jews, who were in bad repute with
l}ing in the open air beside gates, and on public the multitude, on account of the foreign char-
roads ; possessing the nature of his mother, and ^*^ter of their laws and their peculiar polity,
dwelling continually with indigence.^ But, on I 'The present, however, is not the proper time for
the other hand, in conformity with the character j explaining either the myth of Plato, or the story
of his father, he is given to plotting against the ^^ the serpent and the paradise of God, and all
beautiful and the good, being courageous, and | that is related to have taken place in it, as in our
hasty, and vehement ;9 a keen'° hunter, perpet- i exposition of the book of Genesis we have espe-
J ' cially occupied ourselves as we best could with


IxvOov TLva." wapa.TT\ri<Ti.ov tow JrapaStSofxecot? 7019 vpavtrii
^ irnpadeicro;.

5 Penia, poverty; Porus, abundance.
6ta TT)i' auTTj? aTTopiat',

XJl Ka$e<7TriKe.


^ ei' Toi? ex

' ev TOIOUT

' (ncArjpbs »
9 (TxJvrovot;,


ivxMlpos.


these matters.


" Kai <tpoi'>)(Teois 677i9unr)T>)S Ka'i Trdpinos.

'3 [Plato, Symposion, xxiii. p. 203. S.]

'■» Boherelhis, quern Ruaeus sequitur, in notis; "Ante voces:
T.ra TpoTTov, videtur deesse: dau/uaaoi'Tai, aut quid simile." — Lo.vi-

MATZSCH.


5i6


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


CHAP. XL.

But as he asserts that " the Mosaic narrative
most impiously represents God as in a state
very commencement (of


of weakness from the

things), and as unable to gain over (to obedi
ence) even one single man whom He Himself
had formed," we say in answer that the objection '
is much the same as if one were to find fault with
the existence of evil, which God has not been
able to prevent even in the case of a single in-
dividual, so that one man might be found from
the very beginning of things who was born into
the world untainted by sin. For as those whose
business it is to defend the doctrine of provi-
dence do so by means of arguments which are
not to be despised,^ so also the subjects of Adam
and his son will be philosophically dealt with by
those who are aware that in the Hebrew lan-
guage Adam signifies man ; and that in those
parts of the narrative which appear to refer to
Adam as an individual, Moses is discoursing
upon the nature of man in general.^ For " in
Adam " (as the Scripture * says) " all die," and
were condemned in the likeness of Adam's trans-
gression, the word of God asserting this not so
much of one particular individual as of the
whole human race. For in the connected se-
ries of statements which appears to apply as to
one particular individual, the curse pronounced
upon Adam is regarded as common to all (the
members of the race), and what was spoken
with reference to the woman is spoken of every
woman without exception.s And the expulsion
of the man and woman from paradise, and their
being clothed with tunics of skins (which God,
because of the transgression of men, made for
those who had sinned), contain a certain secret
and mystical doctrine (far transcending that of
Plato) of the soul's losing its wings,"^ and being
borne downwards to -earth, until it can lay hold
of some stable resting-place.

CHAP. XLI.

After this he continues as follows : " They
speak, in the next place, of a deluge, and of a
monstrous ^ ark, having within it all things, and
of a dove and a crow** as messengers, falsifying
and recklessly altering? the story of Deucahon ;
not expecting, I suppose, that these things would
come to light, but imagining that they were in-
venting stories merely for young children." Now
in these remarks observe the hostility — so un-

' TO Xiyo^tvov.

2 evKaraifipoi'riTaiv.

3 4iV(7Lo\oycl Mmvo-t); Ta Trcpi t^s toO drepwTrov (^u'crecos.
"t Cf. I Cor. XV. 22 with Rom. v. 14.
5 oi/K cCTTt Ka8' fii ov Aeyerai.

° TTTepoppvouo-r;?. This is a correction for Trrcpoi^vouo-r)?, the
textual reading in the Benedictine and Spencer's edd.
' aAAoKOToi'.

8 KOpui'7).

9 napaxapaTTovTe's Kal paSiovpyovvTe';.


becoming a philosopher — displayed by this man
towards this very ancient Jewish narrative. For,
not being able to say anything against the his-
tory of the deluge, and not perceiving what he
might have urged against the ark and its dimen-
sions, — viz., that, according to the general opin-
ion, which accepted the statements that it was
three hundred cubits in length, and fifty in
breadth, and thirty in height, it was impossible
to maintain that it contained (all) the animals
that were upon the earth, fourteen specimens of

every clean and four of every unclean beast,

he merely termed it " monstrous, containing' all
things within it." Now wherein was its " mon-
strous " character, seeing it is related to have
been a hundred years in building, and to have
had the three hundred cubits of its length and
the fifty of its breadth contracted, until the thirty
cubits of its height terminated in a top one cubit
long and one cubit broad? Why should we not
rather admire a structure which resembled an
extensive city, if its measurements be taken to
mean what they are capable of meaning,'" so that
it was nine myriads of cubits long in the base,
and two thousand five hundred in breadth?"'
And why should we not admire the design evinced
in having it so compactly built, and rendered
capable of sustaining a tempest which caused a
deluge ? For it was not daubed with pitch, or
any material of that kind, but was securely coated
with bitumen. And is it not a subject of admi-
ration, that by the providential arrangement of
God, the elements of all the races were brought
into it, that the earth might receive again the
seeds of all living things, while God made use
of a most righteous man to be the progenitor of
those who were to be born after the deluge ?

CHAP. XLir.

In order to show that he had read the book
of Genesis, Celsus rejects the story of the dove,
although unable to adduce any reason which
might prove it to be a fiction. In the next
place, as his habit is, in order to put the narra-
tive in a more ridiculous light, he converts the
"raven" into a "crow," and imagines that Moses
so wrote, having recklessly altered the accounts
related of the Grecian Deucalion; unless per-
haps he regards the narrative as not having pro-
ceeded from Moses, but from several individuals,
as appears from his employing the ////;-«/ num-
ber in the expressions, " falsifying and recklessly
altering the story of Deucalion," '^ as well as from
the words, " For they did not expect, I suppose,
that these things would come to light." But


1° Tw ^yv6.p.ii. \eyecr9ai. rd tuerpa.

" [This question, which is little short of astounding, illustrates
the marvellous reach and play of Origen's fancy at times. See note
supra, p. 262. S.]

'^ TTapap^apciTToi'res /cai paSioupyovvTts.


Chap. XLIV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


517


how should they, who gave their Scriptures to
the whole nation, not expect that they would
come to light, and who predicted, moreover, that
this religion should be proclaimed to all nations ?
Jesus declared, " The kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof; " • and in uttering these
words to the Jews, what other meaning did He
intend to convey than this, viz., that He Him-
self should, through his divine power, bring forth
into light the whole of the Jewish Scriptures,
which contain the mysteries of the kingdom of
God ? If, then, they peruse the Theogonies of
the Greeks, and the stories about the twelve
gods, they impart to them an air of dignity, by
investing them with an allegorical signification ;
but when they wish to throw contempt upon our
biblical narratives, they assert that they are fables,
clumsily invented for infant children !

CHAP. XLIII.

"Altogether absurd, and out of season,"^ he
continues, " is the (account of the) begetting of
children," where, although he has mentioned no
names, it is evident that he is referring to the
history of Abraham and Sarah. Cavilling also at
the " conspiracies of the brothers," he alludes
either to the story of Cain plotting against Abel,^
or, in addition, to that of Esau against Jacob ; "*
and (speaking) of " a father's sorrow," he prob-
ably refers to that of Isaac on account of the
absence of Jacob, and perhaps also to that of
Jacob because of Joseph having been sold into
Egypt. And when relating the " crafty proced-
j ure of mothers," I suppose he means the con-
I duct of Rebecca, who contrived that the blessing
of Isaac should descend, not upon Esau, but
upon Jacob. Now if we assert that in all these
cases God interposed in a very marked degree,5
what absurdity do we commit, seeing we are
persuaded that He never withdraws His provi-
dence ^ from those who devote themselves to
Him in an honourable and vigorous 7 life? He
ridicules, moreover, the acquisition of property
made by Jacob while living with Laban, not un-
derstanding to what these words refer : " And
those which had no spots were Laban's, and
those which were spotted were Jacob's ; "'^ and he
says that " God presented his sons with asses, and
sheep, and camels,'"^ and did not see that "all
these things happened unto them for ensamples,
and were written for our sake, upon whom the


' Cf. Matt. xxi. 43.

2 (fupoi-.

3 Cf. Gen. iv. 8.
* Cf. Gen. .\,\vii. 41.
5 dyxio-Ta 6c TOUTOl?
^ 0ei6T>jTa.

7 eppionei/ius.

8 Cf. Gen. XXX. 42 (LXX.).
stronger Jacob's" (Aiuh. Vers.)

1 Cf. Gen. XXX. 4^.


(TUjLtTTOAtTCVOJLie


' The feebler were Laban's, and the


ends of the world are come." '° The varying
customs (prevailing among the different nations)
becoming famous," are regulated by the word of
God, being given as a possession to him who is
figuratively termed Jacob. For those who be-
come converts to Christ from among the hea-
then, are indicated by the history of Laban and
Jacob.

CHAP. XLIV.

And erring widely from the meaning of Scrip-
ture, he says that " God gave wells '^ also to the
righteous." Now he did not observe that the
righteous do not construct cisterns,'^ but dig wells,
seeking to discover the inherent ground and
source of potable blessings, '■♦ inasmuch as they
receive in a figurative sense the comhiandment
which enjoins, " Drink waters from your own
vessels, and from your own wells of fresh water.
Let not your water be poured out beyond your
own fountain, but let it pass into your own
streets. Let it belong to you alone, and let no
alien partake with thee." '5 Scripture frequently
makes use of the histories of real events, in order
to present to view more important truths, which
are but obscurely intimated ; and of this kind
are the narratives relating to the " wells," and
to the " marriages," and to the various acts of
" sexual intercourse " recorded of righteous per-
sons, respecting which, however, it will be more
seasonable to offer an explanation in the exe-
getical writings referring to those very passages.
But that wells were constructed by righteous men
in the land of the Philistines, as related in the
book of Genesis,'^ is manifest from the wonder-
ful wells which are shown at Ascalon, and which
are deserving of mention on account of their
structure, so foreign and peculiar compared with
that of other wells. Moreover, that both young
women '7 and female servants are to be under-
stood metaphorically, is not our doctrine merely,
but one which we have received from the begin-
ning from wise men, among whom a certain one
said, when exhorting his hearers to investigate
the figurative meaning : " Tell me, ye that read
the law, do ye not hear the law? For it is
written that Abraham had two sons ; the one by
a bond maid, tiie other by a free woman. But
he who was of the bond woman was born after
the flesh ; but he of the free woman was by
promise. Which things are an allegory : for


«° Cf. I Cor. X. II. _ _

J' Trap* 01? Ta TTOtKtAa ^Gt] €iTL<njtia yci'o/nf »'a, Tw Ao-yo* toO @€ov
n-oAiTei;«Toi, SoOevTa kttJcti? tw Tpon-iKw? KaXov/xevui 'laKio$: eiri-
<7r)uix is the term employed to denote the "spotted" cattle of Laban,
and is here used by Origen in its figurative sense of " distinguished,"
thus playing on the double meaning of the word.

•3 Aa/c/cou?.

'■• rriv efvndpxovffav yriv Ka'i ap^rji' tmv TroTifiuiv ayaffwv,
Boherellus proposes: rr^v ivvTrdpxovaav irifyriv Kal ap\ri>' tuii'
TTOTitXUJV vSaTwi',

IS Cf. Prov. V. 15-17.
'<> Cf. Gen. xxvi. 15.

17 i/ti(ji(J)as.


5i8


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


these are the two covenants ; the one from
the Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage,
which is Agar." ' And a little after, " But
Jerusalem which is above is free, which is
the mother of us all." And any one who will
take up the Epistle to the Galatians may learn
how the passages relating to the " marriages,"
and the intercourse with " the maid-servants,"
have been allegorized ; the Scripture desiring us
to imitate not the literal acts of those who did
these things, but (as the apostles of Jesus are
accustomed to call them) the spiritual.


And whereas Celsus ought to have recognised
the love of truth displayed by the writers of sacred
Scripture, who have not concealed even what is
to their discredit,^ and thus been led to accept
the other and more marvellous accounts as true,
he has done the reverse, and has characterized
the story of Lot and his daughters (without ex-
amining either its literal or its figurative mean-
ing) as " worse than the crimes of Thyestes."
The figurative signification of that passage of
history it is not necessary at present to explain,
nor what is meant by Sodom, and by the words
of the angels to him who was escaping thence,
when they said : " Look not behind thee, neither
stay thou in all the surrounding district ; escape
to the mountain, lest thou be consumed ;"3 nor
what is intended by Lot and his wife, who be-
came a pillar of salt because she turned back ;
nor by his daughters intoxicating their father,
that they might become mothers by him. But
let us in a few words soften down the repulsive
features of the history. The nature of actions —
good, bad, and indifferent — has been investi-
gated by the Greeks ; and the more successful
of such investigators * lay down the principle that
intention alone gives to actions the character of
good or bad, and that all things which are done
without a purpose are, strictly speaking, indiffer-
ent ; that when the intention is directed to a
becoming end, it is praiseworthy ; when the
reverse, it is censurable. They have said, accord-
ingly, in the section relating to " things indiffer-
ent," that, strictly speaking, for a man to have
sexual intercourse with his daughters is a thing
indifferent, although such a thing ought not to
take place in established communities. And for
the sake of hypothesis, in order to show that
such an act belongs to the class of things indif-
ferent, they have assumed the case of a wise
man being left with an only daughter, the entire
human race besides having perished ; and they
put the question whether the father can fitly have


intercourse with his daughter, in order, agreeably
to the supposition, to prevent the extermination
of mankind. Is this to be accounted sound rea-
soning among the Greeks, and to be commended
by the influential 5 sect of the Stoics ; but when
young maidens, who had heard of the burning
of the world, though without comprehending (its
full meaning), saw fire devastating their city and
j country, and supposing that the only means left
of rekindling the flame ^ of human life lay in
their father and themselves, should, on such a
supposition, conceive the desire that the world
should continue, shall their conduct be deemed
worse than that of the wise man who, according
to the hypothesis of the Stoics, acts becomingly
in having intercourse with his daughter in the
case already supposed, of all men having been
destroyed? I am not unaware, however, that
some have taken offence at the desire ^ of
Lot's daughters, and have regarded their con-
duct as very wicked ; and have said that two
accursed nations — Moab and Ammon — have
sprung from that unhallowed intercourse. And
yet truly sacred Scripture is nowhere found dis-
tinctly approving of their conduct as good, nor
yet passing sentence upon it as blameworthy.
Nevertheless, whatever be the real state of the
case, it admits not only of a figurative meaning,
but also of being defended on its own merits.'^

CHAP. XLVI.

Celsus, moreover, sneers at the " hatred " of
Esau (to which, I suppose, he refers) against
Jacob, although he was a man who, according
to the Scriptures, is acknowledged to have been
wicked ; and not clearly stating the story of
Simeon and Levi, who sallied out (on the She-
chemites) on account of the insult offered to their
sister, who had been violated by the son of the
Shechemite king, he inveighs against their con-
duct. And passing on, he speaks of " brothers
selling (one another)," alluding to the sons of
Jacob ; and of " a brother sold," Joseph to wit;
and of " a father deceived," viz., Jacob, because
he entertained no suspicion of his sons when
they showed him Joseph's coat of many colours,
but believed their statement, and mourned for
his son, who was a slave in Egypt, as if he were
dead. And observe in what a spirit of hatred
and falsehood Celsus collects together the state-
ments of the sacred history ; so that wherever it
appeared to him to contain a ground of accusa-
tion he produces the passage, but wherever there
is any exhibition of virtue worthy of mention —


' Cf. Gal. iv. 21-24.

3 Gen. xix. 17.

^ ot €TriTvyxoifOvT€s "ye


5 OVK euKaracppocrjTOi auTOis.

6 ^uiirvpor.

7 liovKinfjLaTi.

8 e'xei Si TLva kol Ka9' avTO oTroAo-yi'ai'. [Our Edinburgh
translator gives a misleading rendering here. Origen throughout
this part of his argument is reasoning aii hominem, and has shown
that Greek philosophy sustains this idea.]


Chap. XLVIIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


519


as when Joseph would not gratify the lust of his
mistress, refusing alike her allurements and her
threats — he does not even mention the circum-
stance ! He should see, indeed, that the con-
duct of Joseph was far superior to what is related
of Bellerophon,' since the former chose rather
to be shut up in prison than do violence to his
virtue. For although he might have offered a
just defence against his accuser, he magnani-
mously remained silent, entrusting his cause to
God.

CHAP. XLVII.

Celsus next, for form's sake,^ and with great
want of precision, speaks of " the dreams of the
chief butler and chief baker, and of Pharaoh,
and of the explanation of them, in consequence
of which Joseph was taken out of prison in order
to be entrusted by Pharaoh with the second place
in Egypt." What absurdity, then, did the history
contain, looked at even in itself, that it should
be adduced as matter of accusation by this Cel-
sus, who gave the title of True Discourse to a
treatise not containing doctrines, but full of
charges against Jews and Christians? He adds :
" He who had been sold behaved kindly to his
brethren (who had sold him), when they were
suffering from hunger, and had been sent with
their asses to purchase (provisions) ; " although
he has not related these occurrences (in his trea-
tise). But he does mention the circumstance of
Joseph making himself known to his brethren,
although I know not with what view, or what
absurdity he can point out in such an occurrence ;
since it is impossible for Momus himself, we
might say, to find any reasonable fault with events
which, apart from their figurative meaning, pre-
sent so much that is attractive. He relates, fur-
ther, that "Joseph, who had been sold as a slave,
was restored to liberty, and went up with a sol-
emn procession to his father's funeral," and thinks
that the narrative furnishes matter of accusation
against us, as he makes the following remark :
" By whom (Joseph, namely) the illustrious and
divine nation of the Jews, after growing up in
Egypt to be a multitude of people, was com-
manded to sojourn somewhere beyond the limits
of the kingdom, and to pasture their flocks in
districts of no repute." Now the words, " that
they were commanded to pasture their flocks in
districts of no repute," are an addition, proceed-
ing from his own feelings of hatred ; for he has
j not shown that Goshen, the district of Egypt, is
a place of no repute. The exodus of the people
from Egypt he calls a flight, not at all remem-
1 bering what is written in the book of Exodus
I regarding the departure of the Hebrews from
I the land of Egypt. We have enumerated these


' Cf. Homer, Iliad, vi. 160.

2 OCTiaS KViK.iV.


instances to show that what, literally considered,
might appear to furnish ground of accusation,
Celsus has not succeeded in proving to be either
objectionable or foolish, having utterly failed to
establish the evil character, as he regards it, of
our Scriptures.

CHAP. XLVIII.

In the next place, as if he had devoted him-
self solely to the manifestation of his hatred and
dislike of the Jewish and Christian doctrine, he
says : " The more modest of Jewish and Chris-
tian writers give all these things an allegorical
meaning ; " and, " Because they are ashamed of
these thmgs, they take refuge in allegory." Now
one might say to him, that if we must admit
fables and fictions, whether written with a con-
cealed meaning or with any other object, to be
shameful narratives when taken in their literal
acceptation, 3 of what histories can this be said
more truly than of the Grecian? In these his-
tories, gods who are sons castrate the gods who
are their fathers, and gods who are parents de-
vour their own children, and a goddess-mother
gives to the " father of gods and men " a stone
to swallow instead of his own son, and a father
has intercourse with his daughter, and a wife
binds her own husband, having as her allies in
the work the brother of the fettered god and his
own daughter ! But why should I enumerate
these absurd stories of the Greeks regarding
their gods, which are most shameful in them-
selves, even though invested with an allegorical
meaning? (Take the instance) where Chrysip-
pus of Soli, who is considered to be an ornament
of the Stoic sect, on account of his numerous
and learned treatises, explains a picture at Samos,
in which Juno was represented as committing
unspeakable abominations with Jupiter. This
reverend philosopher says in his treatises, that
matter receives the spermatic words-* of the god,
and retains them within herself, in order to
ornament the universe. For in the picture at
Samos Juno represents matter, and Jupiter god.
Now it is on account of these, and of countless
other similar fables, that we would not even in
word call the God of all things Jupiter, or the
sun Apollo, or the moon Diana. IJut we offer to
the Creator a worship which is pure, and speak
with religious respect of His noble works of
creation, not contaminating even in word the
things of God ; approving of the language of
Plato in the Philehus, who would not admit that
pleasure was a goddess, " so great is my rever-
ence, Protarchus," he says, " for the very names
of the gods." We verily entertain such rever-
ence for the name of God, and for His noble
works of creation, that we would not, even under


3 Kara Ty\v TTputTrjv €KSo\-qi',

4 Tou? anipfxaTiKOv; \6yov^.


520


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


pretext of an allegorical meaning, admit any
fable which might do injury to the young.

CHAP. XLIX.

If Celsus had read the Scriptures in an impar-
tial spirit, he would not have said that " our
writings are incapable of admitting an allegori-
cal meaning." For from the prophetic Scrip-
tures, in which historical events are recorded
(not from the historical), it is possible to be
convinced that the historical portions also were
written with an allegorical purpose, and were
most skilfully adapted not only to the multitude
of the simpler believers, but also to the few who
are able or willing to investigate matters in an
intelligent spirit. If, indeed, those writers at
the present day who are deemed by Celsus the
" more modest of the Jews and Christians" were
the (first) allegorical interpreters of our Scrip-
tures, he would have the appearance, perhaps,
of making a plausible allegation. But since the
very fathers and authors of the doctrines them-
selves give them an allegorical signification,
what other inference can be drawn than that
they were composed so as to be allegorically un-
derstood in their chief signification? ' And we
shall adduce a few instances out of very many
to show that Celsus brings an empty charge
against the Scriptures, when he says " that they
are incapable of admitting an allegorical mean-
ing." Paul, the apostle of Jesus, says : " It is
written in the law, Thou shalt not muzzle the
mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn.
Doth God take care for oxen ? or saith He it al-
together for our sakes ? For our sakes, no doubt,
this is written, that he that plougheth should
plough in hope, and he that thresheth in hope
of partaking." ^ And in another passage the
same Paul says : " For it is written, For this
cause shall a man leave his father and mother,
and shall be joined to his wife, and they two
shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery ; but
I speak concerning Christ and the Church." ^
And again, in another place : " We know that
all our fathers were under the cloud, and all
passed through the sea ; and were all baptized
UHto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea.""*
Then, explaining the history relating to the man-
na, and that referring to the miraculous issue of
the water from the rock, he continues as follows :
" And they did all eat the same spiritual meat,
and did all drink the same spiritual drink. For
they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed
them, and that Rock was Christ." s Asaph,
moreover, who, in showing the histories in Exo-


* Kara Tor nporfyovfJievov vovv,

2 Cf. I Cor. ix. 9, lo, and Deut. xxv. 4.

3 Cf. Eph. V. 31, 32. Cf Gen. ii. 24.

* Cf. I Cor. X. I, 2.
5 Cf. I Cor. X. 3, 4.


dus and Numbers to be full of difficulties and
parables,^ begins in the following manner, as re-
corded in the book of Psalms, where he is about
to make mention of these? things : " Give ear, O
my people, to my law : incline your ears to the
words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in
parables ; I will utter dark sayings of old, which
we have heard and known, and our fathers have
told us," 7


Moreover, if the law of Moses had contained
nothing which was to be understood as having a
secret meaning, the prophet would not have said
in his prayer to God, " Open Thou mine eyes,
and I will behold wondrous things out of Thy
law ; " ^ whereas he knew that there was a veil
of ignorance lying upon the heart of those who
read but do not understand the figurative mean-
ing, which veil is taken away by the gift of God,
when He hears him who has done all that he
can,9 and who by reason of habit has his senses
exercised to distinguish between good and evil,
and who continually utters the prayer, " Open
Thou mine eyes, and I will behold wondrous
things out of Thy law." And ivho is there that,
on reading of the dragon that lives in the Egyp-
tian river, '° and of the fishes which lurk in his
scales, or of the excrement of Pharaoh which
fills the mountains of Egypt," is not led at once
to inquire who he is that fills the Egyptian moun-
tains with his stinking excrement, and what the
Egyptian mountains are ; and what the rivers in
Egypt are, of which the aforesaid Pharaoh boast-
fully says, " The rivers are mine, and I have
made them ; " '° and who the dragon is, and the
fishes in its scales, — and this so as to harmo-
nize with the interpretation to be given of the
rivers ? But why establish at greater length what
needs no demonstration? For to these things
applies the saying : " Who is wise, and he shall
understand these things ? or who is prudent, and
he shall know them?"'^ Now I have gone at
some length into the subject, because I wished
to show the unsoundness of the assertion of
Celsus, that " the more modest among the Jews
and Christians endeavour somehow to give these
stories an allegorical signification, although some
of them do not admit of this, but on the contrary
are exceedingly silly inventions." Much rather
are the stories of the Greeks not only very silly,
but very impious inventions. For our narratives
keep expressly in view the multitude of simpler
believers, which was not done by those who in-
vented the Grecian fables. And therefore not


* TvpoBKriu-ara (tat jrapa^oAoi.

7 Cf Ps. Ixxviii. 1-3.

8 Cf Ps, cxix. 18.

9 eiTav firaKova-ri Tov Trap' eouTOu TrdvTa noiricTavTOi.
'° Cf Ezek. xxix. 3.

" Cf. Ezek. xxxii. 5, 6,
*^ Cf. Hos. xiv. 9.


Chap. LIIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


521


without propriety does Plato expel from his state
all fables and poems of such a nature as those
of which we have been speaking.

CHAP. LI.

Celsus appears to me to have heard that there
are treatises in existence which contain allegor-
ical explanations of the law of Moses. These,
however, he could not have read ; for if he had,
he would not have said : " The allegorical ex-
planations, however, which have been devised,
are much more shameful and absurd than the
fables themselves, inasmuch as they endeavour
to unite with marvellous and altogether insensate
folly things which cannot at all be made to har-
monize." He seems to refer in these words to
the works of Philo, or to those of still older
writers, such as Aristobulus. But I conjecture
that Celsus has not read their books, since it
appears to me that in many passages they have
so successfully hit the meaning (of the sacred
writers), that even Grecian philosophers would
have been captivated by their explanations ; for
in their writings we find not only a polished style,
but exquisite thoughts and doctrines, and a ra-
tional use of what Celsus imagines to be fables
in the sacred writings. I know, moreover, that
Numenius the Pythagorean — a surpassingly ex-
cellent expounder of Plato, and who held a
foremost place as a teacher of the doctrines of
Pythagoras — in many of his works quotes from
the writings of Moses and the prophets, and
applies to the passages in question a not improb-
able allegorical meaning, as in his work called
Epops, and in those which treat of " Numbers "
and of " Place." And in the third book of his
dissertation on The Good, he quotes also a nar-
rative regarding Jesus — without, however, men-
tioning His name — and gives it an allegorical
signification, whether successfully or the reverse
I may state on another occasion. He relates
also the account respecting Moses, and Jannes,
and Jambres.' But we are not elated on account
of this instance, though we express our approval
of Numenius, rather than of Celsus and other j
Greeks, because he was willing to investigate our
histories from a desire to acquire knowledge, and
was (duly) affected by them as narratives which
were to be allegorically understood, and which
did not belong to the category of foolish com-
positions.

CHAP. LII.

After this, selecting from all the treatises which
contain allegorical explanations and interpreta-
tions, expressed in a language and style not to
be despised, the least important,^ such as might
contribute, indeed, to strengthen the faith of


' Cf. 2 Tim. iii. 8. [Note this testimony concerning Numenius. J 3 v^/vy^.

^ TO euTsAeo-Tepoi'. 4 iiAij.


the multitude of simple believers, but were not
adapted to impress those of more intelligent
mind, he continues : " Of such a nature do I
know the work to be, entitled Controversy be-
tween one Papiscus and Jason, which is fitted to
excite pity and hatred instead of laughter. It
is not my purpose, however, to confute the state-
ments contained in such works ; for their fallacy
is manifest to all, especially if any one will have
the patience to read the books themselves.
Rather do I wish to show that Nature teaches
this, that God made nothing that is mortal, but
that His works, whatever they are, are immortal,
and theirs mortal. And the soul ^ is the work of
God, while the nature of the body is different.
And in this respect there is no difference be-
tween the body of a bat, or of a worm, or of a
frog, and that of a man ; for the matter 't is the
same, and their corruptible part is alike." Never-
theless I could wish that every one who heard
Celsus declaiming and asserting that the treatise
entitled Controversy bchoccn Jason and Papiscus
regarding Christ wii?, fitted to excite not laughter,
but hatred, could take the work into his hands,
and patiently listen to its contents ; that, finding
in it nothing to excite hatred, he might condemn
Celsus out of the book itself. For if it be im-
partially perused, it will be found that there is
nothing to excite even laughter in a work in
which a Christian is described as conversing
with a Jew on the subject of the Jewish Scrip-
tures, and proving that the predictions regarding
Christ fitly apply to Jesus ; although the other
disputant maintains the discussion in no ignoble
style, and in a manner not unbecoming the char-
acter of a Jew.


I do not know, indeed, how he could conjoin
things that do not admit of union, and which
cannot exist together at the same time in human
nature, in saying, as he did, that " the above
treatise deserved to be treated both with pity
and hatred." For every one will admit that he
who is the object of pity is not at the same
moment an object of hatred, and that he who
is the object of hatred is not at the same time a
subject of pity. Celsus, moreover, says that it
was not his purpose to refute such statements,
because he thinks that their absurdity is evident
to all, and that, even before offering any logical
refiitation, they will appear to be bad, and to
merit both pity and hatred. But we invite him
who peruses this reply of ours to the charges of
Celsus to have patience, and to listen to our
sacred writings themselves, and, as far as possi-
ble, to form an opinion from their contents of
the purpose of the writers, and of their con-


52:


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


sciences and disposition of mind ; for he will
discover that they are men who strenuously con-
tend for what tliey uphold, and that some of
them show that the history which they narrate
is one which they have both seen and experi-
enced/ which was miraculous, and worthy of
being recorded for the advantage of their future
hearers. Will any one indeed venture to say
that it is not the source and fountain of all bless-
ing ^ (to men) to believe in the God of all
things, and to perform all our actions with the
view of pleasing Him in everything whatever,
and not to entertain even a thought unpleasing
to Him, seeing that not only our words and
deeds, but our very thoughts, will be the subject
of future judgment? And what other argu-
ments would more effectually lead human nature
to adopt a virtuous life, than the belief or opin-
ion that the supreme God beholds all things,
not only what is said and done, but even what
is thought by us ? And let any one who likes
compare any other system which at the same
time converts and ameliorates, not merely one
or two individuals, but, as far as in it hes, count-
less numbers, that by the comparison of both
methods he may form a correct idea of the ar-
guments which dispose to a virtuous life.

CHAP. LIV.

But as in the words which I quoted from Cel-
sus, which are a paraphrase from the Timcpus,
certain expressions occur, such as, " God made
nothing mortal, but immortal things alone, while
mortal things are the works of others, and the
soul is a work of God, but the nature of the
body is different, and there is no difference
between the body of a man and that of a bat,
or of a worm, or of a frog ; for the matter is
the same, and their corruptible part alike," —
let us discuss these points for a little ; and let
us show that Celsus either does not disclose his
Epicurean opinions, or, as might be said by one
person, has exchanged them for better, or, as
another might say, has nothing in common save
the name, with Celsus, the Epicurean. For he
ought, in giving expression to such opinions, and
in proposing to contradict not only us, but the
by no means obscure sect of philosophers who
are the adherents of Zeno of Citium, to have
proved that the bodies of animals are not the
work of God, and that the great skill displayed
in their construction did not proceed from the
highest intelligence. And he ought also, with
regard to the countless diversities of plants,
which are regulated by an inherent, incompre-
hensible nature,^ and which have been created


' The reading in the text of Spencer and of the Benedictine ed.
is KaTaAeiififleio-nc, for whieh Lommatzsch has adopted the con-
jecture of Boherellus, KaTaAr)<J)etio-ai'.

2 w./)€Aeia?.


for the by no means despicable * ftse of man in
general, and of the animals which minister to
man, whatever other reasons may be adduced
for their existence, 5 not only to have stated his
opinion, but also to have shown us that it was
no perfect intelligence which impressed these
qualities upon the matter of plants. And when
he had once represented (various) divinities as
the creators of all the bodies, the soul alone
being the work of God, why did not he, who
separated these great acts of creation, and ap-
portioned them among a plurality of creators,
next demonstrate by some convincing reason
the existence of these diversities among divini-
ties, some of which construct the bodies of
men, and others — those, say, of beasts of bur-
den, and others — those of wild animals ? And
he who saw that some divinities were the crea-
tors of dragons, and of asps, and of basihsks,
and others of each plant and herb according to
its species, ought to have explained the causes
of these diversities. For probably, had he
given himself carefully to the investigation of
each particular point, he would either have ob-
served that it was one God who was the creator
of all, and who made each thing with a certain
object and for a certain reason ; or if he had
failed to observe this, he would have discovered
the answer which he ought to return to those
who assert that corruptibility is a thing indif-
ferent in its nature ; and that there was no
absurdity in a world which consists of diverse
materials, being formed by one architect, who
constructed the different kinds of things so as
to secure the good of the whole. Or, finally,
he ought to have expressed no opinion at all on
so important a doctrine, since he did not intend
to prove what he professed to demonstrate ;
unless, indeed, he who censures others for pro-
fessing a simple faith, would have us to believe
his mere assertions, although he gave out that
he would not merely assert, but would prove
his assertions.

CHAP. LV.

But I maintain that, if he had had the patience
(to use his own expression) to listen to the
writings of Moses and the prophets, he would
have had his attention arrested by the circum-
stance that the expression " God made " is ap-
plied to heaven and earth, and to what is called
the firmament, and also to the lights and stars;
and after these, to the great fishes, and to every
living thing among creeping animals which the
waters brought forth after their kinds, and to
every fowl of heaven after its kind ; and after
these, to the wild beasts of the earth after their
kind, and the beasts after their kind, and to


TTOTf aAAtUS OVTliJV


Chap. LVIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


every creeping thing upon the earth after its
kind ; and last of all to man. The expression
"' made," however, is not applied to other things ;
but it is deemed sufficient to say regarding light,
"And it was light;" and regarding the one
gathering together of all the waters that are |
under the whole heaven, " It was so." And in ,
like manner also, with regard to what grew upon |
the earth, where it is said, " The earth brought
forth grass, and herb yielding seed after its kind
and after its likeness, and the fruit-tree yielding
fruit, whose seed is in itself, after its kind, upon .
the earth." He would have inquired, moreover, '
whether the recorded commands of God re-
specting the coming into existence of each part
of the world were addressed to one thing or to
several ; ' and he would not lightly have charged
with being unintelligible, and as having no secret
meaning, the accounts related in these books,
either by Moses, or, as we would say, by the
Divine Spirit speaking in Moses, from whom also
he derived the power of prophesying ; since he
" knew both the present, and the future, and the
past," in a higher degree than those priests who are
alleged by the poets to have possessed a knowl-
edge of these things.

CHAP. LVI.

Moreover, since Celsus asserts that " the soul
is the work of God, but that the nature of body
is different ; and that in this respect there is no
difference between the body of a bat, or of a
worm, or of a frog, and that of a man, for the
matter is the same, and their corruptible part
alike," — we have to say in answer to this argu-
ment of his, that if, since the same matter under-
lies the body of a bat, or of a worm, or of a
frog, or of a man, these bodies will differ in no
respect from one another, it is evident then that
these bodies also will differ in no respect from
the sun, or the moon, or the stars, or the sky, or
any other thing which is called by the Greeks a
I god, cognisable by the senses.^ For the same
\ matter, underlying all bodies, is, properly speak-
I ing, without qualities and without form, and
} derives its qualities from some (other) source, I
I know not whence, since Celsus will have it that
I nothing corruptible can be the work of God.
I Now the corruptible part of everything whatever,
being produced from the same underlying mat-
1 ter, must necessarily be the same, by Celsus' own
I showing ; unless, indeed, finding himself here
{ hard pressed, he should desert Plato, who makes
I the soul arise from a certain bowl,^ and take
j refuge with Aristotle and the Peripatetics, who
maintain that the ether is immaterial^'' and con-


sists of a fifth nature, separate from the other
four elements,5 against which view both the
Platonists and the Stoics have nobly protested.
And we too, who are despised by Celsus, will
contravene it, seeing we are required to explain
and maintain the following statement of the
prophet : " The heavens shall perish, but Thou
remainest : and they all shall wax old as a gar-
ment ; and as a vesture shalt Thou fold them
up, and they shall be changed : but Thou art
the same."^ These remarks, however, are suf-
ficient in reply to Celsus, when he asserts that
" the soul is the work of God, but that the nature
of body is different ; " for from his argument it
follows that there is no difference between the
body of a bat, or of a worm, or of a frog, and
that of a heavenly ^ being.


CHAP. LVII.

See, then, whether we ought to yield to one
who, holding such opinions, calumniates the
Christians, and thus abandon a doctrine which
explains the difference existing among bodies
as due to the different qualities, internal and ex-
ternal, which are implanted in them. For we,
too, know that there are " bodies celestial, and
bodies terrestrial ; " and that " the glory of the
celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial
another ; " and that even the glory of the celes-
tial bodies is not alike : for " one is the glory of
the sun, and another the glory of the stars ; "
and among the stars themselves, " one star dif-
fereth from another star in glory." ^ And there-
fore, as those who expect the resurrection of the
dead, we assert that the qualities which are in ■
bodies undergo change : since some bodies,
which are sown in corruption, are raised in in-
corruption ; and others, sown in dishonour, are
raised in glory ; and others, again, sown in
weakness, are raised in power ; and those which
are sown natural bodies, are raised as spiritual.^
That the matter which underlies bodies is capa-
ble of receiving those qualities which the Crea-
tor pleases to bestow, is a point which all of us
who accept the doctrine of providence firmly
hold ; so that, if God so willed, one ciuality is at
the present time implanted in this portion of
matter, and aftenvards another of a different
and better kind. But since there are, from the
beginning of the world, laws '° established for
the purpose of regulating the changes of bodies,
and which will continue while the world lasts, I
do not know whether, when a new and different


3 Cf. Plato in Tiincea.


5 weMTTTT)? irapoL ra. reaaapa (TTOix^ia

6 Cf. Ps. cii. 26, 27.

7 ateepiov.

8 Cf. I Cor. XV. 41, etc.

9 Cf I Cor. XV. 44.
10 ocioi.


524


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


order of things has succeeded ' after the destruc-
tion of the world, and what our Scriptures call
the end^ (of the ages), it is not wonderful that
at the present time a snake should be formed
out of a dead man, growing, as the multitude
affirm, out of the marrow of the back,^ and that
a bee should spring from an ox, and a wasp
from a horse, and a beetle from an ass, and,
generally, worms from the most of bodies. Cel-
sus, indeed, thinks that this can be shown to be
the consequence of none of these bodies being
the work of God, and that qualities (I knew not
whence it was so arranged that one should spring
out of another) are not the work of a divine in-
telligence, producing the changes which occur
in the qualities of matter.

CHAP. LVIII.

But we have something more to say to Celsus,
when he declares that " the soul is the work of
God, and that the nature of body is different,"
and puts forward such an opinion not only with-
out proof, but even without clearly defining his
meaning ; for he did not make it evident whether
he meant that every soul is the work of God, or
only the rational soul. This, then, is what we
have to say : If every soul is the work of God,
it is manifest that those of the meanest irrational
animals are God's work, so that the nature of all
bodies is different from that of the soul. He
appears, however, in what follows, where he says
that " irrational animals are more beloved by
God than we, and have a purer knowledge of
divinity," to maintain that not only is the soul
of man, but in a much greater degree that of
irrational animals, the work of God ; for this
follows from their being said to be more beloved
by God than we. Now if the rational soul alone
be the work of God, then, in the first place, he
did not clearly indicate that such was his opin-
ion ; and in the second place, this deduction fol-
lows from his indefinite language regarding the
soul — viz., whether not every one, but only the
rational, is the work of God — that neither is
the nature of all bodies different (from the soul).
But if the nature of all bodies be not different,
although the body of each animal correspond to
its soul, it is evident that the body of that ani-
mal whose soul was the work of God, would
differ from the body of that animal in which
dwells a soul which was not the work of God.
And so the assertion will be false, that there is
no difference between the body of a bat, or of
a worm, or of a frog, and that of a man.


1 /cau'ijs SiaSe^a/xeVrjs 660O Kol a\\oia<;, etc. For ScaSefameVj)?,
Boherellus would read SiaSefonei-rj?;. Cf. Origen, ch' Princip., iii.
c. 5; ii. c. 3. [See also Neander's Church History, vol. i. p. 328,
and his remarks on " the general o.-noKo.To.tjra.ai'; " of Origen. S.J

2 o-vfTe'Aeia.

3 Cf. Pliny, X. c. 66: " Anguem ex medulla hominis spinfe gigni
accepimus a multis." Cf. also Ovid, Metamorphos., xv. fab. iv.


For it would, indeed, be absurd that certain
stones and buildings should be regarded as more
sacred or more profane than others, according as
they were constructed for the honour of God, or
for the reception of dishonourable and accursed
persons ; * while bodies should not differ from
bodies, according as they are inhabited by ra-
tional or irrational beings, and according as these
rational beings are the most virtuous or most
worthless of mankind. Such a principle of dis-
tinction, indeed, has led some to deify the bodies
of distinguished men,5 as having received a vir-
tuous soul, and to reject and treat with dishon-
our those of very wicked individuals. I do not
maintain that such a principle has been always
soundly exercised, but that it had its origin in a
correct idea. Would a wise man, indeed, after
the death of Anytus and Socrates, think of bury-
ing the bodies of both with like honours? And
would he raise the same mound or tomb to the
memory of both? These instances we have
adduced because of the language of Celsus, that
" none of these is the work of God " (where the
words " of these " refer to the body of a man,
or to the snakes which come out of the body ;
and to that of an ox, or of the bees which come
from the body of an ox ; and to that of a horse,
or of an ass, and to the wasps which come from
a horse, and the beetles which proceed from an
ass) ; for which reason we have been obliged to
return to the consideration of his statement, that
" the soul is the work of God, but that the na-
ture of body is different."


He next proceeds to say, that " a common
nature pervades all the previously mentioned
bodies, and one which goes and returns the same
amid recurring changes."'' In answer to this,
it is evident from what has been already said,
that not only does a common nature pervade
those bodies which have been previously enu-
merated, but the heavenly bodies as well. And
if this is the case, it is clear also that, according
to Celsus (although I do not know whether it is
according to truth), it is one nature which goes
and returns the same through all bodies amid
recurring changes. It is evident also that this is
the case in the opinion of those who hold that the
world is to perish ; while those also who hold
the opposite view will endeavour to show, with-
out the assumption of a fifth substance,7 that in
their judgment too it is one nature " which goes
and returns the same through all bodies amid


Chap. LXIIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


525


recurring changes.',' And thus, even that which
is perishable remains in order to undergo a
change ; ' for the matter which underhes (all
thmgs), while its properties perish, still abides,
according to the opinion of those who hold it to
be uncreated. If, however, it can be shown by I
any arguments not to be uncreated, but to have |
been created for certain purposes, it is clear that !
it will not have the same nature of permanency i
which it would possess on the hypothesis of I
bemg uncreated. But it is not our object at j
present, in answering the charges of Celsus, to '
discuss these questions of natural philosophy'


CHAP. LXII.


CHAP. LXI.

He maintains, moreover, that " no product of
matter is immortal." Now, in answer to this it
may be said, that if no product of matter is im-
mortal, then either the whole world is immortal,
and thus not a product of matter, or it is tiot
niimortal. If, accordingly, the world is immor-
tal (which is agreeable to the view of those who
say that the soul alone is the work of God, and
was produced from a certain bowl), let Celsus
show that the world was not produced from a
matter devoid of qualities, remembering his own
assertion that '' no product of matter is immor-
tal." If, however, the world is not immortal
(seemg it is a product of matter), but mortal, I
does It also perish, or does it not ? For if it ,
perish, it will perish as being a work of God ;
and then, in the event of the worM perishing'
what will become of the sotd, which is also a
work of God ? Let Celsus answer this ! But if
perverting the notion of immortality, he will
assert that, although perishable, it is immortal
because it does not realh perish ; that it is capa-
ble of dying, but does not actually die, — it is
evident that, according to him, there will exist
something which is at the same time mortal and
immortal, by being capable of both conditions • '
and that which does not die will be mortal, and
that which is not immortal by nature will be
termed in a peculiar sense immortal, because it
does not die ! According to what distinction,
then, in the meaning of words, will he maintain
that no product of matter is immortal? And
thus you see that the ideas contained in his
writings, when closely examined and tested, are
proved not to be sound and incontrovertible =
And after making these assertions he adds : "On !
this point these remarks are sufficient; and if I
any one is capable of hearing and examining '
further, he will come to know (the truth)." Let I
us, then, who in his opinion are unintelligent in- |
dividuals, see what will result from our being
able to listen to him for a little, and so continue
our investigation.


After these matters, then, he thinks that he
can make us acquainted in a few words with the
questions regarding the nature of evil, which
have been variously discussed in many important
treatises, and which have received very opposite
explanations. His words are : " There neither
were formerly, nor are there now, nor will there
be again, more or fewer evils in the world (than
have always been). For the nature of all things
IS one and the same, and the generation of evils
IS always the same." He seems to have para-
phrased these words from the discussions in the
ThecBteius, where Plato makes Socrates say : " It
IS neither possible for evils to disappear from
among men, nor for them to become established
among the gods," and so on. But he appears
to me not to have understood Plato correctly
although professing to include all truth 3 in this
one treatise, and giving to his own book against
us the tide of A True Discourse. For the lan-
guage in the Timceus, where it is said, " \Vhen
the gods purify the earth with water," shows that
the earth, when purified with water, contains less
evil than it did before its purification. And this
assertion, that there at one time were fewer evils
in the world, is one which we make, in harmony
with the opinion of Plato, because of the language
in the Thecetetus, where he says that " evils can-
not disappear from among men."*

CHAP. LXIII.

I do not understand how Celsus, while admit-
ting the existence of Providence, at least so far
as appears from the language of this book, can
say that there never existed (at any dme) either
more or fewer evils, but, as it were, a fixed
number ; thus annihilating the beautiful doctrine
regarding the indefinites nature of evil, and
asserting that evil, even in its own nature,^ is
infinite. Now it appears to follow from the posi-
tion, that there never have been, nor are now,
nor ever will be, more or fewer evils in the
world ; that as, according to the view of those
who hold the indestructibility of the world, the
equipoise of the elements is maintained by a
Providence (which does not permit one to gain
the preponderance over the others, in order to
prevent the destruction of the world), so a kind
of Providence presides, as it were, over evils
(the number of which is fixed), 7 to prevent their
being either increased or diminished ! In other
ways, too, are the arguments of Celsus concern-
ing evil confuted, by those philosophers who
have investigated the subjects of good and evil,


3 o Tjji' aKriBfLav eKwepi\aiipdvti)V.

* [Cf. Plato, Thecetetus, xxv. p. 176. S.

° Ka.\ Tw t6ta> A6yu>.

' TQtTQKrht 7\)y\6.vovirt.v .


526


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


-and who have proved also from history that in
former times it was without the city, and with
their faces concealed by masks, that loose women
hired themselves to those who wanted them ;
that subsequently, becoming more impudent,
they laid aside their masks, though not being
permitted by the laws to enter the cities, they
(still) remained without them, until, as the dis-
soluteness of manners daily increased, they dared
even to enter the cities. Such accounts are given
by Chrysippus in the introduction to his work
on Good and Evil. From this also it may be
seen that evils both increase and decrease, viz.,
that those individuals who were called " Ambigu-
ous " ' used formerly to present themselves openly
to view, suffering and committing all shameful
things, while subserving the passions of those
who frequented their society ; but recently they
have been expelled by the authorities.^ And
of countless evils which, owing to the spread of
wickedness, have made their appearance in
human life, we may say that formerly they did
not exist. For the most ancient histories, which
bring innumerable other accusations against sin-
ful men, know nothing of the perpetrators of
abominable 3 crimes.

CHAP, LXIV.

And now, after these arguments, and others
of a similar kind, how can Celsus escape appear-
ing in a ridiculous light, when he imagines that
there never has been in the past, nor will be in
the future, a greater or less number of evils?
For although the nature of all things is one and
the same, it does not at all follow that the pro-
duction of evils is a constant quantity.-^ For
although the nature of a certain individual is one
and the same, yet his mind, and his reason, and
his actions, are not always alike : s there being a
time when he had not yet attained to reason ;
and another, when, with the possession of rea-
son, he had become stained with wickedness,
and when this increased to a greater or less de-
gree ; and again, a time when he devoted him-
self to virtue, and made greater or less progress
therein, attaining sometimes the very summit of
perfection, through longer or shorter periods
of contemplation.^ In like manner, we may
make the same assertion in a higher degree of
the nature of the universe,^ that although it is
one and the same in kind, yet neither do exactly
the same things, nor yet things that are similar,
occur in it ; for we neither have invariably pro-
ductive nor unproductive seasons, nor yet periods


' 'A;u,(()i'^oAoi.

* 'Avopavdmot.

3 apprjTOTroious ovK icrairi.

* oil 7rai'T(o5 xal r] Tuf KaKuv yiveeii del n ouTij.

5 oi/K aei Ta aiiTa ecTTi nepi to riyenoviKOV aVToO, Kal tov \6yov
auToO, Kal Tas 7rpa|6is.

6 ^eiupiai?,

7 TU)C oAlDV.


of continuous rain or of drought. And so in the
same way, with regard to virtuous souls, there
are neither appointed periods of fertility nor of
I barrenness ; and the same is the case with the
I greater or less spread of evil. And those who
j desire to investigate all things to the best of their
j ability, must keep in view this estimate of evils,
! that their amount is not always the same, owing
to the working of a Providence which either pre-
serves earthly things, or purges them by means
of floods and conflagrations ; and effects this,
perhaps, not merely with reference to things on
earth, but also to the whole universe of things ^
[ which stands in need of purification, when the
wickedness that is in it has become great.

CHAP. LXV.

After this Celsus continues : " It is not easy,
indeed, for one who is not a philosopher to
ascertain the origin of evils, though it is suf-
ficient for the multitude to say that they do not
proceed from God, but cleave to matter, and
have their abode among mortal things ; while
the course 9 of mortal things being the same
from beginning to end, the same things must
always, agreeably to the appointed cycles, '° recur
in the past, present, and future." Celsus here
observes that it is not easy for one who is not a
philosopher to ascertain the origin of evils, as if
it were an easy matter for a philosopher to gain
this knowledge, while for one who is not a phil-
osopher it was difficult, though still possible, for
such an one, although with great labour, to attain
it. Now, to this we say, that the origin of evils
is a subject which is not easy even for a philos-
opher to master, and that perhaps it is impossible
even for such to attain a clear understanding of
it, unless it be revealed to them by divine inspi-
ration, both what evils are, and how they origi-
nated, and how they shall be made to disappear.
But although ignorance of God is an evil, and
one of the greatest of these is not to know how
God is to be served and worshipped, yet, as even
Celsus would admit, there are undoubtedly some
philosophers who have been ignorant of this, as
is evident from the views of the different philo-
sophical sects ; whereas, according to our judg-
ment, no one is capable of ascertaining the origin
of evils who does not know that it is wicked to
suppose that piety is preserved uninjured amid
the laws that are established in different states,
in conformity with the generally prevailing ideas
of government." No one, moreover, who has
not heard what is related of him who is called
" devil," and of his " angels," and what he was
before he became a devil, and /low he became


Ta ev oAto toj (cou^ito.

Kara Ta? Terayfj^fva^ ava<VK\ri(T(t^,

fx'-q eyuMKM^ KaKOV elvaL to cofii'^eci' evcre^eiav auiieaSai ev

ca0ecrT7)Kd(7i KaTa Tds KOii'OTepoi' ►'ooun.ti'as TTo\i,Teiai i-o/iois.


Chap. I.XVIIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


5^7


such, and what was the cause of the simultaneous
apostasy of those who are termed his angels, will
be able to ascertain the origin of evils. But he
who would attain to this knowledge must learn
more accurately the nature of demons, and know
that they are not the work of God so far as re-
spects their demoniacal nature, but only in so
far as they are possessed of reason ; and also
what their origin was, so that they became beings
of such a nature, that while converted into de-
mons, the powers of their mind ' remain. And
if there be any topic of human investigation
which is difficult for our nature to grasp, cer-
tainly the origin of evils may be considered to
be such.

CHAP. LXVI. ^

Celsus in the next place, as if he were able to
tell certain secrets regarding the origin of evils,
but chose rather to keep silence, and say only
what was suitable to the multitude, continues as
follows : " It is sufficient to say to the multitude
regarding the origin of evils, that they do not
proceed from God, but cleave to matter, and
dwell among mortal things." It is true, cer-
tainly, that evils dd^not proceed from God ; for
according to Jeremiah, one of our prophets, it
is certain that " out of the mouth of the Most
High proceedeth not evil and good." ^ But to
maintain that matter, dwelling among mortal
things, is the cause of evils, is in our opinion
not true. For it is the mind of each individual
which is the cause of the evil which arises in
him, and this is evil (in the abstract) ; 3 while
the actions which proceed from it are wicked,
and there is, to speak with accuracy, nothing
else in our view that is evil. I am aware, how-
ever, that this topic requires very elaborate treat-
ment, which (by the grace of God enlightening
the mind) may be successfully attempted by him
who is deemed by God worthy to attain the
necessary knowledge on this subject.

CHAP. LXVII,

I do not understand how Celsus should deem
it of advantage, in writing a treatise against us,
to adopt an opinion which requires at least much
plausible reasoning to make it appear, as far as
he can do so, that " the course of mortal things
is the same from beginning to end, and that the
same things must always, according to the ap-
pointed cycles, recur in the past, present, and
future." Now, if this be true, our free-will is
annihilated.-* For if, in the revolution of mortal
things, the same events must perpetually occur
in the past, present, and future, according to the

' t!) riyeixoviKov.

^ Cf. Lam. iii. 38. [In the Authorized Version and in the Vulgate
the passage is interrogative. S.]
^ >)Ti? ecrri to KaKOv.
* TO e</>' Tj/nic avilprjTai..


appointed cycles, it is clear that, of necessity,
Socrates will always be a philosopher, and be
condemned for introducing strange gods and for
corrupting the youth. And Anytus and Melitus
must always be his accusers, and the council of
the Areopagus must ever condemn him to death
by hemlock. And in the same way, according
to the appointed cycles, Phalaris must always
play the tyrant, and Alexander of Pherae com-
mit the same acts of cruelty, and those con-
demned to the bull of Phalaris continually pour
forth their wailings from it. But if these things
be granted, I do not see how our free-will can
be preserved, or how praise or blame can be ad-
ministered with propriety. We may say further
to Celsus, in answer to such a view, that " if the
course of mortal things be always the same from
beginning to end, and if, according to the ap-
pointed cycles, the same events must always
occur in the past, present, and future," then,
according to the appointed cycles, Moses must
again come forth from Egypt with the Jewish
people, and Jesus again -come to dwell in human
life, and perform the same actions which (ac-
cording to this view) he has done not once, but
countless times, as the periods have revolved.
Nay, Christians too will be the same in the ap-
pointed cycles ; and Celsus will again write this
treatise of his, which he has done innumerable
times before,

CHAP. Lxviir.

Celsus, however, says that it is only " the
course of mortal things which, according to
the appointed cycles, must always be the same in
the past, present, and future ; " whereas the ma-
jority of the Stoics maintain that this is the case
not only with the course of mortal, but also with
that of immortal things, and of those whom
they regard as gods. For after the conflagradon
of the world,s which has taken place countless
times in the past, and will happen countless
times in the future, there has been, and will be,
the same arrangement of all things from the
beginning to the end. The Stoics, indeed, in
endeavouring to parry, I don't know how, the
objections raised to their views, allege that as
cycle after cycle returns, all men will be altogether
unchanged^ from tliose who lived in former
cycles ; so that Socrates will not live again, but
one altogether like to Socrates, who will marry a
wife exacdy like Xanthippe, and will be accused
by men exactly like Anytus and Melitus. I do
not understand, however, how the world is to be
always the same, and one individual not differ-
ent from another, and yet the things in it not
the same, though exactly alike. But the main
argument in answer to the statements of Celsus


5 ToO TT-OI'TO?.

* awopaAAa/cToi;?.


528


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


and of the Stoics will be more appropriately
investigated elsewhere, since on the present
occasion it is not consistent with the purpose we
have in view to expatiate on these points.

CHAP. LXIX.

He continues to say that " neither have visible
things ' been given to man (by God), but each
individual thing comes into existence and per-
ishes for the sake of the safety of the whole,
passing agreeably to the change, which I have
already mentioned, from one thing to another."
It is unnecessary, however, to linger over the
refutation of these statements, which have been
already refuted to the best of my ability. And
the following, too, has been answered, viz., that
" there will neither be more nor less good and
evil among mortals." This point also has been
referred to, viz., that "God does not need to
amend His work afresh." ^ But it is not as a
man who has imperfectly designed some piece
of workmanship, and executed it unskilfully,
that God administers correction to the world, in
purifying it by a flood or by a conflagration, but
in order to prevent the tide of evil from rising
to a greater height ; and, moreover, I am of
opinion that it is at periods which are precisely
determined beforehand that He sweeps wicked-
ness away, so as to contribute to the good of the
whole world.3 If, however, he should assert that,
after the disappearance of evil, it again comes
into existence, such questions will have to be
examined in a special treatise.'^ It is, then,
always in order to repair what has become faulty 5
that God desires to amend His work afresh.
For although, in the creation of the world, all
things had been arranged by Him in the most
beautiful and stable manner, He nevertheless
needed to exercise some healing power upon
those who were labouring under the disease of
wickedness, and upon a whole world, which was
polluted as it were thereby. But nothing has
been neglected by God, or will be neglected by
Him ; for He does at each particular juncture
what it becomes Him to do in a perverted and
changed world. And as a husbandman per-
forms different acts of husbandry upon the soil
and its productions, according to the varying
seasons of the year, so God administers entire
ages of time, as if they were, so to speak, so
many individual years, performing during each
one of them what is requisite with a reasonable
regard to the care of the world ; and this, as
it is truly understood by God alone, so also is it
accomplished by Him,


CHAP. LXX.

Celsus has made a statement regarding evils
of the following nature, viz., that "although a
thing may seem to you to be evil, it is by no
means certain that it is so ; for you do not know
what is of advantage to yourself, or to another,
or to the whole world." Now this assertion is
made with a certain degree of caution ; ^ and it
hints that the nature of evil is not wholly wicked,
because that which may be considered so in in-
dividual cases, may contain something which is
of advantage to the whole community. How-
ever, lest any one should mistake my words, and
find a pretence of wrongdoing, as if his wicked-
ness were profitable to the world, or at least
might be so, we have to say, that although God,
who preserves the free-will of each individual,
may make use of the evil of the wicked for the
administration of the world, so disposing them as
to conduce to the benefit of the whole ; yet, not-
withstanding, such an individual is deserving of
censure, and as such has been appointed for a
use, which is a subject of loathing to each sepa-
rate individual, although of advantage to the
whole community.7 It is as if one were to say
that in the case of a city, a man who had com-
mitted certain crimes, and on account of these
had been condemned to serve in public works
that were useful to the community, did some-
thing that was of advantage to the entire city,
while he himself was engaged in an abominable
task,^ in which no one possessed of moderate
understanding would wish to be engaged. Paul
also, the apostle of Jesus, teaches us that even
the very wicked will contribute to the good of
the whole, while in themselves they will be
amongst the vile, but that the most virtuous
men, too, will be of the greatest advantage to
the world, and will therefore on that account
occupy the noblest position. His words are :
" But in a great house there are not only vessels
of gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth ;
and some to honour, and some to dishonour. If
a man therefore purge himself, he shall be a
vessel unto honour, sanctified and meet for the
Master's use, prepared unto every good work." '
These remarks I have thought it necessary to
make in reply to the assertion, that " although a
thing may seem to you to be evil, it is by no
means certain that it is so, for you do not know
what is of advantage either to yourself or to
another," in order that no one may take occa-
sion from what has been said on the subject to
commit sin, on the pretext that he will thus be
useful to the world.


1 Ta opuJjU.eva.

2 0UT6 Tijj ©6(p xaivoTepai Sel Siopfliicrecos.

3 oTi Kai Trai/TT) TeravfAeVios avTi)V a(t>aviiiov (TUfi(#>epd;'Tw! Tw
navri.

* [See note supra, p. 524. S.]
5 To. ct^dA/u-ara avaAafxIidvtiv,


6 e\(i Ti euAaPes.

7 Kal 10? i|/6kt6? KaraTeTaKTai. ecs xpe

XprjO'LIJ.Ol' 5e Ttu TTaVTL,

3 ef aTT€VKTaio} TTpdyp.a.Tt.,
9 Cf. 2 Tim. ii. 20, 21.


inevKTaiav piiv exaiTTif,


Chap. LXXIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


529


CHAP. LXXI.


I Thou bring me to nothing." s Any one, more-
But as, in what follows, Celsus, not under- j over,^who reads in the second book of Kings of
standing that the language of Scripture regard- I ^^^ " wrath " of God, inducing David to num-
ing Crod is adapted to an anthropopathic point I ^5"" ^^^ People, and finds from the first book of
of view,' ridicules those passages which speak of; ^"hronicles that it was the devil who suggested
words of anger addressed to the ungodly, and ' "'""~
of threatenings directed against sinners, we have


to say that, as we ourselves, when talking with
very young children, do not aim at exerting our
own power of eloquence,^ but, adapting our-
selves to the weakness of our charge, both say
and do those thinsrs which


this measure, will, on comparing together the
two statements, easily see for what purpose the


wrath" is mentioned, of which '"'wrath," as
the Apostle Paul declares, all men are children :
" We were by nature children of wrath, even as
others." ^ Moreover, that " wrath " is no passion
on the part of God, but that each one brings it


may appear to us 1 , • ,r 1 , • -°- -

useful for the correction and improvement of the "P°^ hmiseii by his sms, will be clear from the
children as children, so the word of God appears farther statement of Paul : " Or despisest thou
to have dealt with the history, making the capa- ' ^^^ nches of His goodness, and forbearance, and
city of the hearers, and the benefit which they ' long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
were to receive, the standard of the appropriate- i ^^°^^ leadeth thee to repentance? But after thy
ness of its announcements (regarding Him). ' '"'^'^^'^^"^^^ '^^^^ impenitent heart, treasurest up
And, generally, with regard to such a style of ^"^^'^ thyself wrath against the day of wrath, and
speaking about God, we find in the book of revelation of the righteous judgment of God."
Deuteronomy the following : " The Lord thy ^°^^' ^^en, can any one treasure up for himself
God bare with your manners, as a man would "wrath" against a "day of wrath," if "wrath"
bear with the manners of his son." 3 It is, as it ^^ understood in the sense of " passion?" or
were, assuming the manners of a man in order I ^°^^. ^^'"^ ^'^^ " P^^ssion of wrath " be a help to
to secure the advantage of men that the Scrip- i discipline ? Besides, the Scripture, which tells
ture makes use of such expressions ; for it would | ^^. ^'^^ ^° ^^ angry at all, and which says in the
not have been suitable to the condition of the i thi^'^y-seventh Psalm, " Gease from anger, and
multitude, that what God had to say to them j f<^rsake wrath," 7 and which commands us by
should be spoken by Him in a manner more ^^""^ mouth of Paul to " put off all these, anger,
befitting the majesty of His own person. And wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communica-
yet he who is anxious to attain a true under- tion," ^ would not involve God in the same pas-
standing of holy Scripture, will discover the ^^°^ ^^°"^ which it would have us to be altogether
spiritual truths which are spoken by it to those I ^^^^- ^^ ^^ manifest, further, that the language


who are called "spiritual," by comparing the
meaning of what is addressed to those of weaker
mind with what is announced to such as are of
acuter understanding, both meanings being fre-
quently found in the same passage by him who
is capable of comprehending it.

CHAP. LXXII.

We speak, indeed, of the "wrath" of God.
We do not, however, assert that it indicates any
" passion " on His part, but that it is something
which is asumed in order to discipline by stern
means those sinners who have committed many
and ^grievous sins. For that which is called
God's "wrath," and "anger," is a means of dis-
ciphne ; and that such a view is agreeable to
Scripture, is evident from what is said in the
sixth Psalm, " Q Lord, rebuke me not in Thine
anger, neither chasten me in Thy hot displeas-
ure ; " 4 and also in Jeremiah, " O Lord, correct
me, but with judgment : not in 'i^hine anger, lest


^ [See note, p. 502, su^ra.]

^'- JJeut- 1- 31 • Origen appears to have read, not trpoffrdpTjcrei',
the common reading (Heb. Xty;), but erpo7ro4>6pr,'7^u, the reading
of the Codex Alex.
* Cf. Ps. vi. I.


used regarding the wrath of God is to be under-
stood figuratively from what is related of His
"sleep," from which, as if awaking Him, the
prophet says : " Awake, why sleepest Thou,
Lord? "9 and again: "Then the Lord awaked
as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that
shouteth by reason of wine." '° If, then, " sleep "
must mean something else, and not what the
first acceptation of the word conveys, why should
not " wrath " also be understood in a similar
way? The "threatenings," again, are intima-
tions of the (punishments) which are to befall
the wicked : for it is as if one were to call the
words of a physician " threats," when he tells his
patients, "I will have to use the knife, and apply
cauteries, if you do not obey my i)rescriptions,
and regulate your diet and mode of life in such
a way as I direct you." It is no human passions,
then, which we ascribe to God, nor impious
opinions which we entertain of Him ; nor do we
err when we present the various narratives con-
cerning Him, drawn from the Scriptures them-


f. Jer_ X, 24.
f. Eph. a. 3.


5 Cf.

6 Cf

' Cf. Ps. xxxvii. 8.
« Cf. Col. iii. 8.

9 Ps. xliv. 23.
■° Cf. Ps. Ixxviii. 6s.


530


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


selves, after careful comparison one with another.
For those who are wise ambassadors of the
"word" have no other object in view than to
free as far as they can their hearers from weak
opinions, and to endue them with intelligence.

CHAP. LXXIII.

And as a sequel to his non-understanding of
the statements regarding the " wrath " of God,
he continues : " Is it not ridiculous to suppose
that, whereas a man, who became angry with the
Jews, slew them all from the youth upwards, and
burned their city (so powerless were they to
resist him), the mighty God, as they say, being
angry, and indignant, and uttering threats,
should, (instead of punishing them,) send His
own Son, who endured the sufferings which He
did?" If the Jews, then, after the treatment
which they dared to inflict upon Jesus, perished
with all their youth, and had their city consumed
by fire, they suffered this punishment in conse-
quence of no other wrath than that which they
treasured up for themselves ; for the judgment
of God against them, which was determined by
the divine appointment, is termed "wrath"
agreeably to a traditional usage of the Hebrews.
And what the Son of the mighty God suffered,
He suffered voluntarily for the salvation of men,
as has been stated to the best of my ability in
the preceding pages. He then continues : " But
that I may speak not of the Jews alone (for that
is not my object), but of the whole of nature, as
I promised, I will bring out more clearly what
has been already stated." Now what modest
man, on reading these words, and knowing the
weakness of humanity, would not be indignant
at the offensive nature of the promise to give an
account of the " whole of nature," and at an ar-
rogance like that which prompted him to inscribe
upon his book the title which he ventured to
give it (of a True Discourse) ? But let us see
what he has to say regarding the " whole of na-
ture," and what he is to place " in a clearer light."

CHAP. LXXIV.

He next, in many words, blames us for assert-
ing that God made all things for the sake of
man. Because from the history of animals, and
from the sagacity manifested by them, he would
show that all things came into existence not
more for the sake of man than of the irrational
animals. And here he seems to me to speak in
a similar manner to those who, through dislike
of their enemies, accuse them of the same things
for which their own friends are commended.
For as, in the instance referred to, hatred blinds
these persons from seeing that they are accusing
their very dearest friends by the means through
which they think they are slandering their ene-


mies ; so in the same way, Celsus also, becoming
confused in his argument, does not see that he is
bringing a charge against the philosophers of the
Porch, who, not amiss, place man in the fore-
most rank, and rational nature in general before
irrational animals, and who maintain that Provi-
dence created all things mainly on account of
rational nature. Rational beings, then, as being
the principal ones, occupy the place, as it were,
of children in the womb, while irrational and
soulless beings hold that of the envelope which
is created along with the child.' I think, too,
that as in cities the superintendents of the goods
and market discharge their duties for the sake
of no other than human beings, while dogs and
other irrational animals have the benefit of the
superabundance ; so Providence provides in a
special manner for rational creatures ; while this
also follows, that irrational creatures likewise
enjoy the benefit of what is done for the sake of
man. And as he is in error who alleges that the
superintendents of the markets ^ make provision
in no greater degree for men than for dogs, be-
cause dogs also get their share of the goods ; so
in a far greater degree are Celsus and they who
think with him guilty of impiety towards the God
who makes provision for rational beings, in as-
serting that His arrangements are made in no
greater degree for the sustenance of human
beings than for that of plants, and trees, and
herbs, and thorns.

CHAP. LXXV.

For, in the first place, he is of opinion that
" thunders, and lightnings, and rains are not the
works of God," — thus showing more clearly at
last his Epicurean leanings ; and in the second
place, that " even if one were to grant that these
were the works of God, they are brought into
existence not more for the support of us who are
human beings, than for that of plants, and trees,
and herbs, and thorns," — maintaining, like a
true Epicurean, that these things are the product
of chance, and not the work of Providence. For
if these things are of no more use to us than to
plants, and trees, and herbs, and thorns, it is evi-
dent either that they do not proceed from Provi-
dence at all, or from a providence which does not
provide for us in a greater degree than for trees,
and herbs, and thorns. Now, either of these sup-
positions is impious in itself, and it would be fool-
ish to refute such statements by answering any one
who brought against us the charge of impiety ;
for it is manifest to every one, from what has
been said, who is the person guilty of impiety.
In the next place, he adds : " Although you may
say that these things, viz., plants, and trees, and


Kal Koyov fiev e^fi to. \oyiKa., anep ecrrl Trporjyou^cei'o, iraiBcv
lofjieviav • TO. &' aKoya Kai to. atlivxa- xtupt'ou <TvyKTi.ioiJ.evov T?


Chap. LXXVII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


herbs, and thorns, grow for the use of men, why
will you maintain that they grow for the use of
men rather than for that of the most savage of
irrational animals?" Let Celsus then say dis-
tinctly that the great diversity among the prod-
ucts of the earth is not the work of Providence,
but that a certain fortuitous concurrence of
atoms ' gave birth to qualities so diverse, and
that it was owing to chance that so many kinds
of plants, and trees, and herbs resemble one an-
other, and that no disposing reason gave exist-
ence to them,- and that they do not derive their
origin from an understanding, that is beyond all
admiration. We Christians, however, who are
devoted to the worship of the only God, who
created these things, feel grateful for them to
Him who made them, because not only for us,
but also (on our account) for the animals which
are subject to us, He has prepared such a home,^
seeing " He causeth the grass to grow for the
cattle, and herb for the service of man, that He
may bring forth food out of the earth, and wine
that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to
make his face to shine, and bread which strength-
eneth man's heart." + But that He should have
provided food even for the most savage animals
is not matter of surprise, for these very animals
are said by some who have philosophized (upon
the subject) to have been created for the pur-
pose of affording exercise to the rational creature.
And one of our own wise men says somewhere :
" Do not say. What is this? or Wherefore is that?
for all things have been made for their uses.
And do not say, What is this ? or Wherefore is
that? for everything shall be sought out in its
season." 5

CHAP. LXXVI.

After this, Celsus, desirous of maintaining that
Providence created the products of the earth,
not more on our account than on that of the
most savage animals, thus proceeds : " We in-
deed by labour and suffering earn a scanty and
toilsome subsistence,'' while all things are pro-
duced for them without their sowing and plough-
ing." He does not observe that God, wishing
to exercise the human understanding in all coun-
tries (that .it might not remain idle and unac-
cjuainted with the arts), created man a being full
of wants, 7 in order that by virtue of his very
needy condition he might be compelled to be
the inventor of arts, some of which minister to
his subsistence, and others to his protection.
For it was better that those who would not have


oiiSei? Aoyos Tevi-iK


sought out divine things, nor engaged in the
study of philosophy, should be placed in a con-
dition of want, in order that they might employ

I their understanding in the invention of the arts,
than that they should altogether neglect the cul-
tivation of their minds, because their condition
was one of abundance. The want of the neces-
saries of human life led to the invention on the
one hand of the art of husbandry, on the other
to that of the cultivation of the vine ; again, to
the art of gardening, and the arts of carpentry
and smithwork, by means of which were formed
the tools required for the arts which minister to
the support of life. The want of covering, again,
introduced the art of weaving, which followed
that of wool-carding and spinning ; and again,
that of house-building : and thus the intelligence
of men ascended even to the art of architecture.
The want of necessaries caused the products also
of other places to be conveyed, by means of the
arts of sailing and pilotage,^ to those who were
without them \ so that even on that account one
might admire the Providence which made the
rational being subject to want in a far higher
degree than the irrational animals, and yet all
with a view to his advantage. For the irrational
animals have their food provided for them, be-
cause there is not in them even an impulse ^
towards the invention of the arts. They have,
besides, a natural covering ; for they are pro-
vided either with hair, or wings, or scales, or

j shells. Let the above, then, be our answer to
the assertions of Celsus, when he says that " we
indeed by labour and suffering earn a scanty and
toilsome subsistence, while all things are pro-
duced for them without their sowing and plough-
ing."

CHAP. LXXVII.

In the next place, forgetting that his object is
to accuse both Jews and Christians, he quotes
! against himself an iambic verse of Euripides,
which is opposed to his view, and, joining issue
with the words, charges them with being an er-
roneous statement. His words are as follow :
" But if you will quote the saying of Euripides,
that

'The Sun and Night are to mortals slaves,' '°

why should they be so in a greater degree to us
than to ants ^nd flies? For the night is created
for them in order that they may rest, and the
day that they may see and resume their work."
Now it is undoubted, that not only have certain
of the Jews and Christians declared that the sun
and the heavenly bodies ' ' are our servants ; but
he also has said this, who, according to some, is


" Cf. Ps.'ci

5 Cf. Ecclu

6 IJ.6\i<;_Ka


. xxxix. 21, and i6, 17.


8 Sia vavTLKTi^ Kai Ku/Sfpi-rjTtic^?.

9 Aihooarii'.

10 Cf. Eurip., Phaeniss., 546.
" Td iv ovpavw.


532


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


the philosopher of the stage,' and who was a
hearer of the lectures on the philosophy of na-
ture delivered by Anaxagoras. But this man
asserts that all things in the world are subject to
all rational beings, — one rational nature being
taken to represent all, on the principle of a part
standing for the whole ; ^ which, again, clearly
appears from the verse : —

" The Sun and Night are to mortals slaves."

Perhaps the tragic poet meant the day when he
said the sun, inasmuch as it is the cause of the
day, — teaching that those things which most
need the day and night are the things which are
under the moon, and other things in a less degree
than those which are upon the earth. Day and
night, then, are subject to mortals, being created
for the sake of rational beings. And if ants and
flies, which labour by day and rest by night, have,
besides, the benefit of those things which were
created for the sake of men, we must not say
that day and night were brought into being for
the sake of ants and flies, nor must we suppose
that they were created for the sake of nothing,
but, agreeably to the design of Providence, were
formed for the sake of man.

CHAP. LXXVIII.

He next proceeds further to object against
himself^ what is said on behalf of man, viz.,
that the irrational animals were created on his
account, saying : " If one were to call us the
lords of the animal creation because we hunt
the other animals and live upon their flesh, we
would say. Why were not we rather created on
their account, since they hunt and devour us?
Nay, ive require nets and weapons, and the assist-
ance of many persons, along with dogs, when
engaged in the chase ; while they are immedi-
ately and spontaneously provided by nature with
weapons which easily bring us under their power."
And here we may observe, that the gift of under-
standing has been bestowed upon us as a mighty
aid, far superior to any weapon which wild beasts
may seem to possess. We, indeed, who are far
weaker in bodily strength than the beasts, and
shorter in stature than some of them, yet by
means of our understanding obtain the mastery,
and capture the huge elephants. We subdue by
our gentle treatment those animals whose nature
it is to be tamed, while with those whose nature
is different, or which do not appear likely to be
of use to us when tamed, we take such precau-
tionary measures, that when we desire it, we
keep such wild beasts shut up ; and when we


* o Kara T\.va.<i Sxtji'ikos (J)iAo(to(|)o?. Euripides himself is the
person alluded to. He is called by Athenaeus and Clemens Alexan-
drinus {Strom., v. vol. ii. p. 461), 6 tjn t^s <JK-f\vi]'i <f)i.X6cro<l>oi. —
De la Rue.


need the flesh of their bodies for food, we slaugh-
ter them, as we do those beasts which are not
of a savage nature. The Creator, then, has con-
stituted all things the servants of the rational
being and of his natural understanding. For
some purposes we require dogs, say as guardians
of our sheep-folds, or of our cattle-yards, or
goat-pastures, or of our dwellings ; and for other
purposes we need oxen, as for agriculture ; and
for others, again, we make use of those which
bear the yoke, or beasts of burden. And so it
may be said that the race of lions, and bears,
and leopards, and wild boars, and such like, has
been given to us in order to call into exercise
the elements of the manly character that exists
within us.

CHAP. LXXIX.

In the next place, in answer to the human race,
who perceive their own superiority, which far
exceeds that of the irrational animals, he says :
" With respect to your assertion, that God gave
you the power to capture wild beasts, and to
make your own use of them, we would say that,
in all probability, before cities were built, and
arts invented, and societies such as now exist
were formed, and weapons and nets employed,
men were generally caught and devoured by
wild beasts, while wild beasts were very seldom
captured by men." Now, in reference to this,
observe that although men catch wild beasts, and
wild beasts make prey of men, there is a great
difference between the case of such as by means
of their understanding obtain the mastery over
those whose superiority consists in their savage
and cruel nature, and that of those who do not
make use of their understanding to secure their
safety from injury by wild beasts. But when
Celsus says, " before cities were built, and arts
invented, and societies such as now exist were
formed," he appears to have forgotten what he
had before said, that " the world was uncreated
and incorruptible, and that it was only the things
on earth which underwent deluges and conflagra-
tions, and that all these things did not happen at
the same time." Now let it be granted that
these admissions on his part are entirely in har-
mony with our views, though not at all with him
and his statements made above ; yet what does
it all avail to prove that in the beginning men
were mostly captured and devoured by wild
beasts, while wild beasts were never caught by
men ? For, since the world was created in con-
formity with the will of Providence, and God
presided over the universe of things, it was neces-
sary that the elements •* of the human race should
at the commencement of its existence be placed
under some protection of the higher powers, so
that there might be formed from the beginning


Chap. LXXXII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


533


a union of the divine nature with that of men.
And the poet of Ascra, perceiving this, sings : —

" For common then were banquets, and common were
seats,
Alike to immortal gods and mortal men." '

CHAP. LXXX.

Those holy Scriptures, moreover, which bear
the name of Moses, introduce the first men as
hearing divine voices and oracles, and beholding
sometimes the angels of God coming to visit
them.- For it was probable that in the begin-
ning of the world's existence human nature would
be assisted to a greater degree (than afterwards),
until progress had been made towards the attain-
ment of understanding and the other virtues, and
the invention of the arts, and they should thus
be able to maintain life of themselves, and no
longer stand in need of superintendents, and of
those to guide them who do so with a miraculous
manifestation of the means which subserve the
will of God. Now it follows from this, that it is
false that " in the beginning men were captured
and devoured by wild beasts, while wild beasts
Avere very seldom caught by men." And from
this, too, it is evident that the following state-
ment of Celsus is untrue, that " in this way God
rather subjected men to wild beasts." For God
did not subject men to wild beasts, but gave wild
beasts to be a prey to the understanding of man,
and to the arts, which are directed against them,
and which are the product of the understanding.
For it was not without the help of God ^ that
men desired for themselves the means of protec-
tion against wild beasts, and of securing the
mastery over them.

CHAP. LXXXI.

Our noble opponent, however, not observing
how many philosophers there are who admit the
existence of Providence, and who hold that
Providence created all things for the sake of ra-
tional beings, overturns as far as he can those
doctrines which are of use in showing the har-
mony that prevails in these matters between
Christianity and philosophy ; nor does he see
how great is the injury done to religion from
accepting the statement that before God there
is no difference between a man and an ant or a
bee, but proceeds to add, that " if men appear
to be superior to irrational animals on this ac-
count, that they have built cities, and make use
of a political constitution, and forms of govern-
ment, and sovereignties,-* this is to say nothing to
the purpose, for ants and bees do the same.
[ Bees, indeed, have a sovereign, who has followers


I ' Cr. Hesiod, Fragmenta Ittcerta, ed. Goettling, p. 231.
I ^ [Cf. Wordsworth, Excursion : " He sat and talked,"
I book IV., circa med.\


and attendants ; and there occur among them
wars and victories, and slaughterings of the van-
quished,5 and cities and suburbs, and a succession
of labours, and judgments passed upon the idle
and the wicked ; for the drones are driven away
and punished." Now here he did not observe
the difference that exists between what is done
after reason and consideration, and what is the
result of an irrational nature, and is purely me-
chanical. For the origin of these things is not
explained by the existence of any rational prin-
ciple in those who make them, because they do
not possess any such principle ; but the most
ancient Being, who is also the Son of God, and
the King of all things that exist, has created an
irrational nature, which, as being irrational, acts
as a help to those who are deemed worthy of
reason. Cities, accordingly, were established
among men, with many arts and well-arranged
laws ; while constitutions, and governments, and
sovereignties among men are either such as are
properly so termed, and which exemplify certain
virtuous tendencies and workings, or they are
those which are improperly so called, and which
were devised, so far as could be done, in imitation
of the former : for it was by contemplating these
that the most successful legislators established
the best constitutions, and governments, and
sovereignties. None of these things, however,
can be found among irrational animals, although
Celsus may transfer rational names, and arrange-
ments which belong to rational beings, as cities
and constitutions, and rulers and sovereignties,
even to ants and bees ; in respect to which mat-
ters, however, ants and bees merit no approval,
because they do not act from reflection. But
we ought to admire the divine nature, which ex-
tended even to irrational animals the capacity,
as it were, of imitating rational beings, perhaps
with a view of putting rational beings to shame ;
so that by looking upon ants, for instance, they
might become .more industrious and more thrifty
in the management of their goods ; while, by
considering the bees, they might place them-
selves in subjection to their Ruler, and take their
respective parts in those constitutional duties
which are of use in ensuring the safety of cities.

CHAP. LXXXII.

Perhaps also the so-called wars among the
bees convey instruction as to the manner in
which wars, if ever there arise a necessity for
them, should be waged in a just and orderly
way among men. But the bees have no cities
or suburbs ; while their hives and hexagonal
cells, and succession of labours, are for the sake
of men, who require honey for many ])urposes,


5 Toiv T/TTijfieVaji' aipecTftir. " Nota atDetret? hoc loco sumi pro
internecionibus, caidibus. Hand scio an alibi reperiatur pari signiii-
catu. Forte etium scribendum KaSaipeo-ti!." — Rt;.isus.


534


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


both for cure of disordered bodies, and as a
pure article of food. Nor ought we to compare
the proceedings taken by the bees against the
drones with the judgments and punishments in-
flicted on the idle and wicked in cities. But, as
I formerly said, we ought on the one hand in
these things to admire the divine nature, and on
the other to express our admiration of man, who
is capable of considering and admiring all things
(as co-operating with Providence), and who ex-
ecutes not merely the works which are deter-
mined by the providence of God, but also those
which are the consequences of his own foresight.

CHAP. LXXXIII.

After Celsus has finished speaking of the bees,
in order to depreciate (as far as he can) the
cities, and constitutions, and governments, and
sovereignties not only of us Christians, but of all
mankind, as well as the wars which men under-
take on behalf of their native countries, he pro-
ceeds, by way of digression, to pass a eulogy
upon the ants, in order that, while praising them,
he may compare the measures which men take
to secure their subsistence with those adopted
by these insects,' and so evince his contempt
for the forethought which makes provision for
winter, as being nothing higher than the irra-
tional providence of the ants, as he regards it.
it. Now might not some of the more simple-
minded, and such as know not how to look into
the nature of all things, be turned away (so far,
at least, as Celsus could accomplish it) from
helping those who are weighed down with the
burdens (of life), and from sharing their toils,
when he says of the ants, that " they help one
another with their loads, when they see one of
their number toiling under them ? " For he who
needs to be disciplined by the word, but who
does not at all understand ^ its voice, will say :
" Since, then, there is no difference between us
and the ants, even when we help those who are
weary with bearing their heavy burdens, why
should we continue to do so to no purpose ? "
And would not the ants, as being irrational crea-
ture, be greatly puffed up, and think highly of
themselves, because their works were compared
to those of men? while men, on the other hand,
who by means of their reason are enabled to
hear how their philanthropy ^ towards others is
contemned, would be injured, so far as could be
effected by Celsus and his arguments : for he
does not perceive that, while he wishes to turn
away from Christianity those who read his trea-
tise, he turns away also the sympathy of those
who are not Christians from those who bear the


' Trapa^dKj] Tw \6yu> jrpbs Toii? ^vpfiTjKa?. "Verba: tu Koyta
b; Toil? fj.vpixrfica'; addititia videntur et recidenda." — KaEUS.


heaviest burdens (of life). Whereas, had he
been a philosopher, who was capable of per-
ceiving the good which men may do each other,
he ought, in addition to not removing along
with Christianity the blessings which are found
amongst men, to have lent his aid to co-operate
(if he had it in his power) with those principles
of excellence which are common to Christianity
and the rest of mankind. Moreover, even if
the ants set apart in a place by themselves those
grains which sprout forth, that they may not swell
into bud, but may continue throughout the year
as their food, this is not to be deemed as evi-
dence of the existence of reason among ants,
but as the work of the universal mother. Nature,
which adorned even irrational animals, so that
even the most insignificant is not omitted, but
bears traces of the reason implanted in it by
nature. Unless, indeed, by these assertions Cel-
sus means obscurely to intimate (for in many
instances he would like to adopt Platonic ideas)
that all souls are of the same species, and that
there is no difference between that of a man
and those of ants and bees, which is the act of
one who would bring down the soul from the
vault of heaven, and cause it to enter not only
a human body, but that of an animal. Chris-
tians, however, will not yield their assent to such
opinions : for they have been instructed before
now that the human soul was created in the
image of God ; and they see that it is impossi-
ble for a nature fashioned in the divine image to
have its (original) features altogether obliter-
ated, and to assume others, formed after I know
not what likeness of irrational animals.

CHAP. LXXXIV.

And since he asserts that, " when ants die, the
survivors set apart a special place (for their in-
terment), and that their ancestral sepulchres
such a place is," we have to answer, that the
greater the laudations which he heaps upon irra-
tional animals, so much the more does he mag-
nify (although against his will) the work of that
reason which arranged all things in order, and
points out the skill ■♦ which exists among men,
and which is capable of adorning by its reason
even the gifts which are bestowed by nature on
the irrational creation. But why do I say " irra-
tional," since Celsus is of opinion that these ani-
mals, which, agreeably to the common ideas of
all men, are termed irrational, are not really so ?
Nor does he regard the ants as devoid of reason,
who professed to speak of " universal nature,"
and who boasted of his truthfulness in the in-
scription of his book. For, speaking of the ants
conversing with one another, he uses the follow-
ing language : "And when they meet one another


Chap. LXXXVII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


5,


they enter into conversation, for which reason
they never mistake their way ; consequently they
possess a full endowment of reason, and some
common ideas on certain general subjects, and
a voice by which they express themselves regard-
ing accidental things." ' Now conversation be-
tween one man and another is carried on by
means of a voice, which gives expression to the
meaning intended, and which also gives utter-
ances concerning what are called " accidental
things ; " but to say that this was the case with
ants would be a most ridiculous assertion.

CHAP. LXXXV.

He is not ashamed, moreover, to say, in addi- [
tion to these statements (that the unseemly :
character^ of his opinions may be manifest to
those who will live after him) : " Come now, if
one were to look down from heaven upon earth,
in what respect would our actions appear to differ
from those of ants and bees ? " Now does he
who, according to his own supposition, looks
from heaven upon the proceedings of men and
ants, look upon their bodies alone, and not rather '
have regard to the controlling reason which is
called into action by reflection ; ^ while, on the !
other hand, the guiding principle of the latter is |
irrational, and set in motion irrationally by im- !
pulse and fancy, in conjunction with a certain !
natural apparatus ? + But it is absurd to suppose
that he who looks from heaven upon earthly
things would desire to look from such a distance
upon the fio^f/es of men and ants, and would not
rather consider the nature of the guiding princi-
ples, and the source of impulses, whether that
be rational or irrational. And if he once look
upon the source of all impulses, it is manifest ,
that he would behold also the difference which
exists, and the superiority of man, not only over
ants, iDut even over elephants. For he who looks
from heaven will see among irrational creatures,
however large their bodies, no other principle 5
than, so to speak, irrationality ; ^ while amongst
rational beings he will discover reason, the com-
mon possession of men, and of divine and heav-
enly beings, and perhaps of the Supreme God
Himself, on account, of which man is said to
have been created in the image of God, for the
image of the Supreme God is his reason.?

CHAP. LXXXVI.

Immediately after this, as if doing his utmost
to reduce the human race to a still lower position,
and to bring them to the level of the irrational


OVKOVV Kai A07OV <TV/XTrAT/p(iJ(Tt9 €<TTi TTap aUTOl?, Kai KOLVai

at Kado^LKtav Tii'iui', /cal <l>aivri, /cai TvyxdvovTa o-ij/oiaii'd/iici'a.

acxrj/JiOdvvriv.

oil Karavofl &i to AoyiKoi' ffytfioviKOV (cai Aoyi(T(iiC}> Kii/ovfXCfOv;

jaeTOL Tifos f}>viJiKij<; vnoKa7a<TKGvr}<i',

ipXriv.

T7)i/ a\oyia.v,

Adyos,


animals, and desiring to omit not a single cir-
cumstance related of the latter which manifests
their greatness, he declares that " in certain in-
dividuals among the irrational creation there
exists the power of sorcery ; " so that even in
this particular men cannot specially pride them-
selves, nor wish to arrogate a superiority over
irrational creatures. And the following are his
words : "If, however, men entertain lofty notions
because of their possessing the power of sorcery,
yet even in that respect are serpents and eagles
their superiors in wisdom ; for they are acquaint-
ed with many prophylactics against persons and
diseases, and also with the virtues of certain
stones which help to preserve their young. If
men, however, fall in with these, they think that
they have gained a wonderful possession." Now,
in the first place, I know not why he should
designate as sorcery the knowledge of natural
prophylactics displayed by animals, — whether
that knowledge be the result of experience, or
of some natural power of apprehension ; ^ for
the term " sorcery " has by usage been assigned
to something else. Perhaps, indeed, he wishes
quietly, as an Epicurean, to censure the entire
use of such arts, as resting only on the profes-
sions of sorcerers. However, let it be granted
him that men do pride themselves greatly upon
the knowledge of such arts, whether they are
sorcerers or not : how can serpents be in this
respect wiser than men, when they make use of
the well-known fennel 9 to sharpen their power
of vision and to produce rapidity of movement,
having obtained this natural power not from the
exercise of reflection, but from the constitution
of their body,'° while men do not, like serpents,
arrive at such knowledge merely by nature, but
partly by experiment, partly by reason, and some-
times by reflection and knowledge ? So, if eagles,
too, in order to preserve their young in the nest,
carry thither the eagle-stone" when they have
discovered it, how does it appear that they are
wise, and more intelligent than men, who find
out by the exercise of their reflective powers
and of their understanding what has been be-
stowed by nature upon eagles as a gift?

CHAP. LXXXVII.

Let it be granted, however, that there are
other prophylactics against poisons known to
animals : what does that avail to prove that it is
not nature, but reason, which leads, to. the dis-
covery of such things among tliem,? For if
reason were the discoverer; this, one thing (or, if
you will, one or two more things) would not be
(exclusive'^ of all others) the sole discovery


9 Tip fxapddpw.
10 oAA' ex KaracrKfvri^.
" [The aeWTT,?. See Pliny, N. //., x. 4.]
'- aTToTeToy/iei'u)?.


J


536


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


made by serpents, and some other thing the sole
discovery of the eagle, and so on with the rest
of the animals ; but as many discoveries would
have been made amongst them as among men.
But now it is manifest from the determinate in-
clination of the nature of each animal towards
certain kinds of help, that they possess neither
wisdom nor reason, but a natural constitutional
tendency implanted by the Logos ' towards such
things in order to ensure the preservation of the
animal. And, indeed, if I wished to join issue
with Celsus in these matters, I might quote the
words of Solomon from the book of Proverbs,
which run thus : " There be four things which
are litde upon the earth, but these are wiser than
the wise : The ants are a people not strong, yet
they prepare their meat in the summer ; the
conies ^ are but a feeble folk, yet make they their
houses in the rocks ; the locusts have no king,
yet go they forth in order at one command ; and
the spotted lizard, ^ though leaning upon its hands,
and being easily captured, dwelleth in kings'
fortresses." •♦ I do not quote these words, how-
ever, as taking them in their literal signification,
but, agreeably to the title of the book (for it is
inscribed "Proverbs"), I investigate them as
containing a secret meaning. For it is the cus-
tom of these writers (of Scripture) to distribute
into many classes those writings which express
one sense when taken hterally,s but which convey
a different signification as their hidden meaning ;
and one of these kinds of writing is "Proverbs."
And for this reason, in our Gospels too, is our
Saviour described as saying : "These things have
I spoken to you in proverbs, but the time com-
eth when I shall no more speak unto you in
proverbs."^ It is not, then, the visible ants
which are " wiser even than the wise," but they
who are indicated as such under the " proverb-
ial " style of expression. And such must be our
conclusion regarding the rest of the animal crea-
tion, although Celsus regards the books of the
Jews and Christians as exceedingly simple and
commonplace, 7 and imagines that those who
give them an allegorical interpretation do vio-
lence to the meaning of the writers. By what
we have said, then, let it appear that Celsus
calumniates us in vain, and let his assertions
that serpents and eagles are wiser than men also
receive their refutation.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.

And wishing to show at greater length that
even the thoughts of God entertained by the


^ UTTO ToO Aoyou y€yevy)^^vr\,

2 XOi.poypvK\i.oi. Heb. □'^£15^.

3 atTKaKafiMTrf;.

* Cf. Prov. XXX. 24-28.
5 aVToOer.

* John xvi. 25.


human race are not superior to those of all
other mortal creatures, but that certain of the
irrational animals are capable of thinking about
Him regarding whom opinions so discordant
have existed among the most acute of mankind —
Greeks and Barbarians — he continues : " If,
because man has been able to grasp the idea of
God, he is deemed superior to the other ani-
mals, let those who hold this opinion know that
this capacity will be claimed by many of the
other animals ; and with good reason : for what
would any one maintain to be more divine than
the power of foreknowing and predicting future
events ? Men accordingly acquire the art from
the other animals, and especially from birds.
And those who listen to the indications furnished
by them, become possessed of the gift of proph-
ecy. If, then, birds, and the other prophetic
animals, which are enabled by the gift of God
to foreknow events, instruct us by means of
signs, so much the nearer do they seem to be to
the society of God, and to be endowed with
greater wisdom, and to be more beloved by
Him. The more intelligent of men, moreover,
say that the animals hold meetings which are
more sacred than our assemblies, and that they
know what is said at these meetings, and show
that in reality they possess this knowledge, when,
having previously stated that the birds have de-
clared their intention of departing to some par-
ticular place, and of doing this thing or the
other, the truth of their assertions is established
by the departure of the birds to the place in
question, and by their doing what was foretold.
And no race of animals appears to be more ob-
servant of oaths than the elephants are, or to
' show greater devotion to divine things ; and
this, I presume, solely because they have some
knowledge of God." See here now how he at
once lays hold of, and brings forward as ac-
knowledged facts, questions which are the sub-
ject of dispute among those philosophers, not
only among the Greeks, but also among the
Barbarians, who have either discovered or
learned from certain demons some things about
birds of augury and other animals, by which
certain prophetic intimations are said to be
made to men. For, in the first place, it has
been disputed whether there is an art of augury,
and, in general, a method of divination by ani-
mals, or not. And, in the second place, they
who admit that there is an art of divination by
birds, are not agreed about the manner of the
divination ; since some maintain that it is from
certain demons or gods of divination*^ that the
animals receive their impulses to action — the
birds to flights and sounds of different kinds,
and the other animals to movements of one sort


€OJU fXaVTiKU.


Chap. XC]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


537


or another. Others, again, beheve that their
souls are more divine in their nature, and fitted
to operations of that kind, which is a most in-
credible supposition.


CHAP. LXXXIX.


CIL\P. XC.

But we have a few remarks to make, out of a
larger number, in answer to these statements of
Celsus, that we may show the ingratitude towards
his Maker which is involved in his holding these
false opinions.' For Celsus, although a man,
and "being in honour," ^ does not possess un-
derstanding, and therefore he did not compare
Celsus, however, seeing he wished to prove by iiin^geif y^i^^ the birds and the other irrational

animals, which he regards as capable of divin-


the foregoing statements that the irrational ani-


mals are more divine and intelligent than human -^^^ . ^^^ yielding to them the foremost place, he
beings, ought to have established at greater lo^^gred himself, and as far as he could the whole
length the actual existence of such an art of human race with him (as entertaining lower and
divination, and in the next place have energeti- j j^fgrior views of God than the irrational animals),
cally undertaken its defence, and effectually ; i^g^^^^^l^ ^^^ Egyptians, who worship irrational
refuted the arguments of those who would an- | animals as divinities. Let the principal point of
nihilate such arts of divination, and have over- , investigation, however, be this : whether there
turned in a convincing manner also the arguments ; actually is or not an art of divination, by means
of those who say that it is from demons or from • ^^ j^j^.^^^ ^^^^ ^^^gj. ji^.j^g things believed' to have
gods that animals receive the movements which j ^^^^ power. For the arguments which tend to
lead them to divination, and to have proved in establish either view are not to be despised,
the next place that the soul of irrational animals : q^ ^j^^ ^^^ h^^d, it is pressed upon us not to
is more divine than that of man. For, had he | j^^jj-^it such an art, lest the ratit)nal being should
done so, and manifested a philosophical spirit in abandon the divine oracles, and betake himself to
dealing with such things, we should to the best ^-^^^^ . ^^^ ^^ the other, there is the energetic
of our power have met his confident assertions, | testimony of many, that numerous individuals
refuting in the first place the allegation that irra- : j^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^.^^ f^Q^.^ the greatest dangers by
tional animals are wiser than men, and showing I p^tting their trust in divination by birds. For
the falsity of the statement that they have ideas ; ^j^^ present, however, let it be granted that an
of God more sacred than ours, and that they i ^^^ ^^ divination does exist, in order that I may
hold among themselves certain sacred assem- 1 j^^ ^j^jg ^^^y ^^^^^ to those who are prejudiced on
blies. But now, on the contrary, he who accuses | ^j^^ subject, that if this be admitted, the supe-
us because we believe in the Supreme God, re- , ^[^^[^y of man over irrational animals, even over
quires us to believe that the souls of birds enter- 1 ^j^^g^ ^j^^^ ^^.^ endowed with power of divination,
tain ideas of God more divine and distinct than , -^ great, and beyond all reach of comparison with
those of men. Yet if this is true, the birds have j ^^^ latter. We have then to say, that if there
clearer ideas of God than Celsus himself; and , ^^,^g jj^ ^j^gj-^ ^^y divine iviture capable of fore-
it is not matter of surprise that it should be so | telling future events, and so rich (in that knowl-
with him, who so greatly depreciates human be- j g^ge) as out of its superabundance to make them
ings. Nay, so far as Celsus can make it appear, j^j-jq^^,-, to any man who wished to know them, it
the birds possess grander and more divine ideas j j^ ^lanifest that they would know what concerned
than, I do not say we Christians do, or than the ^ themselves far sooner (than what concerned
Jews, who use the same Scriptures with ourselves, j others) ; and had they possessed this knowledge,
I but even than are possessed by the theologians ^ ^^^^y ^yo^ld have been upon their guard against
j among the Greeks, for they were only human flyjng to any particular place where men had
beings. According to Celsus, indeed, the tribe p|.^i-,ted snares and nets to catch them, or where
of birds that practise divination, forsooth, un- ' archers took aim and shot at them in their flight.
I derstand the nature of the Divine Being better .^^^^ especially, were eagles aware beforehand of
I than Pherecydes, and Pythagoras, and Socrates, | ^j^^ designs formed against their young, either by
and Plato ! We ought then to go to the birds j ggrpents crawling up to their nests and destroy-
as our teachers, in order that as, according to , ^^^ ^j^^^^^^ oj. ^y ji-^g^ ^vho take them for their
I the view of Celsus, they instruct us by their i amusement, or for any other usefiil purpose or
1 power of divination in the knowledge of future \ ggrvice, they would not ha\'e placed their young
1 events, so also they may free men from doubts j^^ ^ gp^^ where they were to be attacked ; and,
j regarding the Divine Being, by imparting to them | j^^ general, not one of these animals would have
1 the clear ideas which they have obtained respect- 1 ^^^^^ captured by men, because they were more
I ing Him ! It follows, accordingly, that Celsus, | divine and intelligent than they.

I who regards birds as superior to men, ought to

1 employ them as his instructors, and not one of | , ^, ^ i^<;p,^,o. ^evSoSof.a.-.
1 the Greek philosophers. I = Ps. xiix. 12.


538


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV,


But besides, if birds of augury converse with
one another,' as Celsus maintains they do, the
prophetic birds having a divine nature, and the
other rational animals also ideas of the divinity
and foreknowledge of future events ; and if they
had communicated this knowledge to others, the
sparrow mentioned in Homer would not have
built her nest in the spot where a serpent was to
devour her and her young ones, nor would the
serpent in the writings of the same poet have
failed to take precautions against being captured
by the eagle. For this wonderful poet says, in
his poem regarding the former : —

" A mighty dragon shot, of dire portent ;
From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent.
Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he rolled,
And curled around in many a winding fold.
The topmost branch a mother-bird possessed;
Eight callow infants filled the mossy nest ;
Herself the ninth : the serpent, as he hung.
Stretched his black jaws, and crashed the dying young;
While hovering near, with miserable moan,
The drooping mother wailed her children gone.
The mother last; as round the nest she flew,
Seized by the beating wing, the monster slew :
Nor long survived : to marble turned, he stands
A lasting prodigy on Aulis' sands.
Such was the will of Jove ; and hence we dare
Trust in his omen, and support the war."^


the bird — the poet


And regarding the second ■
says : —


" Jove's bird on sounding pinions beat the skies ;
A bleeding serpent of enormous size,
His talons twined ; alive, and curling round.
He stung the bird, whose throat received the wound.
Mad with the smart, he drops the fatal prey,
In airy circles wings his painful way,
Floats on the winds, and rends the heaven with cries;
Amidst the host, the fallen serpent lies.
They, pale with terror, mark its spires unrolled,
And Jove's portent with beating hearts behold." ^

Did the eagle, then, possess the power of divina-
tion, and the serpent (since this animal also is
made use of by the augurs) not? But as this
distinction can be easily refuted, cannot the as-
sertion that both were capable of divination be
refuted also? For if the serpent had possessed
this knowledge, would not he have been on his
guard against suffering what he did from the
eagle? And innumerable other instances of a
similar character may be found, to show that ani-
mals do not possess a prophetic soul, but that,
according to the poet and the majority of man-
kind, it is the " Olympian himself who sent him
to the light." And it is with a symbolical mean-
ing ^ that Apollo employs the hawks as his


* e'lirep oicovot oiioro'? fxa^oi'Tai. For lUa^^ovTai Rugeus con-
jectures &ia\dyovTaL. which is adopted by Lommatzsch.

2 Homer, h/aef, ii. 30S sq. (Pope's translation).

3 Homer, Iliad, xii. 200 sq. (Pope's translation),

* K(X7o. hi Tt crnuetof,
5 ■Uf.i.


messenger, for the hawk^ is called the "swift
messenger of Apollo." 7

CHAP. xcn.

In my opinion, however, it is certain wicked
demons, and, so to speak, of the race of Titans
or Giants, who have been guilty of impiety to-
wards the true God, and towards the angels in
heaven, and who have fallen from it, and who
haunt the denser parts of bodies, and frequent
unclean places upon earth, and who, possessing
some power of distinguishing future events, be-
cause they are without bodies of earthly mate-
rial, engage in an employment of this kind, and
desiring to lead the human race away from the
true God, secretly enter the bodies of the more
rapacious and savage and wicked of animals, and
stir them up to do whatever they choose, and at
whatever time they choose : either turning the
fancies of these animals to make flights and
movements of various kinds, in order that men
may be caught by the divining power that is in
the irrational animals, and neglect to seek after
the God who contains all things ; or to search
after the pure worship of God, but allow their
reasoning powers to grovel on the earth, and
amongst birds and serpents, and even foxes and
wolves. For it has been observed by those who
are skilled in such matters, that the clearest
prognostications are obtained from animals of
this kind ; because the demons cannot act so
effectively in the milder sort of animals as they
can in these, in consequence of the similarity be-
tween them in point of wickedness ; and yet it
is not wickedness, but something like wicked-
ness,*^ which exist in these animals.

CHAP. XCIII.

For which reason, whatever else there may be
in the writings of Moses which excites my won-
der, I would say that the following is worthy of
admiration, viz., that Moses, having observed the
varying natures of animals, and having either
learned from God what was peculiar to them,
and to the demons which are kindred to each of
the animals, or having himself ascertained these
things by his own wisdom, has, in arranging the
different kinds of animals, pronounced all those
which are supposed by the Egyptians and the rest
of mankind to possess the power of divination
to be unclean, and, as a general rule, all that are
not of that class to be clean. And amongst the
unclean animals mentioned by Moses are the
wolf, and fox, and serpent, and eagle, and hawk,
and such like. And, generally speaking, you
will find that not only in the law, but also in the


6 (ci'pKo?, " the hen-harrier," " Falc(
Cf. Liddell and Scott, s.v.

7 Cf. Homer, Odyss., xv. 526.

S Kal ov K.a.iii.av txtv, oioi'ti 6e kckI


"Circus pygargus.


Chap. XCVI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


539


prophets, these animals are employed as exam-
ples of all that is most wicked ; and that a wolf
or a fox is never mentioned for a good purpose.
Each species of demon, consequently, would
seem to possess a certain affinity with a certain
species of animal. And as among men there
are some who are stronger than others, and this
not at all owing to their moral character, so, in
the same way, some demons will be more pow-
erful in things indifferent than others ; ' and one
class of them employs one kind of animal for
the purpose of deluding men, in accordance
with the will of him who is called in our Scrip-
tures the " prince of this world," while others
predict future events by means of another kind
of animal. Observe, moreover, to what a pitch
of wickedness the demons proceed, so that they
even assume the bodies of weasels in order to
reveal the future ! And now, consider with your-
self whether it is better to accept the belief that
it is the Supreme God and His Son who stir up
the birds and the other living creatures to divi-
nation, or that those who stir up these creatures,
and not human beings (although they are pres-
ent before them), are wicked, and, as they are
called by our Scriptures, unclean demons.

CHAP. xciv.

But if the soul of birds is to be esteemed di-
vine because future events are predicted by them,
why should we not rather maintain, that when
omens ^ are accepted by men, the souls of those
are divine through which the omens are heard ?
Accordingly, among such would be ranked the
female slave mentioned in Homer, who ground
the corn, when she said regarding the suitors : —

" For the very last time, now, will they sup here." ^
This slave, then, was divine, while the great
Ulysses, the friend of Homer's Pallas Athene,
was not divine, but understanding the words
spoken by this "divine" grinder of corn as an
omen, rejoiced, as the poet says : —

"The divine Ulysses rejoiced at the omen."^
Observe, now, as the birds are possessed of a
divine soul, and are capable of perceiving God,
or, as Celsus says, the gods, it is clear that when
we men also sneeze, we do so in consequence of
a kind of divinity that is within us, and which
imparts a prophetic power to our soul. For
this belief is testified by many witnesses, and
therefore the poet also says : —

" And while he prayed, he sneezed." ^
And Penelope, too, said : —
" Perceiv'st thou not that at every word iny son did


CHAP. XCV.

The true God, however, neither employs irra-
tional animals, nor any individuals whom chance
may offer,? to convey a knowledge of the future ;
but, on the contrary, the most pure and holy of
human souls, whom He inspires and endows with
prophetic power. And therefore, whatever else
in the Mosaic writings may excite our wonder,
the following must be considered as fitted to do
so : " Ye shall not practise augury, nor observe
the flight of birds ; " ^ and in another place :
" For the nations whom the Lord thy God will
destroy from before thy face, shall listen to omens
and divinations ; but as for thee, the Lord thy
God has not suffered thee to do so." 9 And he
adds : " A prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you from among your brethren." '°
On one occasion, moreover, God, wishing by
means of an augur to turn away (His people)
from the practice of divination, caused the spirit
that was in the augur to speak as follows : " For
there is no enchantment in Jacob, nor is there
divination in Israel. In due time will it be de-
clared to Jacob and Israel what the Lord will
do." " And now, we who knew these and simi-
lar sayings wish to observe this precept with the
mystical meaning, viz., " Keep thy heart with all
diligence," '^ that nothing of a demoniacal nature
may enter into our minds, or any spirit of our ad-
versaries turn our imagination whither it chooses.
But we pray that the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God may shine in our hearts, and
that the Spirit of God may dwell in our imagi-
nations, and lead them to contemplate the things
of God ; for " as many as are led by the Spirit
of God, they are the sons of God." '^

CHAP. XCVI.

We ought to take note, however, that the
power of foreknowing the future is by no means
a proof of divinity ; for in itself it is a thing
indifferent, and is found occurring amongst both
good and bad. Physicians, at any rate, by means
of their professional skill foreknow certain things,
although their character may happen to be bad.
And in the same way also pilots, although per-
haps wicked men, are able to foretell the signs '+
(of good or bad weather), and the approach
of violent tempests of wind, and atmospheric
changes,'5 because they gather this knowledge
from experience and observation, although I do
not suppose that on that account any one would


2 (tAriSove?.

3 Cf. Homer, Odyss., iv. 685; cf. als
■• Cf. Homer, Od^ss., xx. 120.

5 Cf. Homer, Odvss., xvii. 541.
' Cf. Homer, Odyss., xvii. 545.


"> ouTe Toi? Tuxovai twv av9f>u>Triot'.

8 Cf. Lev. xix. 26. The Septuagiiu here diflers from ihe Maso-

9 Cf. beut. xviii. 14, cf. la.
10 Cf. Deut. xviii. 15.

" Cf. Num. xxiii. 23.

'- Prov. iv. 23.

" Cf. Rom. viii. 14.

'5 TpoTrois.


J


540


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book IV.


term them " gods " if their characters happened
to be bad. The assertion, then, of Celsus is
false, when he says : " What could be called more
divine than the power of foreknowing and fore-
telling the future ? " And so also is this, that
" many of the animals claim to have ideas of
God ; " for none of the irrational animals possess
any idea of God. And wholly false, too, is his
assertion, that " the irrational animals are nearer
the society of God (than men)," when even
men who are still in a state of wickedness, how- j
ever great their progress in knowledge, are far |
removed from that society. It is, then, those
alone who are truly wise and sincerely religious
who are nearer to God's society ; such persons |
as were our prophets, and Moses, to the latter of
whom, on account of his exceeding purity, the
Scripture said : " Moses alone shall come near
the Lord, but the rest shall not come nigh." '

CHAP, xcvri.

How impious, indeed, is the assertion of this
man, who charges us with impiety,, that "not
only are the irrational animals wiser than the
human race, but that they are more beloved by
God (than they) ! " And who would not be re-
pelled (by horror) from paying any attention to
a man who declared that a serpent, and a fox,
and a wolf, and an eagle, and a hawk, were more
beloved by God than the human race? For it
follows from his maintaining such a position,
that if these animals be more beloved by God
than human beings, it is manifest that they are
dearer to God than Socrates, and Plato, and
Pythagoras, and Pherecydes, and those theolo-
gians whose praises he had sung a little before.
And one might address him with the prayer :
" If these animals be dearer to God than men,
may you be beloved of God along with them,
and be made like to those whom you consider
as dearer to Him than human beings ! " And
let no one suppose that such a prayer is meant
as an imprecation ; for who would not pray to
resemble in all respects those whom he believes
to be dearer to God than others, in order that
he, like them, may enjoy the divine love ? And
as Celsus is desirous to show that the assemblies
of the irrational animals are more sacred than
ours, he ascribes the statement to that effect not
to any ordinary individuals, but to persons of
intelligence. Yet it is the virtuous alone who are
truly wise, for no wicked man is so. He speaks,
accordingly, in the following style : " Intelligent
men say that these animals hold assemblies
which are more sacred than ours, and that they
know what is spoken at them, and actually prove
that they are not without such knowledge, when
they mention beforehand that the birds have


announced their intention of departing to a par-
ticular place, or of doing this thing or that, and
then show that they have departed to the place
in question, and have done the particular thing
which was foretold." Now, truly, no person of
intelligence ever related such things ; nor did
any wise man ever say that the assemblies of the
irrational animals were more sacred than those
of men. But if, for the purpose of examining
(the soundness of) his statements, we look to
their consequences, it is evident that, in his
opinion, the assemblies of the irrational animals
are more sacred than those of the venerable
Pherecydes, and Pythagoras, and Socrates, and
Plato, and of philosophers in general ; which
assertion is not only incongruous ^ in itself, but
full of absurdity. In order that we may believe,
however, that certain individuals do learn from
the indistinct sound of birds that they are about
to take their departure, and do this thing or that,
and announce these things beforehand, we would
say that this information is imparted to men by
demons by means of signs, with the view of
having men deceived by demons, and having
their understanding dragged down from God
and heaven to earth, and to places lower still.

CHAP. XCVIII.

I do not know, moreover, how Celsus could
hear of the elephants' (fidelity to) oaths, and
of their great devotedness to our God, and. of
the knowledge which they possess of Him. For
I know many wonderful things which are related
of the nature of this animal, and of its gentle
disposition. But I am not aware that any one
has spoken of its observance of oaths ; unless
indeed to its gentle disposition, and its observ-
ance of compacts, so to speak, when once con-
cluded between it and man, he give the name
of keeping its oath, which statement also in
itself is false. For although rarely, yet some-
times it has been recorded that, after their appar-
ent tameness, they have broken out against men
in the most savage manner, and have committed
murder, and have been on that account con-
demned to death, because no longer of any use.
And seeing that after this, in order to establish
(as he thinks he does) that the stork is more
pious than any human being, he adduces the
accounts which are narrated regarding that crea-
ture's display of filial affection ^ in bringing food
to its parents for their support, we have to say in
reply, that this is done by the storks, not from a
regard to what is proper, nor from reflection, but
from a natural instinct ; the nature which formed
them being desirous to show an instance among
the irrational animals which might put men to


!.X. XXIV. 2.


ivTiTreAapyoOi'TOS.


Chap. XCIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


541


shame, in the matter of exhibiting their gratitude
to their parents. And if Celsus had known how
great the difference is between acting in this way
from reason, and from an irrational natural im-
pulse, he would not have said that storks are more
pious than human beings. But further, Celsus,
as still contending for the piety of the irrational
creation, quotes the instance of the Arabian bird
the phoenix, which after many years repairs to
Egypt, and bears thither its parent, when dead
and buried in a ball of myrrh, and deposits its
body in the Temple of the Sun. Now this story is
indeed recorded, and, if it be true,' it is possible
that it may occur in consequence of some pro-
vision of nature ; divine providence freely dis-
playing to human beings, by the differences which
exist among living things, the variety of consti-
tution which prevails in the world, and which
extends even to birds, and in harmony with
which He has brought into existence one crea-
ture, the only one of its kind, in order that by it
men may be led to admire, not the creature, but
Him who created it.

CHAP. XCIX.

In addition to all that he has already said,
Celsus subjoins the following: "All things, ac-
cordingly, were not made for man, any more
than they were made for lions, or eagles, or dol-
phins, but that this world, as being God's work,
might be perfect and entire in all respects. For
this reason all things have been adjusted, not
with reference to each other, but with regard to
their bearing upon the whole.^ And God takes
care of the whole, and (His) providence will
never forsake it ; and it does not become worse ;
nor does God after a time bring it back to him-
self; nor is He angry on account of men any
more than on account of apes or flies ; nor does
He threaten these beings, each one of which has
received its appointed lot in its proper place."


' [See. vol. i. pp. viii., 12, this series. Observe, Origen, in
Egypt, doubts the story.]

2 ciAA." ei ^li) Tra.v epyov. " Gelenius does not recognise these
words, and Guietus regards them as superfluous." They are omitted
in the translation.


Let us then briefly reply to these statements. I
think, indeed, that I have shown in the preced-
ing pages that all things were created for man,
and every rational being, and that it was chiefly
j for the sake of the rational creature that the
creation took place. Celsus, indeed, may say
that this was done not more for man than for
lions, or the other creatures which he mentions ;
but we maintain that the Creator did not form
I these things for Hons, or eagles, or dolphins, but
all for the sake of the rational creature, and " in
order that this wodd, as being God's work, might
! be perfect and complete in all things." For to
I this sentiment we must yield our assent as being
' well said. And God takes care, not, as Celsus
supposes, merely of the whole, but beyond the
whole, in a special degree of every rational being.
Nor will Providence ever abandon the whole ;
for although it should become more wicked,
owing to the sin of the rational being, which is a
portion of the whole. He makes arrangements
to purify it, and after a time to bring back the
whole to Himself. Moreover, He is not angry
with apes or flies ; but on human beings, as those
who have transgressed the laws of nature, He
sends judgments and chastisements, and threat-
ens them by the mouth of the prophets, and by
the Saviour who came to visit the whole human
race, that those who hear the threatenings may
be converted by them, while those who neglect
these calls to conversion may deservedly suffer
those punishments which it becomes God, in
conformity with that will of His which acts for
the advantage of the whole, to inflict upon those
who need such painful discipline and correction.
But as our fourth book has now attained suffi-
cient dimensions, we shall here terminate our
discourse. And may God grant, through His
Son, who is God the Word, and Wisdom, and
Truth, and Righteousness, and everything else
which the sacred Scriptures when speaking of
God call Him, that we may make a good begin-
ning of the fifth book, to the benefit of our
readers, antl may bring it to a successful conclu-
sion, with the aid of His word abiding in our
soul.


542 ELUCIDATION.


ELUCIDATION.

(Stated in obscure terms, with advantage, p. 495.)

Turn back to the Second Apology of Justin (cap. ix.), "Eternal punishment not a mere
threat;"' also to Clement {^Stromata, iv. cap. xxiv.), "the reason and end of divine punish-
ments."^ Now compare Gieseler 3 (^vol. i. p. 212) for what he so sweepingly asserts. And on the
doctrine of Origen, let me quote a very learned and on such points a most capable judge, the
late erudite and pious half- Galilean Dr. Pusey. He says : —

" Celsus and Origen are both witnesses that Christians believed in the eternity of punishment.
Celsus, to weaken the force of the argument from the sufferings which the martyrs underwent
sooner than abjure Christianity, tells Origen that heathen priests taught the same doctrine of
eternal punishment as the Christians, and that the only question was, whieh was rightA

" Origen answers, ' I should say that the truth lies with those who are able to induce their
hearers to live as meji convinced of the truth of what they have heard. Jews and Christians have
been thus' affected by the doctrines which they hold about the world to come, the rewards of the
righteous, and the punishments of the wicked. Who have been moved in this way, in regard to
eternal punishments, by the teaching of heathen priests and mystagogues ? '

" Origen's answer acknowledges that the doctrine of eternal punishment had been taught to
Christians, that One [Christ] had taught it, and that it had produced the effects He had [in view]
in teaching it; viz., to set Christians to strive with all their might to conque?- the sin which
produced it." 5

On this most painful subject my natural feelings are much with Canon Farrar ; but, after life-
long application to the subject, I must think Dr. Pusey holds with his Master, Christ. I feel
willing to leave it all with Him who died for sinners, and the cross shuts my mouth. " Herein
is love ; " and I cannot dictate to such love, from my limited mind, and capacity, and knowledge
of His universe. Here let " every thought be brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ."
Let us sacrifice " imaginations and every high thing that exalteth itself," and leave our Master
alike supreme in our affections and over our intellectual powers. He merits such subjection.
Let us preach His words, and leave Him to explain them when He shall " condemn every tongue
that shall rise against Him in judgment."

Let me also refer to Bledsoe's most solemn and searching reply to John Foster ; also to his
answer to Lord Kames's effort to help the Lord out of a supposed difficulty.^ I am sorry that
Tillotson exposed himself to a witty retort by the same author, in these words : " If the Almighty
really undertook to deceive the world for its own good, it is a pity He did not take the precau-
tion to prevent the archbishop from detecting the cheat, . . . not suffering his secret to get
into the possession of one who has so indiscreetly published it." The awful importance of
the subject, and the recently awakened interest in its discussion, have led me to enlarge this
annotation.

' Our vol. i. p. 191.

^ Our vol. ii. p. 437.

3 Ed. Philadelphia, 1836.

* See this treatise, Book VIII. cap. .xlviii., infra.

5 What is of Faith as to Everlasting Punishment? in reply to Dr. Farrar's Challenge, 1879. By the Rev. E. B. Pusey, D.D.,
Oxford, 1 88 1.

6 Theodicy, pp. 295-311 (answer to Foster), p. 8t (to Lord Karnes), p. 310 (to Tillotson). I must confess that Bledsoe is paulo
inignior wihen he gives no reference to Tillotson's language. If the retort is based on the sermon (xxxv. vol. iii. p. 350, ed. folio, 1720)
on the " Eternity of Torment," however, I do not think it just. The latitudinarian primate restricts himself therein to a very guarded state-
ment of that reserved right by which any governor commutes or remits punishment, though he cannot modify a promise of reward. I wish
modern apologists for the divine sovereignty had not gone farther.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.

BOOK V.


It is not, my reverend Ambrosius, because we
seek after many words — a thing which is for-
bidden, and in the indulgence of which it is im-
possible to avoid sin ' — that we now begin the
fifth book of our reply to the treatise of Celsus,
but with the endeavour, so far as may be within
our power, to leave none of his statements with-
out examination, and especially those in which
it might appear to some that he had skilfully
assailed us and the Jews. If it were possible,
indeed, for me to enter along with my words
into the conscience of every one without excep-
tion who peruses this work, and to extract each
dart which wounds him who is not completely
protected with the "whole armour" of God, and
apply a rational medicine to cure the wound
inflicted by Celsus, which prevents those who
listen to his words from remaining " sound in
the faith," I would do so. But since it is the
work of God alone, in conformity with His own
Spirit, and along with that of Christ, to take up
His abode invisibly in those persons whom He
judges worthy of being visited ; so, on the other
hand, is our object to try, by means of argu-
ments and treatises, to confirm men in their
faith, and to earn the name of " workmen need-
ing not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word
of truth." ^ And there is one thing above all
which it appears to us we ought to do, if we
would discharge faithfully the task enjoined upon
us by you, and that is to overturn to the best of
our ability the confident assertions of Celsus.
Let us then quote such assertions of his as follow
those which we have already refuted (the reader
must decide whether we have done so success-
fully or not), and let us reply to them. And may
God grant that we approach not our subject with
our understanding and reason empty and devoid
of divine inspiration, that the faith of those whom


Cf. Prov. X. 19.
Cf. 2 Tim. ii. 15.


we wish to aid may not depend upon human wis-
dom, but that, receiving the " mind " of Christ
from His Father, who alone can bestow it, and
being strengthened by participating in the word
of God, we may pull down " every high thing
that exalteth itself against the knowledge of
God," 3 and the imagination of Celsus, who
exalts himself against us, and against Jesus, and
also against Moses and the prophets, in order
that He who " gave the word to those who pub-
lished it with great power" •* may supply us also,
and bestow upon us "great power," so that faith
in the word and power of God may be im-
planted in the minds of all who will peruse our
work.

CHAP. II.

We have now, then, to refute that statement
of his which runs as follows : " O Jews and
Christians, no God or son of a God either came
or will come down (to earth). But if you mean
that certain angels did so, then what do you call
them? Are they gods, or some other race of
beings? Some other race of beings (doubtless),
and in all probability demons." Now as Celsus
here is guilty of repeating himself (for in the
preceding pages such assertions have been fre-
quently advanced by him), it is unnecessary to
discuss the matter at greater length, seeing what
we have already said upon this point may suffice.
We shall mention, however, a few considerations
out of a greater number, such as we deem in
harmony with our former arguments, but which
have not altogether the same bearing as they,
and by which we shall show that in asserting
generally that no God, or son of God, ever de-
scended (among men), he overturns not only
the opinions entertained by the majority of man-
kind regarding the manifestation of Deity, but
also what was formerly atlmitted by himself. For
if the general statement, that " no God or son


3 Cf. 2 Cor.
♦ Cf. Ps. Ixv


543


544


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


of God has come down or will come down," be
truly maintained by Celsus, it is manifest that
we have here overthrown the belief in the exist-
ence of gods upon the earth who had descended
from heaven either to predict the future to man-
kind or to heal them by means of divine re-
sponses ; and neither the Pythian Apollo, nor
^sculapius, nor any other among those supposed
to have done so, would be a god descended from
heaven. He might, indeed, either be a god who
had obtained as his lot (the obligation) to dwell
on earth for ever, and be thus a fugitive, as it
were, from the abode of the gods, or he might
be one who had no power to share in the society
of the gods in heaven ; ' or else Apollo, and
yEscuIapius, and those others who are believed
to perform acts on earth, would not be gods, but
only certain demons, much inferior to those wise
men among mankind, who on account of their
virtue ascend to the vault' of heaven.


But observe how, in his desire to subvert our
opinions, he who never acknowledged himself
throughout his whole treatise to be an Epicurean,
is convicted of being a deserter to that sect.
And now is the time for you, (reader), who
peruse the works of Celsus, and give your assent
to what has been advanced, either to overturn
the belief in a God who visits the human race,
ind exercises a providence over each individual
man, or to grant this, and prove the falsity of
the assertions of Celsus. If you, then, wholly
annihilate providence, you will falsify those as-
sertions of his in which he grants the existence
of " God and a providence," in order that you
may maintain the truth of your own position ;
but if, on the other hand, you still admit the
existence of providence, because you do not
assent to the dictum of Celsus, that " neither has
a God nor the son of a God come down nor is
to come down 3 to mankind," why not rather
carefully ascertain from the statements made
regarding Jesus, and the prophecies uttered con-
cerning Him, who it is that we are to consider
as having come down to the human race as God,
and the Son of God? — whether that Jesus who
said and ministered so much, or those who,
under pretence of oracles and divinations, do
not reform the morals of their worshippers, but
who have besides apostatized from the pure and
holy worship and honour due to the Maker of
all things, and who tear away the souls of those
who give heed to them from the one only visible
and true God, under a pretence of paying honour
to a multitude of deities ?


But since he says, in the next place, as if the
Jews or Christians had answered regarding those
who come down to visit the human race, that
they were angels : " But if ye say that they are
angels, what do you call them?" he continues,
" Are they gods, or some other race of beings? "
and then again introduces us as if answering,
" Some other race of beings, and probably de-
mons," — let us proceed to notice these remarks.
For we indeed acknowledge that angels are
" ministering spirits," and we say that." they are
sent forth to minister for them who shall be
heirs of salvation ; " ■♦ and that they ascend,
bearing the supplications of men, to the purest
of the heavenly places in the universe, or even
to supercelestial regions purer still ; 5 and that
they come down from these, conveying to each
one, according to his deserts, something enjoined
by God to be 'conferred by them upon those
who are to be the recipients of His benefits.
Having thus learned to call these beings " an-
gels " from their employments, we find that
because they are divine they are sometimes
termed " god " in the sacred Scriptures,^ but not
so that we are commanded to honour and wor-
ship in place of God those who minister to us,
and bear to us His blessings. For every prayer,
and supplication, and intercession, and thanks-
giving, is to be sent up to the Supreme God
through the High Priest, who is above all the
angels, the living Word and God. And to the
Word Himself shall we also pray and make
intercessions, and offer thanksgivings and sup-
plications to Him, if we have the capacity of
distinguishing between the proper use and abuse
of prayer,^

CHAP. V.

For to invoke angels without having obtained
a knowledge of their nature greater than is ^pos-
sessed by men, would be contrary to reason.
But, conformably to our hypothesis, let this
knowledge of them, which is something wonder-
ful and mysterious, be obtained. Then this
knowledge, making known to us their nature,
and the offices to which they are severally
appointed, will not permit us to pray with con-
fidence to any other than to the Supreme God,
who is sufficient for all things, and that through
our Saviour the Son of God, who is the Word,
and Wisdom, and Truth, and everything else
which the writings of God's prophets and the
aposdes of Jesus entitle Him. And it is enough
to secure that the holy angels of God be pro-


4 Cf. Heb. i. 14.

5 iv Tois Ka9apu)TaT0i? ToO Koaixov xiopi'015 enovpavioi.<;, 1;
Tols ToiiTwi/ Ka$apu>Tipoi<; virfpovpavioL^.

'' Cf. Ps. Ixxxvi. 8, xcvi. 4, cxxxvi. 2.

7 €111/ &vi'uiiJ.e6a KaTaKoviiv T^? mpi npocTfVXV'! tupioAefia? .
<aTa\pri<Tiui';.


Chap. VII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


545


pitious to us,' and that they do all things on our
behalf, that our disposition of mind towards
God should imitate as far as it is within the
power of human nature the e.Kample of these
holy angels, who again follow the example of
their God ; and that the conceptions which we
entertain of His Son, the Word, so far as attaina-
ble by us, should not be opposed to the clearer
conceptions of Him which the holy angels pos-
sess, but should daily approach these in clear-
ness and distinctness. But because Celsus has
not read our holy Scriptures, he gives himself an
answer as if it came from us, saying that we
" assert that the angels who come down from
heaven to confer benefits on mankind are a dif-
ferent race from the gods," and adds that " in
all probability they would be called demons by
us : " not observing that the name " demons " is
not a term of indifferent meaning like that of
" men," among whom some are good and some
bad, nor yet a term of excellence like that of
" the gods," which is applied not to wicked
demons, or to statues, or to animals, but (by
those who know divine things) to what is truly
divine and blessed ; whereas the term "demons"
is always applied to those wicked powers, freed
from the encumbrance of a grosser body, who
lead men astray, and fill them with distractions,
and drag them down from God and superceles-
tial thoughts to things here below.


He next proceeds to make the following state-
ment about the Jews : — " The first point re-
ladng to the Jews which is fitted to excite
wonder, is that they should worship the heaven
and the angels who dwell therein, and yet pass
by and neglect its most venerable and powerful
parts, as the sun, the moon, and the other
heavenly bodies, both fixed stars and planets, as
if it were possible that ' the whole ' could be
God, and yet its parts not divine ; or (as if it
were reasonable) to treat with the greatest re-
spect those who are said to appear to such as
are in darkness somewhere, blinded by some
crooked sorcery, or dreaming dreams through
the influence of shadowy spectres,^ while those
who prophesy so clearly and strikingly to all
men, by means of whom rain, and heat, and ;
clouds, and thunder (to which they offer wor-
ship), and hghtnings, and fruits, and all kinds
I of productiveness, are brought about, — by means
of whom God is revealed to them, — the most
prominent heralds among those beings that are
[above, — those that are truly heavenly angels, —
iare to be regarded as of no account ! " In


' [Comp. Col. iii. 18 and cap. viii., Oi/ra.] _ _•

^ j) Tous ij.iv iv axoTM TTov (K -yoTjTeia; ouk opflijs tv(J)Awttovo'ix',

m 5i' aikv&puii' <f>aaiJ.dTuiv bi/eipuJTTOuo'ii' iyxpi/iirrfiv Aeyo/iiecouj, fi

UaKa. 0pr)aKivei.v.

I


making these statements, Celsus appears to have
fallen into confusion, and to have penned them
from false ideas of things which he did not
understand ; for it is patent to all who investi-
gate the practices of the Jev/s, and compare
them with those of the Christians, that the Jews
who follow the law, which, speaking in the per-
son of God, says, "Thou shalt have no other
gods before Me : thou shalt not make unto
thee an image, nor a likeness of anything that
is in heaven above, or that is in the earth be-
neath, or that is in the waters under the earth ;
thou shalt not bow down to them, nor serve
them," 3 worship nothing else than the Supreme
God, who made the heavens, and all things
besides. Now it is evident that those who live
according to the law, and worship the Alaker
of heaven, will not worship the heaven at the
same time with God. Moreover, no one who.
obeys the law of Moses will bow down to the
angels who are in heaven ; and, in like manner,
as they do not bow down to sun, moon, and
stars, the host of heaven, they refrain from
doing obeisance to heaven and its angels, obey-
ing the law which declares : " Lest thou lift up
thine eyes to heaven, and when thou seest the
sun, and the moon, and the stars, even all the
host of heaven, shouldst be driven to worship
them, and serve them, which the Lord thy God
hath divided unto all nations." ^


Having, moreover, assumed that the Jews
consider the heaven to be God, he adds that
this is absurd ; finding fault with those who bow
down to the heaven, but not also to the sun, and
moon, and stars, saying that the Jews do this, as
if it were possible that " the whole " should be
God, and its several parts not divine. And he
seems to call the heaven " a whole," and sun,
moon, and stars its several parts. Now, certainly
neither Jews nor Christians call the " heaven "
God. Let it be granted, however, that, as he
alleges, the heaven is called God by the Jews,
and suppose that sun, moon, and stars are parts
of " heaven," — which is by no means true, for
neither are the animals and plants upon the earth
any portion of it, — how is it true, even accord-
ing to the opinions of the Greeks, that uf God
be a whole. His parts also are divine? Certainly
they say that the Cosmos taken as the whole 5 is
God, the Stoics calling it the First God, the fol-
lowers of Plato the Second, and some of them
the Third. According to these philosophers,
then, seeing the whole Cosmos is God, its parts
also are divine ; so that not only are human be-


3 Cf. Ex. XX. 3, 4> 5-
* Cf Ueut. iv. 19.

5 TO oAoi' b <c6(7>iOt.


546


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


ings divine, but the whole of the irrational crea-
tion, as being '■^portions " of the Cosmos ; and
besides these, the plants also are divine. And if
the rivers, and mountains, and seas are portions
of the Cosmos, then, since the whole Cosmos is
God, are the rivers and seas also gods? But
even this the Greeks will not assert. Those,
however, who preside over rivers and seas
(either demons or gods, as they call them),
they would term gods. Now from this it follows
that the general statement of Celsus, even ac-
cording to the Greeks, who hold the doctrine of
Providence, is false, that if any " whole " be a
god, its parts necessarily are divine. But it fol-
lows from the doctrine of Celsus, that if the
Cosmos be God, all that is in it is divine, being
parts of the Cosmos. Now, according to this
view, animals, as flies, and gnats, and worms,
and every species of serpent, as well as of birds
and lishes, will be divine, — an assertion which
would not be made even by those who maintain
that the Cosmos is God. But the Jews, who live
according to the law of Moses, although they
may not know how to receive the secret mean- |
ing of the law, which is conveyed in obscure
language, will not maintain that either the heaven
or the angels are God.


As we allege, however, that he has fallen into
confusion in consequence of false notions which
he has imbibed, come and let us point them out
to the best of our ability, and show that although
Celsus considers it to be a Jewish custom to bow
down to the heaven and the angels in it, such a
practice is not at all Jewish, but is in violation
of Judaism, as it also is to do obeisance to sun,
moon, and stars, as well as images. You will
find at least in the book of Jeremiah the words
of God censuring by the mouth of the prophet
the Jewish people for doing obeisance to such
objects, and for sacrificing to the queen of heav-
en, and to all the host of heaven.' The writings
of the Christians, moreover, show, in censuring
the sins committed among the Jews, that when
God abandoned that people on account of cer-
tain sins, these sins (of idol- worship) also were
committed by them. For it is related in the
Acts of the Apostles regarding the Jews, that
" God turned, and gave them up to worship the
host of heaven ; as it is written in the book of
the prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye
offered to Me slain beasts and sacrifices by the
space of forty years in the wilderness? Yea, ye
took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star
of your god Remphan, figures which you made
to worship them." ^ And in the writings of Paul,


' Cf. Jer. vii. 17, 18.
2 Cf. Acts vii 42, 43.


who was carefully trained in Jewish customs, and
converted afterwards to Cliristianity by a miracu-
lous appearance of Jesus, the following words
may be read in the Epistle to the Colossians :
" Let no man beguile you of your reward in a
voluntary humility and worshipping of angels,
intruding into those things which he hath not
seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind ; and
not holding the Head, from which all the body
by joint and bands having nourishment min-
istered, and knit together, increaseth with the
increase of God." ^ But Celsus, having neither
read these verses, nor having learned their con-
tents from any other source, has represented, I
know not how, the Jews as not transgressing
their law in bowing down to the heavens, and to
the angels therein.

CHAP. IX.

And still continuing a little confused, and not
taking care to see what was relevant to the
matter, he expressed his opinion that the Jews
were induced by the incantations employed in
jugglery and sorcery (in consequence of which
certain phantoms appear, in obedience to the
spells employed by the magicians) to bow down
to the angels in heaven, not observing that this
was contrary to their law, which said to them
who practised such observances : " Regard not .,
them which have familiar spirits,-* neither seek
after wizards, 5 to be defiled by them : I am the \
Lord your God."*" He ought, therefore, either
not to have at all attributed this practice to the
Jews, seeing he has observed that they keep i
their law, and has called them "those who live '
according to their law ;" or if he did attribute it, !
he ought to have shown that the Jews did this
in violation of their code. But again, as they
transgress their law who offer worship to those
who are said to appear to them who are involved :
in darkness and blinded by sorcery, and who
dream dreams, owing to obscure phantoms pre-
senting themselves ; so also do they transgress the '
law who offer sacrifice to sun, moon, and stars.' '
And there is thus great inconsistency in the same
individual saying that the Jews are careful to
keep their law by not bowmg down to sun, and
moon, and stars, while they are not so careful to j
keep it in the matter of heaven and the angels. j

CHAP. X.

And if it be necessary for us to offer a defence
of our refusal to recognise as gods, equally with
angels, and sun, and moon, and stars, those who
are called by the Greeks " manifest and visible "


3 Cf. Col. ii. i8, 19.

6 Cf. Lev. xii. 31.

7 The emendations of Ruaeus have been adopted in the transla-
tion, the text being probably corrupt. Cf. Ruaeus, in loc.


Chap. XL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


547


divinities, we shall answer that the law of Moses
knows that these latter have been apportioned
by God among all the nations under the heaven,
but not amongst those who were selected by
God as His chosen people above all the nations
of the earth. For it is written in« the book of
Deuteronomy : " And lest thou lift up thine eyes
unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and
the moon, and the stars, even all the host of
heaven, shouldst be driven to worship them, and
serve them, which the Lord thy God hath divided
unto all nations unto the whole heaven. But the
Lord hath taken us, and brought us forth out of
the iron furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto
Him a people of inheritance, as ye are this
day." ' The Hebrew people, then, being called
by God a " chosen generation, and a royal
priesthood, and a holy nation, and a purchased
people," ^ regarding whom it was foretold to
Abraham by the voice of the Lord addressed
to him, " Look now towards heaven, and tell the
stars, if thou be able to number them : and He
said unto him, So shall thy seed be ; " ^ and
having thus a hope that they would become as
the stars of heaven, were not likely to bow down
to those objects which they were to resemble as
a result of their understanding and observing the
law of God. For it was said to them : " The
Lord our God hath multiplied us ; and, behold,
ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multi-
tude." ■* In the book of Daniel, also, the fol-
lowing prophecies are found relating to those
who are to share in the resurrection : " And at
that time thy people shall be delivered, every
one that has been written in the book. And
many of them that sleep in the dusts of the
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and
some to shame and everlasting contempt. And
they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of
the firmament, and (those) of the many right-
eous'^ as the stars for ever and ever," 7 etc. And
hence Paul, too, when speaking of the resurrec-
tion, says : " And there are also celestial bodies,
and bodies terrestrial : but the glory of the
celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial
is another. There is one glory of the sun, and
another glory of the moon, and another glory of
the stars ; for one star differeth from another
star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the
dead." ^ It was not therefore consonant to rea-
son that those who had been taught sublimely ^
to ascend above all created things, and to hope
for the enjoyment of the most glorious rewards


I Cf Deut. iv. 19, 20.
= Cf. I Pet. ii. 9.
3 Cf Gen. XV. 5.

* Cf. Deut. i. 10.

6 (iirb Ti.)v SiKaiuiv tmv jroAAoii'
' Cf. Dan. xii. i, 2, 3.

* Cf. I Cor. XV. 40-42.
9 neyttAo^ucoS.


with God on account of their virtuous lives, and
who had heard the words, " Ye are the light of
the world," '° and, " Let your light so shine be-
fore men, that they, seeing your good works,
may glorify your Father who is in heaven," " and
who possessed through practice this brilliant and
unfading wisdom, or who had secured even the
" very reflection of everlasting light," '^ should be
so impressed with the (mere) vis/d/e light of
sun, and moon, and stars, that, on account of that
sensible light of theirs, they should deem them-
selves (although possessed of so great a rational
light of knowledge, and of the true light, and
the light of the world, and the light of men) to
be somehow inferior to them, and to bow down.
to them ; seeing they ought to be worshipped,
if they are to receive worship at all, not for the
sake of the sensible light which is admired by
the multitude, but because of the rational and
true light, if indeed the stars in heaven are
rational and virtuous beings, and have been
illuminated with the light of knowledge by that
wisdom which is the " reflection of everlasting
light." For that sensible light of theirs is the
work of the Creator of all things, while that
rational light is derived perhaps from the princi-
ple of free-will within them.'^


But even this rational light itself ought not to
be worshipped by him who beholds and under-
stands the true light, by sharing in which these
also are enlightened ; nor by him who beholds
God, the Father of the true light, — of whom it
has been said, " God is light, and in Him there
is no darkness at all." '■* Those, indeed, who
worship sun, moon, and stars because their light
is visible and celestial, would not bow down to a
spark of fire or a lamp upon earth, because they
see the incomparable superiority of those objects
which are deemed worthy of homage to the light
of sparks and lamps. So those who understand
that God is light, and who have apprehended
that the Son of God is " the true light which
lighteth every man that cometh into the world,"
and who comi:)rchend also yhow He says, " I
am the light of the world," would not rationally
offer worship to that which is, as it were, a spark
in sun, moon, and stars, in comparison with God,
who is light of the true light. Nor is it with a
view to depreciate these great works of God's
creative power, or to call them, after the foshion
of Anaxagoras, " fiery masses," 's that we thus
speak of sun, and moon, and stars ; but because
we perceive the inexpressible superiority of the


'0 Matt. V. 14.

II Cf. Matt. V. 16.

I- Cf. Origcn, e/e Principiis, i. c. vii.

'J eic Tou iv aiiTois aviTtfouffiou eArjAvflds.

'* Cf. I John i. 5.

'5 1J.U&POV diaTTvpov.


548


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[EooK V.


divinity of God, and that of His only-begotten
Son, which surpasses all other things. And be-
ing persuaded that the sun himself, and moon,
and stars pray to the Supreme God through His
only-begotten Son, we judge it improper to pray
to those beings who themselves offer up prayers
(to God), seeing even they themselves would
prefer that we should send up our requests to the
God to whom they pray, rather than send them
downwards to themselves, or apportion our
power of prayer' between God and them.^ And
here I may employ this illustration, as bearing
upon this point : Our Lord and Saviour, hearing
Himself on one occasion addressed as " Good
]\Iaster,"3 referring him who used it to His own
Father, said, " Why callest thou Me good ?
There is none good but one, that is, God the
Father." 4 And since it was in accordance with
sound reason that this should be said by the Son
of His Father's love, as being the image of the
goodness of God, why should not the sun say
with greater reason to those that bow down
to him. Why do you worship me? "for thou
wilt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only
shalt thou serve ;"5 for it is He whom I and all
who are with me serve and worship. And
although one may not be so exalted (as the
sun), nevertheless let such an one pray to the
Word of God (who is able to heal him), and still
more to His Father, who also to the righteous of
former times " sent His word, and healed them,
and delivered them from their destructions." ^


God accordingly, in His kindness, conde-
scends to mankind, not in any local sense, but
through His providence ; 7 while the Son of God,
not only (when on earth), but at all times, is
with His own disciples, fulfiUing the promise,
" Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of
the world." ^ And if a branch cannot bear fruit
except it abide in the vine, it is evident that the
disciples also of the Word, who are the rational
branches of the Word's true vine, cannot produce
the fruits of virtue unless they abide in the true
vine, the Christ of God, who is with us locally
here below upon the earth, and who is with
those who cleave to Him in all parts of the
world, and is also in all places with those who
do not know Him. Another is made manifest
by that John who wrote the Gospel, when, speak-
ing in the person of John the Baptist, he said,
" There standeth one among you whom ye know


2 [See note in Migne's edition of Origen's IVorks, vol. i. p. 1195;
also note supra, p. 262. S.].

3 Cf. Matt. xix. 17; cf. Mark x. 18.

4 Ibid.

s Cf. Deut. vi. 13.
* Cf. Ps. cvii. 20.

7 TTpOVOTJTtKO)?.

8 Matt, xxviii. 20.


not; He it is who cometh after me." ^ And it
is absurd, when He who fills heaven and earth,
and who said, " Do I not fill heaven and earth ?
saith the Lord," '° is with us, and near us (for I
believe Him when He says, " I am a God nigh
at hand, and not afar off, saith the Lord " " ), to
seek to pray to sun or moon, or one of the
stars, whose influence does not reach the whole
of the world. '^ , But, to use the very words of
Celsus, let it be granted that " the sun, moon,
and stars do foretell rain, and heat, and clouds,
and thunders," why, then, if they really do fore-
tell such great things, ought we not rather to do
homage to God, whose servant they are in utter-
ing these predictions, and show reverence to
Btjn rather than His prophets ? Let them pre-
dict, then, the approach of lightnings, and fruits,
and all manner of productions, and let all such
things be under their administration ; yet we
shall not on that account worship those who
themselves offer worship, as we do not worship
even Moses, and those prophets who came from
God after him, and who predicted better things
than rain, and heat, and clouds, and thunders, and
lightnings, and fruits, and all sorts of productions
visible to the senses. Nay, even if sun, and moon,
and stars were able to prophesy better things
than rain, not even then shall we worship them,
but the Father of the prophecies which are in
them, and the Word of God, their minister.
But grant that they are His heralds, and truly
messengers of heaven, why, even then ought we
not to worship the God whom they only pro-
claim and announce, rather than those who are
the heralds and messengers ?


Celsus, moreover, assumes that sun, and moon,
and stars are regarded by us as of no account.
Now, with regard to these, we acknowledge that
they too are " waiting for the manifestation of
the sons of God," being for the present subjected
to the "vanity" of their material bodies, "by
reason of Him who has subjected the same in
hope." '3 But if Celsus had read the innumera-
ble other passages where we speak of sun, moon,
and stars, and especially these, — " Praise Him,
all j^e stars, and thou, O light," and, " Praise
Him, ye heaven of heavens," '^ — he would not
have said of us that we regard such mighty
beings, which "gready praise " the Lord God, as
of no account. Nor did Celsus know the pas-
sage : " For the earnest expectation of the crea-
ture waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of
God, For the creature was made subject to


9 Cf. John i. 26, 27.
'° Cf Jer. xxiii. 24.
" Cf Jer. xxiii. 23.

•2 C,y\Ti\v tv\^(jQixi. Tip ;u,r) (j)0avovTi enl to (rvfiiravTa.
'J Cf. Rom. viii. 19-21,
14 Cf. Ps. cxlviii. 3, 4.


Chap. XV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


549


vanity, not willingly, but by rea.son of Him who
hath subjected the same in hope ; because the
creature itself also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty
of the children of God.'"' And with these I
words let us terminate our defence against the
charge of not worshipping sun, moon, and stars. I
And let us now bring forward those statements '
of his which follow, that we may, God willing, '
address to him in reply such arguments as shall
be suggested by the light of truth.


CHAP. XIV.

The following, then, are his words: "It is
folly on their part to suppose that when God, as
if He were a cook," intro'duces the fire (which
is to consume the world), all the rest of the
human race will be burnt up, while they alone
will remain, not only such of them as are then
alive, but also those who are long since dead,
which latter will arise from the earth clothed
with the self-same flesh (as during life) ; for
such a hope is simply one which might be cher-
ished by worms. For what sort of human soul
is that which would still long for a body that had
been subject to corruption ? ^^'hence, also, this
opinion of yours is not shared by some of the
Christians, and they pronounce it to be exceed-
ingly vile, and loathsome, and impossible ; for
what kind of body is that which, after being
completely corrupted, can return to its original
nature, and to that self-same first condidon out
of which it fell into dissolution ? Being unable
to return any answer, they betake themselves to
a most absurd refuge, viz., that all things are
possible to God. And yet God cajinot do things
that are disgraceful, nor does He wish to do
things that are contrary to His nature ; nor, if
(m accordance with the wickedness of your own
heart) you desired anything that was evil, would
God accomplish it; nor must you believe at
once that it will be done. For God does not
rule the world in order to satisfy inordinate de-
sires, or to allow disorder and confusion, but to
govern a nature that is upright and just.3 For
the soul, indeed. He might be al)le to provide
an everlasting life; while dead bodies, on the
contrary, are, as Heraclitus observes, more worth-
less than dung. God, however, neither can nor
will declare, contrary to all reason, that the flesh,
which is full of those things which it is not even
honourable to mention, is to exist for ever. For
He is the reason of all things that exist, and
therefore can do nothing either contrary to rea-
son or contrary to Himself."


Cf. Rom. viii. 19-21
ui(777ep jLta-yetpo?


OKOO-Mia?, aAAa ti)s op9r,s KaX ScKaiaf 0«,7«ws Weds ecrri^ ap^r,-


CHAP. XV.

Obser\^e, now, here at the very beginning, how
m ridiculing the doctrine of a conflagration of
the world, held by certain of the Greeks who
have treated the subject in a philosophic spirit
not to be depreciated, he would make us, " rep-
resentmg God, as it were, as a cook, hold the
belief in a general conflagration ; " not perceiving
that, as certain Greeks were of opinion (per-
haps havmg received their information from the
ancient nation of the Hebrews), it is a purifica-
tory fire which is brought upon the world, and
probably also on each one of those who stand in
need of chastisement by the fire and healing at
the same time, seeing it burns indeed, but does
not consume, those who are without a material
body,-+ which needs to be consumed by that fire,
and which burns and consumes those who by
their actions, words, and thoughts have built up
wood, or hay, or stubble, in that which is figura-
tively termed a "building." 5 And the holy
Scriptures say that the Lord will, like a refiner's
fire and fullers' soap,^ visit each one of those
who require purification, because of the inter-
mingling in them of a flood of wicked matter
proceeding from their evil nature; who need
fire, I mean, to refine, as it were, (the dross of)
those who are intermingled with copper, and tin,
and lead. And he who likes may learn this
from the prophet Ezekiel.7 But that we say
that God brings fire upon the world, not like a
cook, but like a God, who is the beneflictor of
them who stand in need of the discipline of fire,^
will be testified by the prophet Isaiah, in whose
writings it is related that a sinful nation was thus
addressed : " Because thou hast coals of fire, sit
upon them: they shall be to thee a help." 9
Now the Scripture is appropriately adapted to
the multitudes of those who are to peruse it,
because it speaks obscurely of things that are
sad and gloomy, ■° in order to terrify those who
cannot by any other means be saved from the
flood of their sins, although even then the atten-
tive reader will clearly discover the end that is to
be accomplished by these sad and painful ])un-
ishments upon those who endure them. It is
sufficient, however, for the present to quote the
words of Isaiah : " For My name's sake will I
show Mine anger, and My glory I will bring upon
thee, that I may not destroy thee." " AVe have
thus been under the necessity of referring in
obscure terms to questions not fitted to the
capacity of simple believers,'^ who re(iuire a


* i'ATjf.

5 Cf. I Cor. iii. 12.

6 Cf. Mai. iii. 2.

7 Ct. Ezek. xxii. i8, 20.

8 jroi-ou Ka\ Tsvp6<;,

9 Cf. Isa. xlvii. 14, 15.

'O Tk (TKV0pu>7ra.

" CT. Isa. xlviii. 9 (Septiia.^int).

■^ l^ceRoheilioa's/^/isioryo/i/ie C/iurc/t, vol. i. p. is6,is7. S.j


550


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


simpler instruction in words, that we might not
appear to leave unrefuted the accusation of Cel-
sus, that " God introduces the fire (which is to
destroy the world), as if He were a cook."


From what has been said, it will be manifest
to intelligent hearers how we have to answer the
following : " All the rest of the race will be com-
pletely burnt up, and they alone will remain."
It is not to be wondered at, indeed, if such
thoughts have been entertained by those amongst
us who are called in Scripture the " foolish things "
of the world, and " base things," and " things
which are despised," and "things which are
not," because " by the foolishness of preaching
it pleased God to save them that believe on Him,
after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by
wisdom knew not God," ' — because such indi-
viduals are unable to see distinctly the sense of
each particular passage,^ or unwilling to devote
the necessary leisure to the investigation of
Scripture, notwithstanding the injunction of Je-
sus, " Search the Scriptures." ^ Tlie following,
moreover, are his ideas regarding the fire which
is to be brought upon the world by God, and the
punishments which are to befall sinners. And
perhaps, as it is appropriate to children that
some things should be addressed to them in a
manner befitting their infantile condition, to con-
vert them, as being of very tender age, to a bet-
ter course of life ; so, to those whom the word
terms " the foolish things of the world," and
" the base," and " the despised," the just and
obvious meaning of the passages relating to pun-
ishments is suitable, inasmuch as they cannot
receive any other mode of conversion than that
which is by fear and the presentation of punish-
ment, and thus be saved from the many evils
(which would befall them). 4 The Scripture ac-
cordingly declares that only those who are un-
scathed by the fire and the punishments are to
remain, — those, viz., whose opinions, and mor-
als, and mind have been purified to the highest
degree ; while, on the other hand, those of a
different nature — those, viz., who, according to
their deserts, require the administration of pun-
ishment by fire — will be involved in these suf-
ferings with a view to an end which it is suitable
for God to bring upon those who have been cre-
ated in His image, but who have lived in opposi-
tion to the will of that nature which is according
to His image. And this is our answer to the
statement, " All the rest of the race will be com-
pletely burnt up, but they alone are to remain."


Then, in the next place, having either himself
misunderstood the sacred Scriptures, or those
(interpreters) by whom they were not under-
stood, he proceeds to assert that " it is said by
us that there will remain at the time of the visi-
tation which is to come upon the world by the
fire of purification, not only those who are then
alive, but also those who are long ago dead ; "
not observing that it is with a secret kind of wis-
dom that it was said by the aposde of Jesus :
" We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, at the last trump ; for the trumpet shall
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed." s Now he ought to
have noticed what was the meaning of him who
uttered these words, as being one who was by no
means dead, who made a distinction between
himself and those like him and the dead, and
who said afterwards, " The dead shall be raised
incorruptible," and "we shall be changed."
And as a proof that such was the apostle's mean-
ing in writing those words which I have quoted
from the first Episde to the Gorinthians, 1 will
quote also from the first to the Thessalonians,
in which Paul, as one who is alive and awake,
and different from those who are asleep, speaks as
follows : " For this we say unto you by the word
of the Lord, that we who are alive and remain
unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent
them who are asleep ; for the Lord Himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the archangel, and with the trump of God." ^
Then, again, after this, knowing that there were
others dead in Christ besides himself and such
as he, he subjoins the words, "The dead in
Christ shall rise first ; then we who are alive and
remain shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air." 7


CHAP. XVIII.

But since he has ridiculed at great length the
doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh, which
has been preached in the Churches, and which
is more clearly understood by the more intelli-
gent believer ; and as it is unnecessary again to
quote his words, which have been already ad-
duced, let us, with regard to the problem ^ (as
in an apologetic work directed against an alien
from the faith, and for the sake of those who are
still "children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight
of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie


1 Cf. I Cor. i. 21.

2 TO. Kara. Tou? tottou?.

3 Cf. John V. 39.

4 Kac ruiv TToAAu)!/ KaKCiV anoxTQV,


5 Cf I Cor. XV. 51, 52.

6 Cf. I Thess. iv. 15, 16.

7 Cf. I Thess. iv. i6, 17.

8 Trepl Tou TTpo^A^jixaTos TOUTOV,


Chap. XX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


551


in wait to deceive " ■), state and establish to the
best of our ability a few points expressly intended
for our readers. Neither we, then, nor the holy
Scriptures, assert that with the same bodies, with-
out a change to a higher condition, " shall those
who were long dead arise from the earth and live
again ; " for in so speaking, Celsus makes a false
charge against us. For we may listen to many
passages of Scripture treating of the resurrection
in a manner worthy of God, although it may
suffice for the present to quote the language of
Paul from the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
where he says : " But some man will say, How
are the dead raised up ? and with what body do
they come ? Thou fool, that which thou sowest
is not quickened, except it die. And that which
thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall
be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or
of some other grain ; but God giveth it a body
as it hath pleased Him, and to every seed his
own body."^ Now, observe how in these words
he says that there is sown, " not that body that
shall be ; " but that of the body which is sown
and cast naked into the earth (God giving to
each seed its own body), there takes place as it
were a resurrection : from the seed that was cast
into the ground there arising a stalk, e.g., among
such plants as the following, viz., the mustard
plant, or of a larger tree, as in the olive,^ or one
of the fruit-trees.

CHAP. XIX.

God, then, gives to each thing its own body
as He pleases : as in the case of plants that are
sown, so also in the case of those beings who
are, as it were, sown in dying, and who in due
time receive, out of what has been "sown," the
body assigned by God to each one according to
his deserts. And we may hear, moreover, the
Scripture teaching us at great length the differ-
ence between that which is, as it were, " sown,"
and that which is, as it were, " raised " from it,
in these words : " It is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption ; it is sown in dishonour,
it is raised in glory ; it is sown in weakness, it is
raised in power ; it is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body." ^ And let him who has
the capacity understand the meaning of the
words : " As is the earthy, such are they also
that are earthy ; and as is the heavenly, such
are they also that are heavenly. And as we have
borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear
the image of the heavenly." 5 And although
the apostle wished to conceal the secret mean-
ing of the passage, which was not adapted to
the simpler class of believers, and to the under-


1 Cf. Eph. iv. 14.

2 Cf. I Cor. XV. 35-38.
^ ev eAaia? nvp-qvi,

* Cf. I Cor. XV. 42-44.
5 Cf. I Cor. XV. 48, 49.


Standing of the common people, who are led by
their faith to enter on a better course of life, he
was nevertheless obliged afterwards to say (in
order that we might not misapprehend his mean-
ing), after " Let us bear the image of the heaven-
ly," these words also : " Now this I say, brethren,
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom
of God ; neither doth corruption inherit incor-
ruption."^ Then, knowing that there was a
secret and mystical meaning in the passage, as
was becoming in one who was leaving, in his
Epistles, to those who were to come after him
words full of significance, he subjoins the follow-
ing, " Behold, I show you a mystery ; " ? which
is his usual style in introducing matters of a pro-
founder and more mystical nature, and such as
are fittingly concealed from the multitude, as is
written in the book of Tobit : " It is good to
keep close the secret of a king, but honourable
to reveal the works of God," ^ — in a way con-
sistent with truth and God's glory, and so as to
be to the advantage of the multitude. Our hope,
then, is 7/0^ " the hope of worms, nor does our
soul long for a body that has seen corruption ; "
for although it may require a body, for the sake
of moving from place to place,^ yet it under-
stands — as having meditated on the wisdom
(that is from above), agreeably to the declara-
tion, " The mouth of the righteous will speak
wisdom " '° — the difference between the " earthly
house," in which is the tabernacle of the build-
ing that is to be dissolved, and that in which
the righteous do groan, being burdened, — not
wishing to "put off" the tabernacle, but to be
" clothed therewith," that by being clothed upon,
mortality might be swallowed up of life. For,
in virtue of the whole nature of the body being
corruptible, the corruptible tabernacle must put
on incorruption ; and its other part, being mor-
tal, and becoming liable to the death which
follows sin, must put on immortality, in order
that, when the corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and tlie mortal immortality, then
shall come to pass what was predicted of old by
the prophets, — the annihiladon of the "victory"
of death (because it had conquered and sub-
jected us to his sway), and of its "sting," with
which it stings the imperfectly defended soul,
and inflicts upon it the wounds which result from
sin.

CHAr. XX.

But since our views regarding the resurrecdon
have, as far as time would permit, been stated
in part on the present occasion (for we have
systematically examined the subject in greater


* Cf. I Cor. XV. 50.
7 Cf. I Cor. XV. 51.
' Cf. Tobit xii. 7.
9 Slol tos TOJri/ta? /OleTa^a<rfts.
*° Cf. Ps. xxxvii. 30.


552


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


detail in other parts of our writings) ; and as [ even venerated by him, since he regards Zeno


now we must by means of sound reasoning re-
fute the fallacies of Celsus, who neither under-
stands the meaning of our Scripture, nor has the
capacity of judging that the meaning of our wise
men is not to be determined by those individu-
als who make no profession of anything more


wiser man than Jesus?


CHAP. XXI.


The disciples of Pythagoras, too, and of Plato,
although they appear to hold the incorruptibility
of the world, yet fall into similar errors. For as


than of a (simple) faith in the Christian system, xhe planets, after certain definite cycles, assume


let us show that men, not to be lightly esteemed
on account of their reasoning powers and dia-
lectic subtleties, have given expression to very
absurd ' opinions. And if we must sneer ^ at
them as contemptible old wives' fables, it is at
them rather than at our narrative that we must
sneer. The disciples of the Porch assert, that
after a period of years there will be a conflagra-
tion of the worid, and after that an arrangement
of things in which everything will be unchanged,
as compared with the former arrangement of the


the same positions, and hold the same relations
to one another, all things on earth will, they
assert, be like what they were at the time when
the same state of planetary relations existed in
the world. From this view it necessarily fol-
lows, that when, after the lapse of a lengthened
cycle, the planets come to occupy towards each
other the same relatfons which they occupied in
the time of Socrates, Socrates will again be born
of the same parents, and suffer the same treat-
ment, being accused by Anytus and Melitus, and


world. Those of them, however, who evinced condemned by the Council of Areopagus ! The


their respect for this doctrine have said that
there will be a change, although exceedingly
shght, at the end of the cycle, from what pre-
vailed during the preceding.^ And these men
maintain, that in the succeeding cycle the same
things will occur, and Socrates will be again the
son of Sophroniscus, and a native of Athens


learned among the Egyptians, moreover, hold
similar views, and yet they are treated with re-
spect, and do not incur the ridicule of Celsus
and such as he ; while we, who maintain that all
things are administered by God in proportion to
the relation of the free-will of each individual,
and are ever being brought into a better condi-


and Ph^narete, being married to Sophroniscus, i tion, so far as they admit of being so,^ and who


will again become his mother. And although
they do not mention the word "resurrection,"
they show in reality that Socrates, who derived
his origin from seed, will spring from that of
Sophroniscus, and will be fashioned in the womb
of Phaenarete ; and being brought up at Athens,
will practise the study of philosophy, as if his
former philosophy had arisen again, and were
to be in no respect different from what it was
before. Anytus and Melitus, too, will arise
again as accusers of Socrates, and the Coun-
cil of Areopagus will condemn him to death !
But what is more ridiculous still, is that Soc-
rates will clothe himself with garments not at
all different from those which he wore during
the former cycle, and will live in the same un-
changed state of poverty, and in the same
unchanged city of Athens ! And Phalaris will
again play the tyrant, and his brazen bull will
pour forth its bellowings from the voices of vic-
tims within, unchanged from those who were
condemned in the former cycle ! And Alexan-
der of Pherae, too, will again act the tyrant with
a cruelty unaltered from the former time, and
will condemn to death the same " unchanged "
individuals as before. But what need is there
to go into detail upon the doctrine held by the
Stoic philosophers on such things, and which
escapes the ridicule of Celsus, and is perhaps


know that the nature of our free-will admits of
the occurrence of contingent events = (for it is
incapable of receiving the wholly unchangeable
character of God), yet do not appear to say any-
thing worthy of a testing examination.

CHAP. XXII.

Let no one, however, suspect that, in speaking
as we do, we belong to those who are indeed
called Christians, but who set aside the doctrine
of the resurrection as it is taught in Scripture,
For these persons cannot, so far as their princi-
ples apply, at all establish that the stalk or tree
which springs up comes from the grain of wheat,
or anything else (which was cast into the
ground) ; whereas we, who believe that that
which is " sown " is not " quickened " unless it
die, and that there is sown not that body that
shall be (for God gives it a body as it pleases
Him, raising it in incorruption after it is sown in
corruption ; and after it is sown in dishonour,
raising it in glory ; and after it is sown in weak-
ness, raising it in power ; and after it is sown a
natural body, raising it a spiritual), — we pre-
serve both the doctrine ^ of the Church of Christ
and the grandeur of the divine promise, proving
also the possibility of its accomplishment not by
mere assertion, but by arguments ; knowing that


I a-<l>6Sp' a.TTefjiij>aU'OVTa,

3 [Comp. book iv. capp. Ixv.-lxix. pp. 526-528, sii/'i-


4 Kara to

5 icai T7)i

6 )3ovAr)^i(


ToO €</)■


<j>ii(Ti.v yiyvt


ecSexoneVou S


Chap. XXV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


553


although heaven and earth, and the things that
are in them, may pass away, yet His words re- !
garding each individual thing, being, as parts of
a whole, or species of a genus, the utterances
of Him who was God the Word, who was in
the beginning with God, shall by no means pass
away. For we desire to listen to Him who said :
'• Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My
words shall not pass away." '

CHAP. XXIII.

We, therefore, do not maintain that the body
which has undergone corruption resumes its
original nature, any more than the grain of
wheat which has decayed returns to its former
condition. But we do maintain, that as above
the grain of wheat there arises a stalk, so a cer-
tain power ^ is implanted in the body, which is
not destroyed, and from which the body is raised
up in incorruption. The philosophers of the
Porch, however, in consequence of the opinions
which they hold regarding the unchangeableness
of things after a certain cycle, assert that the
body, after undergoing complete corruption, will
return to its original condition, and will again
assume that first nature from which it passed
into a state of dissolution, establishing these
points, as they think, by irresistible arguments.^
We, however, do not betake ourselves to a most
absurd refuge, saying that with God all things
are possible ; for we know how to understand
this word " all " as not referring either to things
that are " non-existent " or that are inconceiv-
able. But we maintain, at the same time, that
God cannot do what is disgraceful, since then
He would be capable of ceasing to be God ; for
if He do anything that is disgraceful. He is not
God. Since, however, he lays it down as a prin-
ciple, that " God does not desire what is contrary
to nature," we have to make a distinction, and
say that if any one asserts that wickedness is
contrary to nature, while we maintain that " God
does not desire what is contrary to nature," —
either what springs from wickedness or from an
irrational principle, — yet, if such things happen
according to the word and will of God, we must
at once necessarily hold that they are not con-
trary to nature. Therefore things which are
done by God, although they may be, or may
appear to some to be incredible, are not con-
I trary to nature. And if we must press the force
1 of words,-* we would say that, in comparison with
j what is generally understood as " nature," there
I are certain things which are beyond its power,
1 which God could at any time do ; as, e.g., in
raising man above the level of human nature, and


causing him to pass into a better and more divine
condition, and preserving him in the same, so
long as he who is the object of His care shows
by his actions that he desires (the continuance
of His help) .

CHAP. XXIV.

Moreover, as we have already said that for
God to desire anything unbecoming Himself
would be destructive of His existence as Deity,
we will add that if man, agreeably to the wicked-
ness of his nature, should desire anything that is
abominable,5 God cannot grant it. And now it
is from no spirit of contention that we answer
the assertions of Celsus ; but it is in the spirit
of truth that we investigate them, as assenting
to his view that " He is the God, not of inordi-
nate desires, nor of error and disorder, but of a
nature just and upright," because He is the
source of all that is good. And that He is able
to provide an eternal life for the soul we ac-
! knowledge ; and that He possesses not only the
j " power," but the "will." In view, therefore, of
these considerations, we are not at all distressed
by the assertion of Heraclitus, adopted by Cel-
sus, that " dead bodies are to be cast out as
[ more worthless than dung ; " and yet, with refer-
ence even to this, one might say that dung, in-
1 deed, ought to be cast out, while the dead
j bodies of men, on account of the soul by which
they were inhabited, especially if it had been
virtuous, ought not to be cast out. For, in har-
mony with those laws which are based upon the
principles of equity, bodies are deemed worthy
of sepulture, with the honours accorded on such
occasions, that no insult, so far as can be helped,
may be offered to the soul which dwelt within,
by casting forth the body (after the soul has de-
parted) like that of the animals. Let it not
then be held, contrary to reason, that it is the
will of God to declare that the grain of wheat is
not immortal, but the stalk which springs from
it, while the body which is sown in corruption-
is not, but that which is raised by Him in incor-
ruption. But according to Celsus, God Himself
is the rea.son of all things, while according to
our view it is His Son, of whom we say in philo-
sophic language, " In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God ; "^ while in our judgment also,
God cannot do anything which is contrary to
reason, or contrary to Himself.^

CHAP. XXV.

Let us next notice the statements of Celsus,
which follow the preceding, and which are as
follow : " As the Jews, then, became a peculiar


Cf. Matt. xxiv. 35; cf. Mark xiii. 31.
' iiuAfKTiicais ava.yKai.<i.


5 S^fAiipoi".

6 Cf. John i. I.

? [Sec note iu/ra, bk. vi. cap. xlvii.


554


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


people, and enacted laws in keeping with the
customs of their country,' and maintain them
up to the present time, and observe a mode of
worship which, whatever be its nature, is yet de-
rived from their fathers, they act in these respects
like other men, because each nation retains its
ancestral customs, whatever they are, if they
happen to be established among them. And
such an arrangement appears to be advanta-
geous, not only because it has occurred to the
mind of other nations to decide some things
differently, but also because it is a duty to pro-
tect what has been established for the public
advantage ; and also because, in all probability,
the various quarters of the earth were from the
beginning allotted to different superintending
spirits,^ and were thus distributed among certain
governing powers,^ and in this manner the ad-
ministration of the world is carried on. And
whatever is done among each nation in this way
would be rightly done, wherever it was agreeable
to the wishes (of the superintending powers),
while it would be an act of impiety to get rid of ^
the institutions established from the beginning
in the various places." By these words Celsus
shows that the Jews, who were formerly Egyp-
tians, subsequently became a "peculiar people,"
and enacted laws which they carefully preserve.
And not to repeat his statements, which have
been already before us, he says that it is advan-
tageous to the Jews to observe their ancestral
worship, as other nations carefully attend to
theirs. And he further states a deeper reason
why it is of advantage to the Jews to cultivate
their ancestral customs, in hinting dimly that
those to whom was allotted the office of super-
intending the country which was being legislated
for, enacted the laws of each land in co-opera-
tion with its legislators. He appears, then, to
indicate that both the country of the Jews, and
the nation which inhabits it, are superintended
by one or more beings, who, whether they were
one or more, co-operated with Moses, and
enacted the laws of the Jews.

CHAP. XXVI.

"We must," he says, "observe the laws, not
only because it has occurred to the mind of
others to decide some things differently, but be-
cause it is a duty to protect what has been
enacted for the public advantage, and also be-
cause, in all probability, the various quarters of
the earth were from the beginning allotted to
different superintending spirits, and were distrib-
uted among certain governing powers, and in
this manner the administration of the world is


;al Kara to eTrix^pioi/ voixov; OefievOL.

-a. /xepT) Tijs yri? ef apxiis aAAa aAAoi9 eTroTrrats veve/j.rjfi.ei'

cai Kara Tti^as inLKpaTtia.^ 6t£tAT;/xjLi€Va.

TapaAuctt',


carried on." Thus Celsus, as if he had forgotten
what he had said against the Jews, now includes
them in the general eulogy which he passes upon
all who observe their ancestral customs, remark-
ing : "And whatever is done among each nation
in this way, would be rightly done whenever
agreeable to the wishes (of the superintend-
ents)." And observe here, whether he does not
openly, so far as he can, express a wish that the
Jew should live in the observance of his own
laws, and not depart from them, because he
would commit an act of impiety if he aposta-
tized ; for his words are : " It would be an act
of impiety to get rid of the institutions estab-
lished from the beginning in the various places."
Now I should like to ask him, and those who
entertain his views, who it was that distributed
the various quarters of the earth from the begin-
ning among the different superintending spirits ;
and especially, who gave the country of the Jews,
and the Jewish people themselves, to the one or
more superintendents to whom it was allotted ?
Was it, as Celsus would say, Jupiter who assigned
the Jewish people and their country to a certain
spirit or spirits ? And was it /lis wish, to whom
they were thus assigned, to enact among them
the laws which prevail, or was it against his will
that it was done ? You will observe that, what-
ever be his answer, he is in a strait. But if the
various quarters of the earth were not allotted
by some one being to the various superintending
spirits, then each one at random, and without
the superintendence of a higher power, divided
the earth according to chance ; and yet such a
view is absurd, and destructive in no small degree
of the providence of the God who presides over
all things.

CHAP. XXVII.

Any one, indeed, who chooses, may relate
how the various quarters of the earth, being dis-
tributed among certain governing powers, are
administered by those who superintend them ;
but let him tell us also how what is done among
each nation is done rightly when agreeable to
the wishes of the superintendents. Let him, for
example, tell us whether the laws of the Scythi-
ans, which permit the murder of parents, are
right laws ; or those of the Persians, which do
not forbid the marriages of sons with their moth-
ers, or of daughters with their own fathers. But
what need is there for me to make selections
from those who have been engaged in the busi-
ness of enacting laws among the different na-
tions, and to inquire how the laws are rightly
enacted among each, according as they please
the superintending powers? Let Celsus, how-
ever, tell us how it would be an act of impiety
to get rid of those ancestral laws which permit
the marriages of mothers and daughters; or


Chap. XXIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


555


which pronounce a man happy who puts an end
to his Hfe by hanging, or declare that they un-
dergo entire purification who dehver themselves
over to the fire, and who terminate their exist-
ence by fire ; and how it is an act of impiety to
do away with those laws which, for example,
prevail in the Tauric Chersonese, regarding the
offering up of strangers in sacrifice to Diana, or
among certain of the Libyan tribes regarding the
sacrifice of children to Saturn. Moreover, this
inference follows from the dictum of Celsus, that
it is an act of impiety on the part of the Jews to
do away with those ancestral laws which forbid
the worship of any other deity than the Creator
of all things. And it will follow, according to
his view, that piety is not divine by its own na-
ture, but by a certain (external) arrangement
and appointment. For it is an act of piety
among certain tribes to worship a crocodile, and
to eat what is an object of adoration among
other tribes ; while, again, with others it is a
pious act to worship a calf, and among others,
again, to regard the goat as a god. And, in this
way, the same individual will be regarded as act-
ing piously according to one set of laws, and
impiously according to another ; and this is the
most absurd result that can be conceived !

CHAP. XXVIII.

It is probable, however, that to such remarks
as the above, the answer returned would be, that
he was pious who kept the laws of his oivn
country, and not at all cliargeable with impiety
for the non-observance of those of otlier lands ;
and that, again, he who was deemed guilty of
impiety among certain nations was not really so,
when he worshipped his own gods, agreeably to
his country's laws, although he made war against,
and even feasted on,' those who were regarded
as divinities among those nations which possessed
laws of an opposite kind. Now, observe here
whether these statements do not exhibit the great-
est confusion of mind regarding the nature of what
is just, and holy, and religious ; since there is
no accurate definition laid down of these things,
nor are they described as having a peculiar char-
acter of their own, and stamping as religious
those who act according to their injunctions. If,
then, religion, and piety, and righteousness be-
long to those things which are so only by com-
parison, so that the same act may be both pious
and impious, according to different relations and
different laws, see whether it will not follow that
temperance ^ also is a thing of comparison, and
courage as well, and prudence, and the other
virtues, than which nothing could be more ab-
surd I What we have said, however, is sufficient


for the more general and simple class of answers
to the allegations of Celsus. But as we think
it likely that some of those who are accustomed
to deeper investigation will fall in with this trea-
tise, let us venture to lay down some considera-
tions of a profounder kind, conveying a mystical
and secret view respecting the original distribu-
tion of the various quarters of the earth among
different superintending spirits ; and let us prove
to the best of our ability, that our doctrine is
free from the absurd consequences enumerated
above.

CHAP. XXIX.

It appears to me, indeed, that Celsus has mis-
understood some of the deeper reasons relating
to the arrangement of terrestrial affairs, some of
which are touched upon ^ even in Grecian his-
tory, when certain of those who are considered
to be gods are introduced as having contended
with each other about the possession of Attica ;
while in the writings of the Greek poets also,
some who are called gods are represented as
acknowledging that certain places here are pre-
ferred by them ^ before others. The history of
barbarian nations, moreover, and especially that
of Egypt, contains some such allusions to the
division of the so-called Egyptian nomes', when
it states that Athena, who obtained Sais by lot,
is the same who also has possession of Attica.
And the learned among the Egyptians can enu-
merate innumerable instances of this kind, al-
though I do not know whether they include the
Jews and their country in this division. And
now, so far as testimonies outside the word of
God bearing on this point are concerned, enough
have been adduced for the present. We say,
moreover, that our prophet of God and His
genuine servant Moses, in his song in the book
of Deuteronomy, makes a statement regarding
the portioning out of the earth in the following
terms : " When the Most High divided the na-
tions, when He dispersed the sons of Adam, He
set the bounds of the people according to the
number of the angels of God ; and the Lord's
portion was His people Jacob, and Israel the
cord of His inheritance." s And regarding the
distribution of the nations, the same Moses, in
his work entitled Genesis, thus expresses himself
in the style of a historical narrative : " And the
whole earth was of one language and of one
speech ; and it came to pass, as they journeyed
from the east, that they found a plain in the
land of Shinar, and they dwelt there." ^ A little
further on he continues : " And the Lord came
down to see the city and the tower, which the
children of men had built. And the Lord said,


,9(LXX.).


556


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


Behold, the people is one, and they have all one
language ; and this they have begun to do : and
now nothing will be restrained from them which
they have imagined to do. Go to, let Us go
down, and there confound their language, that
they may not understand one another's speech.
And the Lord scattered them abroad from thence
upon the face of all the earth : and they left off
to build the city and the tower. Therefore is
the name of it called Confusion ; ' because the
Lord did there confound the language of all the
earth : and from thence did the Lord scatter
them abroad upon the face of all the earth." ^
In the treatise of Solomon, moreover, on " Wis-
dom," and on the events at the time of the
confusion of languages, when the division of the
earth took place, we find the following regarding
Wisdom : " Moreover, the nations in their wicked
conspiracy being confounded, she found out the
righteous, and preserved him blameless unto
God, and kept him strong in his tender compas-
sion towards his son." ^ But on these subjects
much, and that of a mystical kind, might be
said ; in keeping with which is the following :
" It is good to keep close the secret of a king,"^
— in order that the doctrine of the entrance of
souls into bodies (not, however, that of the
transmigration from one body into another) may
not be thrown before the common understand-
ing, nor what is holy given to the dogs, nor pearls
be cast before swine. For such a procedure
would be impious, being equivalent to a betrayal
of the mysterious declarations of God's wisdom,
of which it has been well said : " Into a malicious
soul wisdom shall not enter, nor dwell in a body
subject to sin." 5 It is sufficient, however, to
represent in the style of a historic narrative what
is intended to convey a secret meaning in the
garb of history, that those who have the capacity
may work out for themselves all that relates to
the subject. (The narrative, then, may be un-
derstood as follows.)

CHAP. XXX.

All the people upon the earth are to be re-
garded as having used one divine language, and
so long as they hved harmoniously together were
preserved in the use of this divine language, and
they remained without moving from tlie east so
long as they were imbued with the sentiments
of the " light," and of the " reflection " of the
eternal light.^ But when they departed from
the east, and began to entertain sentiments alien
to those of the east,^ they found a place in the


* <rvyyvo"t?.

2 Cf. Gen. xi. 5-9.

3 Cf. Wisd. of Sol. X. 5.

4 Cf. Tobit xii. 7.

5 Cf. Wisd. of Sol.

7 dAAoTpia auaro^uiv (j>povovvTe^,


land of Shinar (which, when interpreted, means
"gnashing of teeth," by way of indicating sym-
bolically that they had lost the means of their
support), and in it they took up their abode.
Then, desiring to gather together material things,^
and to join to heaven what had no natural affinity
for it, that by means of material things they
might conspire against such as were immaterial,
they said, " Come, let us made bricks, and burn
them with fire." Accordingly, when they had
hardened and compacted these materials of clay
and matter, and had shown their desire to make
brick into stone, and clay into bitumen, and by
these means to build a city and a tower, the head
of which was, at least in their conception, to
reach up to the heavens, after the manner of the
" high things which exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God," each one was handed over
(in proportion to the greater or less departure
from the east which had taken place among
them, and in proportion to the extent in wliich
bricks had been converted into stones, and clay
into bitumen, and building carried on out of
these materials) to angels of character more or
less severe, and of a nature more or less stern,
until they had paid the penalty of their daring
deeds ; and they were conducted by those angels,
who imprinted on each his native language, to
the different parts of the earth according to their
deserts : some, for example, to a region of burn-
ing heat, others to a country which chastises its
inhabitants by its cold ; others, again, to a land
exceedingly difficult of cultivation, others to one
less so in degree ; while a fifth were brought into |
a land filled with wild beasts, and a sixth to a
country comparatively free of these. :

CHAP. XXXI.

Now, in the next place, if any one has the
capacity, let him understand that in what as-
sumes the form of history, and which contains i
some things that are literally true, while yet it |
conveys a deeper meaning, those who preserved j
their original language continued, by reason of |
their not having migrated from the east, in pos- j
session of the east, and of their eastern language.
And let him notice, that these alone became the
portion of the Lord, and His people who were
called Jacob, and Israel the cord of His inheri-
tance ; and these alone were governed by a ruler j
who did not receive those who were placed un-
der him for the purpose of punishment, as was j
the case with the others. Let him also, who has j
the capacity to perceive as far as mortals may, j
observe that in the body politic ^ of those who
were assigned to the Lord as His pre-eminent
portion, sins were committed, first of all, such as i


(|)a)Tbs Ka\ ToO ciTrb <f>u)TO'; aiSlov anav-


Chap. XXXIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


557


might be forgiven, and of such a nature as not
to make the sinner worthy of entire desertion,
while subsequently they became more numerous,
though still of a nature to be pardoned. And
while remarking that this state of matters con-
tinued for a considerable time, and that a remedy
was always applied, and that after certain inter-
vals these persons returned to their duty, let him
notice that they were given over, in proportion
to their transgressions, to those to whom had
been assigned the other quarters of the earth ;
and that, after being at first slightly punished,
and having made atonement,' they returned, as
if they had undergone discipline,^ to their proper
habitations. Let him notice also that afterwards
they were delivered over to rulers of a severer
character — to Assyrians and Babylonians, as the ,
Scriptures would call them. In the next place, ■
notwithstanding that means of healing were being
applied, let him observe that they were still mul- i
tiplying their transgressions, and that they were j
on that account dispersed into other regions by I
the rulers of the nations that oppressed them. 1
And their own ruler intentionally overlooked :
their oppression at the hands of the rulers of the
other nations, in order that he also with good
reason, as avenging himself, having obtained
power to tear away from the other nations as
many as he can, may do so, and enact for them
laws, and point out a manner of life agreeably to '
which they ought to live, that so he may con-
duct them to the end to which those of the for-
mer people were conducted who did not commit
sin.

CHAP. XXXII.

And by this means let those who have the
capacity of comprehending truths so profound,
learn that he to whom were allotted those who
had not formerly sinned is far more powerful
than the others, since he has been able to make
a selection of individuals from the portion of
the whole, 3 and to separate them from those who
received them for the purpose of punishment,
and to bring them under the influence of laws,
and of a mode of life which helps to produce an
oblivion of their former transgressions. But, as
we have previously observed, these remarks are
to be understood as being made by us with a
concealed meaning, by way of pointing out the
mistakes of those who asserted that " the various
quarters of the earth were from the beginning
distributed among different superintending spir-
its, and being allotted among certain governing
powers, were administered in this way ; " from
which statement Celsus took occasion to make
the remarks referred to. But since those who
wandered away from the east were delivered


x;r6 T7J9 ndvTtjjv juepiSo?,


over, on account of their sins, to " a reprobate
mind," and to "vile affections," and to " un-
cleanness through the lusts of their own hearts," ■♦
in order that, being sated with sin, they might
hate it, we shall refuse our assent to the asser-
tion of Celsus, that " because of the superintend-
ing spirits distributed among the different parts
of the earth, what is done among each natidn is
rightly done ; " for our desire is to do what is
;iot agreeable to these spirits. 5 For we see that
it is a religious act to do away with the customs
originally established in the various places by
means of laws of a better and more divine char-
acter, which were enacted by Jesus, as one pos-
sessed of the greatest power, who has rescued
us " from the present evil world," and " from
the princ^ of the world that come to nought ; "
and that it is a mark of irreligion not to throw
ourselves at the feet of Him who has manifested
Himself to be holier and more powerful than all
other rulers, and to whom God said, as the
prophets many generations before predicted :
" Ask of Me, and I shall give Thee the heathen
for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts
of the earth for Thy possession." * For He,
too, has become the " expectation " of us who
from among the heathen have believed upon
Him, and upon His Father, who is God over all
things.

CHAP. XXXIII.

The remarks which we have made not only
answer the statements of Celsus regarding the
superintending spirits, but anticipate in some
measure what he afterwards brings forward, when
he says : " Let the second party come forward ;
and I shall ask them whence they come, and
whom they regard as the originator of their an-
cestral customs. They will reply. No one, be-
cause they spring from the same source as the
Jews themselves, and derive their instruction and
superintendence 7 from no other quarter, and
notwithstanding they have revolted from the
Jews." Each one of us, then, is come " in the
last days," when one Jesus has visited us, to
the " visible mountain of the Lord," the Word
that is above every word, and to the " house of
God," which is " the Church of the living God,
the pillar and ground of the truth." ^ And \ve
notice how it is built upon " the tops of the
mountains," i.e., the predictions of all the proph-
ets, which are its foundations. And this house
is exalted above the hills, i.e., those individuals
among men who make a profession of superior
attainments in wisdom and truth ; and all the
nations come to it, and the " many nations " go


■♦ Cf. Rom. i. 24, 26, 28.

5 aAAa (cal ^ovKofJ-tda, ovx oirr) )) «/«iVoi5 <^iAov, noielv To.

"'6"Ps. ii. 8.

7 V'OpOO'TOTTJl'.

8 Cf. I Tim. iii. 15.


558


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


forth, and say to one another, turning to the re-
^gion which in the last days has • shone forth
through Jesus Christ : " Come ye, and let us go
up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of
the God of Jacob ; and He will teach us of His
ways, and we will walk in them." ■ For the law
came forth [rom the dwellers in Sion, and settled
among us as a spiritual law. Moreover, the word
of the Lord came forth from that very Jerusalem,
that it might be disseminated through all places,
and might judge in the midst of the heathen,
selecting those whom it sees to be submissive,
and rejecting 2 the disobedient, who are many in
number. And to those who inquire of us whence
we come, or who is our founder,^ we reply that
we are come, agreeably to the counsels of Jesus,
to " cut down our hostile and insolent ' wordy ' 4
swords into ploughshares, and to convert into j
pruning-hooks the spears formerly employed in [
war." 5 For we no longer take up " sword against
nation," nor do we "learn war any more," having
become children of peace, for the sake of Jesus,
who is our leader, instead of those whom our
fathers followed, among wliom we were " stran-
gers to the covenant," and having received a
law, for which we give thanks to Him that
rescued us from the error (of our ways), saying,
" Our fathers honoured lying idols, and there is
not among them one that causeth it to rain." ^
Our Superintendent, then, and Teacher, having
come forth from the Jews, regulates the whole
world by the word of His teaching. And having
made these remarks by way of anticipation, we
have refuted as well as we could the untrue
statements of Celsus, by subjoining the appropri-
ate answer.

CHAP. XXXIV.

But, that we may not pass without notice what
Celsus has said between these and the preceding
paragraphs, let us quote his words : " We might
adduce Herodotus as a witness on this point, for
he expresses himself as follows : ' For the people
of the cities Marea and Apis, who inhabit those
parts of Egypt that are adjacent to Libya, and
who look upon themselves as Libyans, and not
as Egyptians, finding their sacrificial worship op-
pressive, and wishing not to be excluded from
the use of cows' flesh, sent to the oracle of
Jupiter Ammon, saying that there was no rela-
tionship between them and the Egyptians, that
they dwelt outside the Delta, that there was no
community of sentiment between them and the
Egyptians, and that they wished to be allowed


' Cf. Isa. ii. 3.

2 eKiyxn.

3 apxnyeryiv. _

4 (rv-/K6>paL Toi! TroXemiKO? rnxiiiv ^oyiicAs /najfaipa? (col ii^pia-
TiKos ei? apoTpa, Ka\ Ta? Kara to -rrpoTepov rjixiov p-dx^tnov ^i/SOfas
eis ^pe'jrava (^eTao-Keua^o/uei/,

5 Cf. Isa. ii. 4.

* Cf. Jer. xvi. 19 and xiv. 22: 109 \ljevSr} eKTrjcravTo oi Trare'pes
riiJ.£>v el&utKa, Kai oiiK etrTic cc aiiTois ueri^wv.


to partake of all kinds of food. But the god
would not allow them to do as they desired, say-
ing that that country was a part of Egypt, which
was watered by the inundation of the Nile, and
that those were Egyptians who dwell to the south
of the city of Elephantine, and drink of the river
Nile.' 7 Such is the narrative of Herodotus.
But," continues Celsus, "Ammon in divine things
would not make a worse ambassador than the
angels of the Jews,^ so that there is nothing
wrong in each nation observing its established
method of worship. Of a truth, we shall find
very great differences prevailing among the na-
tions, and yet each seems to deem its own by
far the best. Those inhabitants of Ethiopia
who dwell in Meroe worship Jupiter and Bac-
chus alone ; the Arabians, Urania and Bacchus
only ; all the Egyptians, Osiris and Isis ; the
Saites, Minerva ; while the Naucratites have
recently classed Serapis among their deities, and
the rest according to their respective laws. And
some abstain from the flesh of sheep, and others
from that of crocodiles ; others, again, from that
of cows, while they regard swine's flesh with
loathing. The Scythians, indeed, regard it as a
noble act to banquet upon human beings.
Among the Indians, too, there are some who
deem themselves discharging a holy duty in eat-
ing their fathers, and this is mentioned in a cer-
tain passage by Herodotus. For the sake of
credibility, I shall again quote his very words,
for he writes as follows : ' For if any one were
to make this proposal to all men, viz., to bid
him select out of all existing laws the best, each
would choose, after examination, those of his
own country. Men each consider their own
laws much the best, and therefore it is not likely
than any other than a madman would make these
things a subject of ridicule. But that such are
the conclusions of all men regarding the laws,
may be determined by many other evidences,
and especially by the following illustration. Da-
rius, during his reign, having summoned before
him those Greeks who happened to be present
at the time, inquired of them for how much
they would be willing to eat their deceased
fathers ? their answer was, that for no consider-
ation would they do such a thing. After this,
Darius summoned those Indians who are called
Callatians, who are in the habit of eating their
parents, and asked of them in the presence of
these Greeks, who learned what passed througti
an interpreter, for what amount of money they
would undertake to burn their deceased fathers
with fire? on which they raised a loud shout,
and bade the king say no more.' 9 Such is the


7 Cf. Herodot., ii. i8.

^ 6 6e 'AjixiLicoj/ ov&€v Tt k

lov&aioiv ayyeAot.

9 t-u(|)r)|U.eiv fiiv ixi^evov.


6ia7rpe(7/3ei)troi Ta ioi^tdi'ta, fi


Chap. XXXVIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


559


way, then, in which these matters are regarded.
And Pindar appears to me to be right in saying
that ' law ' is the king of all things." '


CHAP. XXXV.


CHAP. XXXVI.

But what sort of being is this Ammon of
Herodotus, whose words Celsus has quoted,
as if by way of demonstrating how each one
ought to keep his country's laws? For this
Ammon would not allow the people of the cities
of Marea and Apis, who inhabit the districts
adjacent to Libya, to treat as a matter of indif-
ference the use of cows' flesh, which is a thing
not only indifferent in its own nature, but which
does not prevent a man from being noble and
virtuous. If Ammon, then, forbade the use of


The argument of Celsus appears to point by
these illustrations to this conclusion : that it is
" an obligation incumbent on all men to live
according to their country's customs, in which
case they will escap^censure ; whereas the Chris-
tians, who have abandoned their native usages,

and who are not one nation like the Jews, are j cows' flesh, because of the advantage which
to be blamed for giving their adherence to the | results from the use of the animal in the culti-
Let him then tell us whether vation of the ground, and in addition to this,
because it is by the female that the breed is in-
creased, the account would possess more plausi-
bility. But now he simply requires that those
who drink of the Nile should observe the laws
of the Egyptians regarding kine. And hereupon
Celsus, taking occasion to pass a jest upon the
employment of the angels among the Jews as
the ambassadors of God, says that "Ammon
did not make a worse ambassador of divine
things than did the angels of the Jews," hito
the meaning of whose words and manifestations
he instituted no investigation ; otherwise he
would have seen, that it is not for oxen that
God is concerned, even where He may appear
to legislate for them, or for irrational animals,
but that what is written for the sake of men,
under the appearance of relating to irrational
animals, contains certain truths of nature.^ Cel-
sus, moreover, says that no wrong is committed
by any one who wishes to observe the religious
worship sanctioned by the laws of his country ;
and it follows, according to his view, that the
Scythians commit no wrong, when, in conformity
with their country's laws, they eat human beings.
And those Indians who eat their own fathers
are considered, according to Celsus, to do a
religious, or at least not a wicked act. He
adduces, indeed, a statement of Herodotus
which favours the principle that each one ought,
from a sense of what is becoming, to obey his
country's laws ; and he appears to approve of
the custom of those Indians called Callatians,


teaching of Jesus
it is a becoming thing for philosophers, and
those who have been taught not to yield to
superstition, to abandon their country's customs,
so as to eat of those articles of food which are
prohibited in their respective cities? or whether
this proceeding of theirs is opposed to what is
becoming? For if, on account of their philoso-
phy, and the instructions which they have re-
ceived against superstition, they should eat, in
disregard of their native laws, what was inter-
dicted by their fathers, why should the Chris-
tians (since the Gospel requires them not to
busy themselves about statues and images, or
even about any of the created works of God,
but to ascend on high, and present the soul to
the Creator), when acting in a similar manner
to the philosophers, be censured for so doing?
But if, for the sake of defending the thesis which
he has proposed to himself, Celsus, or those who
think with him, should say, that even one who
had studied philosophy would keep his country's
laws, then philosophers in Egypt, for example,
would act most ridiculously in avoiding the eat-
ing of onions, in order to observe their country's
laws, or certain parts of the body, as the head
and shoulders, in order not to transgress the
traditions of their fathers. And I do not speak
of those Egyptians who shudder with fear at the
discharge of wind from the body, because if
any one of these were to become a philosopher,
and still observe the laws of his country, he
would be a ridiculous philosopher, acting very


unphilosophically.- In the same way, then, he ^^^q j^ ^h^ time of Darius devoured their parents,
who has been led by the Gospel to worship the since, on Darius inquiring for how great a sum
God of all things, and, from regard to his Qf money they would be willing to lay aside this
country's laws, lingers here below among images ^gage, they raised a loud shout, and bade the


and statues of men, and does not desire to
ascend to the Creator, will resemble those who
have indeed learned philosophy, but who are
afraid of things which ought to inspire no ter-
rors, and who regard it as an act of impiety to
eat of those things which have been enumerated.


• Cf. Herodot., iii. 38.


0</>os a<^iAdao(#>a TrpoiTTcui',


king say no more.


CHAP, xxxvii.


As there are, then, generally two laws pre-
sented to us, the one being the law of nature,
of which God would be the legislator, and the


3 (^uaio\oyii


56o


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[EooK V.


Other being the written law of cities, it is a prop-
er thing, when the written law is not opposed to
that of God, for the citizens not to abandon it
under pretext of foreign customs ; but when
the law of nature, that is, the law of God, com-
mands what is opposed to the written law, ob-
serve whether reason will not tell us to bid a
long farewell to the written code, and to the
desire of its legislators, and to give ourselves up
to the legislator God, and to choose a life agree-
able to His word, although in doing so it may be
necessary to encounter dangers, and countless la-
bours, and even death and dishonour. For when
there are some laws in harmony with the will of
God, which are opposed to others which are in
force in cities, and when it is impracticable to
please God (and those who administer laws of
the kind referred to), it would be absurd to con-
temn those acts by means of which we may
please the Creator of all things, and to select
those by which we shall become displeasing to
God, though we may satisfy unholy laws, and
those who love them. But since it is reasonable
in other matters to prefer the law of nature,
which is the law of God, before the written law,
which has been enacted by men in a spirit of
opposition to the law of God, why should we not
do this still more in the case of those laws which
relate to God ? Neither shall we, like the Ethi-
opians who inhabit the parts about Meroe, wor-
ship, as is their pleasure, Jupiter and Bacchus
only; nor shall we at all reverence Ethiopian
gods in the Ethiopian manner ; nor, like the
Arabians, shall we regard Urania and Bacchus
alone as divinities ; nor in any degree at all dei-
ties in which the difference of sex has been a
ground of distinction (as among the Arabians,
who worship Urania as a female, and Bacchus as
a male deity) ; nor shall we, like all the Egyp-
tians, regard Osiris and Isis as gods ; nor shall
we enumerate Athena among these, as the Saites
are pleased to do. And if to the ancient inhab-
itants of Naucratis it seemed good to worship
other divinities, while their modern descendants
have begun quite recently to pay reverence to
Serapis, who never was a god at all, we shall not
on that account assert that a new being who was
not formerly a god, nor at all known to men, is
a deity. For the Son of God, " the First-born
of all creation," although He seemed recently to
have become incarnate, is not by any means on
that account recent. For the holy Scriptures
know Him to be the most ancient of all the
works of creation ; ' for it was to Him that
God said regarding the creation of man, " Let
Us make man in Our image, after Our like-
ness."^


' TTOecrSiiTaToi' iravTMV tmv 6r;/Aiovpvr);u.aT(o»'.
2 Cf. Gen. i. 26.


CHAP. XXXVIII.

I wish, however, to show how Celsus asserts
without any good reason, that each one reveres
his domestic and native institutions. For he
declares that " those Ethiopians who inhabit
Meroe know only of two gods, Jupiter and Bac-
chus, and worship these alone ; and that the
Arabians also know only of two, viz., Bacchus,
who is also an Ethiopian deity, and Urania,
whose worship is confined to them." According
to his account, neither do the Ethiopians wor-
ship Urania, nor the Arabians Jupiter. If, then,
an Ethiopian were from any accident to fall into
the hands of the Arabians, and were to be
judged guilty of impiety because he did not
worship Urania, and for this reason should incur
the danger of death, would it be proper for the
Ethiopian to die, or to act contrary to his coun-
try's laws, and do obeisance to Urania? Now,
if it would be proper for him to act contrary to
the laws of his country, he will do what is not
right, so far as the language of Celsus is any
standard ; while, if he should be led away to
death, let him show the reasonableness of select-
ing such a fate. I know not whether, if the
Ethiopian doctrine taught men to philosophize
on the immortality of the soul, and the honour
which is paid to religion, they would reverence
those as deities who are deemed to be such by
the laws of the country.^ A similar illustration
may be employed in the case of the Arabians,
if from any accident they happened to visit the
Ethiopians about Meroe. For, having been
taught to worship Urania and Bacchus alone,
they will not worship Jupiter along with the
Ethiopians ; and if, adjudged guilty of impiety,
they should be led away to death, let Celsus tell
us what it would be reasonable on their part to
do. And with regard to the fables which relate
to Osiris and Isis, it is superfluous and out of
place at present to enumerate them. For
although an allegorical meaning may be given
to the fables, they will nevertheless teach us to
offer divine worship to cold water, and to the
earth, which is subject to men, and all the ani-
mal creation. For in this way, I presume, they
refer Osiris to water, and Isis to earth ; while with
regard to Serapis the accounts are numerous
and conflicting, to the effect that very recently
he appeared in public, agreeably to certain jug-
gling tricks performed at the desire of Ptolemy,
who wished to show to the people of Alexan-
dria as it were a visible god. And we have read
in the writings of Numenius the Pythagorean
regarding his formation, that he partakes of the
essence of all the animals and plants that are
under the control of nature, that he may appear


•' This sentence is regarded by Guietus as an interpolation, which
should be struck out of the text.


Chap. XLL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


561


to have been fashioned into a god, not by the
makers of images alone, with the aid of profane
mysteries, and juggUng tricks employed to invoke
demons, but also by magicians and sorcerers,
and those demons who are bewitched by their
incantations.'

CHAP. XXXIX.

We must therefore inquire what may be fit-
tingly eaten or not by the rational and gentle ^
animal, which acts always in conformity with
reason ; and not worship at random, sheep, or
goats, or kine ; to abstain from which is an act
of moderation, 3 for much advantage is derived
by men from these animals. Whereas, is it not
the most foolish of all things to spare crocodiles,
and to treat them as sacred to some fabulous
divinity or other? For it is a mark of exceeding
stupidity to spare those animals which do not
spare us, and to bestow care on those which
make a prey of human beings. But Celsus ap-
proves of those who, in keeping with the laws
of their country, worship and tend crocodiles,
and not a word does he say against them, while
the Christians appear deserving of censure, who
have been taught to loath evil, and to turn away
from wicked works, and to reverence and honour
virtue as being generated byjSod, and as being
His Son. For we must not, on account of their
feminine name and nature, regard wisdom and
righteousness as females ; * for these things are
in our view the Son of God, as His genuine dis-
ciple has shown, when he said of Him, " Who of
God is made to us wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption." 5 And al-
though we may call Him a " second " God, let
men know that by the term " second God " we
mean nothing else than a virtue capable of in-
cluding all other virtues, and a reason capable
of containing all reason whatsoever which exists
in all things, which have arisen naturally, directly,
and for the general advantage, and which " rea-
son," we say, dwelt in the soul of Jesus, and was
united to Him in a degree far above all other
souls, seeing He alone was enabled completely
to receive the highest share in the absolute rea-
son, and the absolute wisdom, and the absolute
righteousness.


But since, after Celsus had spoken to the
above effect of the different kinds of laws, he
adds the following remark, " Pindar appears to
me to be correct in saying that law is kmg of all


fiatjuot^a; juayyai/ettoi/, OV"^ vtto ayaKfiaTOnoLijiV fjiOVtav KaTa(TK€va-
^eaSat 9to?, aAAa Ka'i inro fidyuiv, Koi (l>apiJiaKCiv, /cal tuik

3 ^erpiov. _ ,.,,.,,

* oil yap wapa to drfKvKov ovop-a, Kai Ti/ OVCTto Or)\ci.av vopLiT-
T€Oi' ctt-at Trjv (TOi^iaVy /cat TTji' bi,K(xi\>(Jvvy\v,
5 Cf. I Cor. i. 30.


things," let us proceed to discuss this assertion.
What law do you mean to say, good sir, is " king
of all things?" If you mean those which exist
in the various cities, then such an assertion is not
true. For all men are not governed by the same
law. You ought to have said that " laws are
kings of all men," for in every nation some law
is king of all. But if you mean that which is
law in the proper sense, then it is this which is
by nature " king of all things ; " although there
are some individuals who, having like robbers
abandoned the law, deny its validity, and live
lives of violence and injustice. We Christians,
then, who have come to the knowledge of the
law which is by nature " king of all things," and
which is the same with the law of God, endeav-
our to regulate our lives by its prescriptions,
having bidden a long farewell to those of an un-
holy kind.


Let us notice the charges which are next ad-
vanced by Celsus, in which there is exceedingly
little that has reference to the Christians, as most
of them refer to the Jews. His words are : " If,
then, in these respects the Jews were carefully to
preserve their own law, they are not to be blamed
for so doing, but those persons rather who have
forsaken their own usages, and adopted those of
the Jews. And if they pride themselves on it,
as being possessed of superior wisdom, and keep
aloof from intercourse with others, as not being
equally pure with themselves, they have already
heard that their doctrine concerning heaven is
not peculiar to them, but, to pass by all others,
is one which has long ago been received by
the Persians, as Herodotus somewhere mentions.
' For they have a custom,' he says, ' of going up
to the tops of the mountains, and of offering
sacrifices to Jupiter, giving the name of Jupiter
to the whole circle of the heavens.'^ And I
think," continues Celsus, " that it makes no dif-
ference whether you call the highest being Zeus,
or Zen, or Adonai, or Sabaoth, or Ammoun like
the Egyptians, or Papp^eus like the Scythians.
Nor would they be deemed at all holier than
others in this respect, that they observe the rite
of circumcision, for this was done by the Egyp-
tians and Colchians before them ; nor because
they abstain from swine's flesh, for the Egyptians
practised abstinence not only from it, but from
the flesh of goats, and sheep, and oxen, and.
fishes as well ; while Pythagoras and iiis disci-
ples do not eat beans, nor anything that contains
life. It is not probable, however, that they en-
joy God's favour, or are loved by Him diflfer-
ently from others, or that angels were sent from
heaven to them alone, as if they had had allotted


6 Cf. Herodot., i. 131.


56:


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


to them ' some region of the blessed,' ' for we
see both themselves and the country of which
they were deemed worthy. Let this band,^ then,
take its departure, after paying the penalty of its
vaunting, not having a knowledge of the great
God, but being led away and deceived by the
artifices of Moses, having become his pupil to
no good end."

CHAP. XLII.

It is evident that, by the preceding remarks,
Celsus charges the Jews with falsely giving them-
selves out as the chosen portion of the Supreme
God above all other nations. And he accuses
them of boasting, because they gave out that
they knew the great God, although they did not
really know Him, but were led away by the arti-
fices of Moses, and were deceived by him, and
became his disciples to no good end. Now we
have in the preceding pages already spoken in
part of the venerable and distinguished polity
of the Jews, when it existed amongst them as a
symbol of the city of God, and of His temple,
and of the sacrificial worship offered in it and at
the altar of sacrifice. But if any one were to
turn his attention to the meaning of the legisla-
tor, and to the constitution which he established,
and were to examine the various points relating
to him, and compare them with the present
method of worship among other nations, there
are none which he would admire to a greater
degree ; because, so far as can be accomplished
among mortals, everything that was not of ad-
vantage to the human race was withheld from
them, and only those things which are useful be-
stowed.3 And for this reason they had neither
gymnastic contests, nor scenic representations,,
nor horse-races ; nor were there among them
women who sold their beauty to any one who
wished to have sexual intercourse without off-
spring, and to cast contempt upon the nature of
human generation. And what an advantage was
it to be taught from their tender years to ascend
above all visible nature, and to hold the belief
that God was not fixed anywhere within its limits,
but to look for Him on high, and beyond the
sphere of all bodily substance ! ■♦ And how great
was the advantage which they enjoyed in being
instructed almost from their birth, and as soon
as they could speak, 5 in the immortality of the
soul, and in the existence of courts of justice
under the earth, and in the rewards provided for
those who have lived righteous lives ! These
truths, indeed, were proclaimed in the veil of
fable to children, and to those whose views of
things were childish ; while to those who were


1 olov Srj Tiva ixaKdpojv xiiipav \axoviTi.v.

3 [Note this eulogy on the law, even though it "made nothing
perfect."]

4 UTTep Ta (7c6jU.aTa,

5 (7i;/x7rAT)pui<Tet ToO \6yov.


already occupied in investigating the truth, and

desirous of making progress therein, these fables, :
so to speak, were transfigured into the truths

which were concealed within them. And I con- ,

sider that it was in a manner worthy of their i

name as the " portion of God " that they despised I

all kinds of divination, as that which bewitches I
men to no purpose, and which proceeds rather

from wicked demons than from anything of a |

better nature ; and sought the knowledge of j

future events in the souls of those who, owing to |

their high degree of purity, received the spirit j

of the Supreme God. {

1

CHAP. XLIII. !

But what need is there to point out how agree- !
able to sound reason, and unattended with in- |
jury either to master or slave, was the law that j
one of the same faith ^ should not be allowed to
continue in slavery more than six years ? 7 The 1
Jews, then, cannot be said to preserve their own {
law in the same points with the other nations. j
For it would be censurable in them, and would |
involve a charge of insensibility to the superiority i
of their law, if they were to believe that they had
been legislated for in the same way as the other
nations among the heathen. And although Cel-
sus will not admit it, the Jews nevertheless are
possessed of a wisdom superior not only to that i
of the multitude, but also of those who have the i
appearance of philosophers ; because those who j
engage in philosophical pursuits, after the utter- i
ance of the most venerable philosophical senti- M
ments, fall away into the worship of idols and '
demons, whereas the very lowest Jew directs his j
look to the Supreme God alone ; and they do
well, indeed, so far as this point is concerned, to i
pride themselves thereon, and to keep aloof from ;
the society of others as accursed and impious.
And would that they had not sinned, and trans-
gressed the law, and slain the prophets in former
times, and in these latter days conspired against
Jesus, that we might be in possession of a pat- |
tern of a heavenly city which even Plato would I
have sought to describe ; although I doubt I
whether he could have accomphshed as much |
as was done by Moses and those who followed ['
him, who nourished a " chosen generation," and j
" a holy nation," dedicated to God, with words i
free from all superstition. 1

CHAP. XLIV.

But as Celsus would compare the venerable j
customs of the Jews with the laws of certain i
nations, let us proceed to look at them. He is
of opinion, accordingly, that there is no differ-


6 Tov atro tux avTu>v bpiafx-evou SoynaTMV.

7 Cf. Ex. xxi. 2 and Jer. xxxiv. 14. [An important comment on
Mosaic servitude.]


Chap. XLV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


563


ence between the doctrine regarding "heaven"
and that regarding " God ; " and he says that j
" the Persians, Hlce the Jews, offer sacrifices to !
Jupiter upon the tops of the mountains," — not
observing that, as the Jews were acquainted with
one God, so they had only one holy house of
prayer, and one altar of whole burnt-offermgs,
and one censer for incense, and one high priest ,
of God. The Jews, then, had nothing in com-
mon with the Persians, who ascend the summits
of their mountains, which are many in number,
and offer up sacrifices which have nothing in
common with those which are regulated by the j
Mosaic code, — in conformity to which the Jew-
ish priests "served unto the example and shadow
of heavenly things," explaining enigmatically the I
object of the law regarding the sacrifices, and
the things of which these sacrifices were the
symbols. The Persians therefore may call the
" whole circle of heaven " Jupiter ; but we main-
tain that " the heaven " is neither Jupiter nor
God, as we indeed know that certain beings of
a class inferior to God have ascended above the
heavens and all visible nature : and in this sense
we understand the words, " Praise God, ye
heaven of heavens, and ye waters that be above
the heavens : let them praise the name of the
Lord." '


As Celsus, however, is of opinion that it mat-
ters nothing whether the highest being be called
Jupiter, or Zen, or Adonai, or Sabaoth, or Am-
moun (as the Egyptians term him), or Papp^Eus
(as the Scythians entitle him), let us discuss
the point for a little, reminding the reader at the
same time of what has been said above upon this '
question, when the language of Celsus led us to ,
consider the subject. And now we maintain that 1
the nature of names is not, as Aristotle supposes, i
an enactment of those who impose them.^ For '
the languages which are prevalent among men '
do not derive their origin from men, as is evi- j
dent to those who are able to ascertain the !
nature of the charms which are appropriated '
by the inventors of the languages differendy,
according to the various tongues, and to the
varying pronunciations of the names, on which ■
we have spoken briefly in the preceding pages, j
remarking that when those names which in a
certain language were possessed of a natural
power were translated into another, they were '
no longer able to accomplish what they did
before when uttered in their native tongues.
And the same peculiarity is found to apply to
men ; for if we were to translate the name of
one who was called from his birth by a certain
appellation in the Greek language into the Egyp-


Cf. Ps. cxiviii. 4, 5.

OTt )) Tuiv bvoixdroiy <^u<ris oil 6iy.ivu>v


tian or Roman, or any other tongue, we could
not make him do or suffer the same things which
he would have done or suffered under the appel-
lation first bestowed upon him. Nay, even if
we translated into the Greek language the name
of an individual who had been originally invoked .
in the Roman tongue, we could not produce
the result which the incantation professed itself
capable of accomplishing had it preserved the
name first conferred upon him. And if these
statements are true when spoken of the names
of jtien, what are we to think of those which are
transferred, for any cause whatever, to the Deify ?
For example, something is transferred ^ from the
name Abraham when translated into Greek, and
something is signified by that of Isaac, and also
by that of Jacob ; and accordingly, if any one,
either in an invocation or in swearing an oath,
were to use the expression, " the God of Abra-
ham," and " the God of Isaac," and " the God
of Jacob," he would produce certain effects,
either owing to the nature of these names or to
their powers, since even demons are vanquished
and become submissive to him who pronounces
these names ; whereas if we say, " the god of
the chosen father of the echo, and the god
of laughter, and the god of him who strikes
with the heel," 4 the mention of the name is
attended with no result, as is the case with other
names possessed of no power. And in the same
way, if we translate the word " Israel " into
Greek or any other language, we shall produce
no result ; but if we retain it as it is, and join it
to those expressions to which such as are skilled
in these matters think it ought to be united,
there would then follow some result from the
pronunciation of the word which would accord
with the professions of those who employ such
invocations. And we may say the same also of
the pronunciation of " Sabaoth," a word which
is frequently employed in incantations ; for if we
translate the term into " Lord of hosts," or " Lord
of armies," or "Almighty" (different accepta-
tion of it having been proposed by the inter-
preters), we shall accomplish nothing; whereas
if we' retain the original pronunciation, we shall,
as those who are skilled in such matters main-
tain, produce some effect. And the same obser-
vation holds good of Adonai. If, then, neither
" Sabaoth " nor " Adonai," when rendered into
what appears to be their meaning in the Greek
tongue, can accomplish anything, how much less
would be the result among those who regard it
as a matter of indifference whether the highest
being be called Jupiter, or Zen, or Adonai, or
Sabaoth !


In the edil


3 jaeraAa/u^ai'CTat -yap Ti, (frfp «
HcEschel and Spencer, rt is wanting.

< 6 Seb? Trarpb? exAfxToO Ttj? i7\oiJ<r. Kol o ft«''c toC ytAiuTOJ
(cai 6 fleb? ToO jrTepi'io'Tou. Cf. note in Benedictine ed.


564


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


CHAP. XLVI.

It was for these and similar mysterious rea-
sons, with which Moses and the prophets were
acquainted, that they forbade the name of other
gods to be pronounced by him who bethought
himself of praying to the one Supreme God
alone, or to be remembered by a heart which
had been taught to be pure from all foolish
thoughts and words. And for these reasons we
should prefer to endure all manner of suffering
rather than acknowledge Jupiter to be God. For
we do not consider Jupiter and Sabaoth to be
the same, nor Jupiter to be at all divine, but
that some demon, unfriendly to men and to the
true God, rejoices under this title.' And although
the Egyptians were to hold Amnion before us
under threat of death, we would rather die than
address him as God, it being a name used in all
probability in certain Egyptian incantations in
which this demon is invoked. And although the
Scythians may call Pappaeus the supreme God,
yet we will not yield our assent to this ; grant-
ing, indeed, that there is a Supreme Deity, al-
though we do not give the name Pappaeus to
Him as His proper title, but regard it as one
which is agreeable to the demon to whom was
allotted the desert of Scythia, with its people
and its language. He, however, who gives God
His title in the Scythian tongue, or in the Egyp-
tian or in any language in which he has been
brought up, will not be guilty of sin.^

CHAP. XLVII.

Now the reason why circumcision is practised
among the Jews is not the same as that which
explains its existence among the Egyptians and
Colchians, and therefore it is not to be consid-
ered the same circumcision. And as he who
sacrifices does not sacrifice to the same god,
although he appears to perform the rite of sacri-
fice in a similar manner, and he who offers up
prayer does not pray to the same divinity, al-
though he asks the same things in his supplica-
tion ; so, in the same way, if one performs the
rite of circumcision, it by no means follows that
it is not a different act from the circumcision
performed upon another. For the purpose, and
the law, and the wish of him who performs the
rite, place the act in a different category. But
that the whole subject may be still better under-
stood, we have to remark that the term for
" righteousness " 3 is the same among all the
Greeks ; but righteousness is shown to be one
thing according to the view of Epicurus ; and
another according to the Stoics, who deny the


' 6aiVova 6e' rivix x<i''p«iv oiircos ovonaiotievov,

2 [Note the bearing of this chapter on the famous controversy con-
cerning the Chinese renderings of God's name.]

3 6i(cato(rui'>).


threefold division of the soul ; and a different
thing again according to the followers of Plato,
who hold that righteousness is the proper busi-
ness of the parts of the soul.* And so also the
"courage " 5 of Epicurus is one thing, who would
undergo some labours in order to escape from a
greater number ; and a different thing that of
the philosopher of the Porch, who would choose
all virtue for its own sake ; and a different thing
still that of Plato, vvho maintains that virtue
itself is the act of the irascible part of the soul,
and who assigns to it a place about the breast.^^
And so circumcision will be a different thing
according to the varying opinions of those who
undergo it. But on such a subject it is unneces-
sary to speak on this occasion in a treatise like
the present ; for whoever desires to see what led
us to the subject, can read what we have said
upon it in the Epistle of Paul to the Romans.

CHAP. XLVIII.

Although the Jews, then, pride themselves on
circumcision, they will separate it not only from
that of the Colchians and Egyptians, but also
from that of the Arabian Ishmaelites ; and yet
the latter was derived from their ancestor Abra-
ham, the father of Ishmael, who underwent the
rite of circumcision along with his father. The
Jews say that the circumcision performed on
the eighth day is the principal circumcision, and
that which is performed according to circum-
stances is different ; and probably it was per-
formed on account of the hostility of some angel
towards the Jewish nation, who had the power
to injure such of them as were not circumcised,
but was powerless against those who had under-
gone the rite. This may be said to appear from
what is written in the book of Exodus, where
the angel before the circumcision of Eliezer^
was able to work against '^ Moses, but could do
nothing after his son was circumcised. And
when Zipporah had learned this, she took a peb-
ble and circumcised her child, and is recorded,
according to the reading of the common copies,
to have said, " The blood of my child's circum-
cision is stayed," but according to the Hebrew
text, "A bloody husband art thou to me." 9 For
she had known the story about a certain angel
having power before the shedding of the blood,
but who became powerless through the blood of
circumcision. For which reason the words were
addressed to Moses, "A bloody husband art
thou to me." But these things, which appear


4 tStOTTpaytai' riav ixepuiv T^s i^ux^S.

5 avSpeia.

6 ToO dvfjLiKov /ne'pou? TTJs ^vxv^ (j>d(jK0VTO^ ovTO ('vai. apeTr)V,
KoX aTroTatrcTOi'TO? auTJj rnirov Tov Trepi Toi' Oiopaxa.

7 Cf. Ex. iv. 24, 25. EHezer was one of the two sons of Moses.
Cf. Ex. xviii. 4.

8 h'epyelv Kara. MojiJaeus.

9 Cf. Ex. iv. 25, 26.


Chap. L.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


56:


rather of a curious nature, and not level to the
comprehension of the multitude, I have ven-
tured to treat at such length ; and now I shall
only add, as becomes a Christian, one thing
more, and shall then pass on to what follows.
For this angel might have had power, I think,
over those of the people who were not circum-
cised, and generally over all who worshipped
only the Creator ; and this power lasted so long
as Jesus had not assumed a human body. But
when He had done this, and had undergone
the rite of circumcision in His own person, all the
power of the angel over those who practise
the same worship, but are not circumcised,' was
abolished ; for Jesus reduced it to nought by
(the power of) His unspeakable divinity. And
therefore His disciples are forbidden to circum-
cise themselves, and are reminded (by the apos-
tle) : " If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing." ^

CHAP. XLIX.

But neither do the Jews pride themselves upon
abstaining from swine's flesh, as if it were some
great thing ; but upon their having ascertained
the nature of clean and unclean animals, and
the cause of the distinction, and of swine being
classed among the unclean. And these distinc-
tions were signs of certain things until the ad-
vent of Jesus ; after whose coming it was said to
His disciple, who did not yet comprehend the
doctrine concerning these matters, but who said,
" Nothing that is common or unclean hath en-
tered into my mouth," ^ "What God hath
cleansed, call not thou common." It therefore
in no way affects either the Jews or us that the
Egyptian priests abstain not only from the flesh
of swine, but also from that of goats, and sheep,
and oxen, and fish. But since it is not that
" which entereth into the mouth that defiles a
man," and since "meat does not commend us
to God," we do not set great store on refraining
from eating, nor yet are we induced to eat from
a gluttonous appetite. And therefore, so far as
we are concerned, the followers of Pythagoras,
who abstain from all things that contain life,
may do as they please ; only observe the differ-
ent reason for abstaining from things that have
life on the part of the Pythagoreans and our as-
cetics. For the former abstain on account of
the fable about the transmigration of souls, as
the poet says : —

" And some one, lifting up his beloved son,
Will slay him after prayer; O how foolish he ! "*


' Kara Ta)v fv TJj Oeoa-ePeia Taxirj) irepiTenvotieviov StivaiJ.i.';.
Boherellus inserts /u.)) before TrepcTefivofAeVoii', which has been
adopted in the text.

2 Gal. V. 2.

3 Cf. Acts X. 14.

* (cat T19 (ftiKov vVov aci'pa?, ^

— ;■ A verse of Empedocles, quoted by Plutarch, i/e Siuperstitione, c.
xii. Spencer. Cf. note in loc. in Benedictine edition.


We, however, when we do abstain, do so be-
cause " we keep under our body, and bring it
into subjection," s and desire " to mortify our
members that are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupis-
cence;"^ and we use every effort to " mortify
the deeds of the flesh." ^


Celsus, still expressing his opinion regarding
the Jews, says : " It is not probable that they
are in great favour with God, or are regarded by
Him with more affection than others, or that
angels are sent by Him to them alone, as if to
them had been allotted some region of the
blessed. For we may see both the people them-
selves, and the country of which they were
deemed worthy." We shall refute this, by re-
marking that it is evident that this nation was
in great favour with God, from the fact that the
God who presides over all things was called
the God of the Hebrews, even by those who were
aliens to our faith. And because they were in
favour with God, they were not abandoned by
Him ; ^ but although few in number, they con-
tinued to enjoy the protection of the divine
power, so that in the reign of Alexander of
Macedon they sustained no injury from him, al-
though they refused, on account of certain cove-
nants and oaths, to take up arms against Darius.
They say that on that occasion the Jewish high
priest, clothed in his sacred robe, received obei-
sance from Alexander, who declared that he had
beheld an individual arrayed in this fashion, who
announced to him in his sleep that he was to be
the subjugator of the whole of Asia.^ Accord-
ingly, we Christians maintain that " it was the
fortune of that people in a remarkable degree
to enjoy God's favour, and to be loved by Him
in a way different from others ; " but that this
economy of things and this divine favour were
transferred to us, after Jesus had conveyed the
power which had been manifested among the
Jews to those who had become converts to Him
from among the heathen. And for this reason,
although the Romans desired to perpetrate many
atrocities against the Christians, in order to en-
sure their extermination, they were unsuccessful ;
for there was a divine hand which fought on
their behalf, and whose desire it was that the
word of God should spread from one corner of
the land of Judea throughout the whole human


5 Cf. I Cor. ix. 27.

6 Cf Col. iii. 5.

^ Cf Rom. viii. 13. ...

* (cal io-i evSoKifiovvTi^ ye o<rov ovk tyKaTeKeirrovTo. The nega-
tive particle (ovk) is wanting in the editions of Hreschel and Spen-
cer, but is found in the Royal, Basil, and Vatican MSS. Guietus
would delete ixTov (which emendation has been adopted in the trans-
lation), while Boherellus would re.id bo-ot instead. — RUvEUS.

9 [Josephus, Antiguities, b. xi. cap. viii.]


566


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


But seeing that we have answered to the best
of our abihty the charges brought by Celsus
against the Jews and their doctrine, let us pro-
ceed to consider what follows, and to prove that
it is no empty boast on our part when we make
a profession of knowing the great God, and that
we have not been led away by any juggling
tricks' of Moses (as Celsus imagines), or even
of our own Saviour Jesus ; but that for a good
end we listen to the God who speaks in Moses,
and have accepted Jesus, whom he testifies to
be God, as the Son of God, in hope of receiving
the best rewards if we regulate our lives ac-
cording to His word. And we shall willingly
pass over what we have already stated by way of
anticipation on the points, " whence we came,
and who is our leader, and what law proceeded
from Him." And if Celsus would maintain that
there is no difference between us and the Egyp-
tians, who worship the goat, or the ram, or the
crocodile, or the ox, or the river-horse, or the
dog-faced baboon,^ or the cat, he can ascertain
if it be so, and so may any other who thinks
alike on the subject. We, however, have to the
best of our ability defended ourselves at great
length in the preceding pages on the subject of
the honour which we render to our Jesus, point-
ing out that we have found the better part ; ^
and that in showing that the truth which is con-
tained in the teaching of Jesus Christ is pure
and unmixed with error, we are not commending
ourselves, but our Teacher, to whom testimony
was borne through many witnesses by the Su-
preme God and the prophetic writings among
the Jews, and by the very clearness of the case
itself, for it is demonstrated that He could not
have accomplished such mighty works without
the divine help.

CHAP. LII.

But the statement of Celsus which we wish to
examine at present is the following : " Let us
then pass over the refutations which might be
adduced against the claims of their teacher, and
let him be regarded as really an angel. But is
he the first and only one who came (to men),
or were there others before him ? If they should
say that he is the only one, they would be con-
victed of telling lies against themselves. For
they assert that on many occasions others came,
and sixty or seventy of them together, and that
these became wicked, and were cast under the
earth and punished with chains, and that from
this source originate the warm springs, which are
their tears ; and, moreover, that there came an
angel to the tomb of this said being — according:


■yorjTeia.

TOV KVV0K€f}}ak0V,

OTt KpeiTTOl' €VpOfJ.€V,


to some, indeed, one, but according to others,
two — who answered the women that he had
arisen. For the Son of God could not himself,
as it seems, open the tomb, but needed the help
of another to roll away the stone. And again, on
account of the pregnancy of Mary, there came
an angel to the carpenter, and once more an-
other angel, in order that they might take up
the young Child and flee away (into Egypt).
But what need is there to particularize every-
thing, or to count up the number of angels said
to have been sent to Moses, and others amongst
them ? If, then, others were sent, it is manifest
that he also came from the same God. But he
may be supposed to have the appearance of
announcing something of greater importance
(than those who preceded him), as if the Jews
had been committing sin, or corrupting their
religion, or doing deeds of impiety ; for these
things are obscurely hinted at."

CHAP. LIII.

The preceding remarks might sufifice as an
^swer to the charges of Celsus, so far as regards
those points in which our Saviour Jesus Christ is
made the subject of special investigation. But
that we may avoid the appearance of intention-
ally passing over any portion of his work, as if
we were unable to meet him, let us, even at the
risk of being tautological (since we are chal-
lenged to this by Celsus), endeavour as far as
we can with all due brevity to continue our dis-
course, since perhaps something either more pre-
cise or more novel may occur to us upon the
several topics. He says, indeed, that " he has
omitted the refutations which have been adduced
against the claims which Christians advance on
behalf of their teacher," although he has fio/
omitted anything which he was able to bring for-
ward, as is manifest from his previous language,
but makes this statement only as an empty
rhetorical device. That we are not refuted,
however, on the subject of our great Saviour,
although the accuser may appear to refute us,
will be manifest to those who peruse in a spirit
of truth-loving investigation all that is predicted
and recorded of Him. And, in the next place,
since he considers that he makes a concession in
saying of the Saviour, " Let him appear to be
really an angel," we reply that we do not accept
of such a concession from Celsus ; but we look
to the work of Him who came to visit the whole
human race in His word and teaching, as each
one of His adherents was capable of receiving
Him. And this was the work of one who, as
the prophecy regarding Him said, was not sim-
ply an angel, but the " Angel of the great coun-
sel:" ^ for He announced to men the great


■* Cf. Isa. ix. 6 [according to Sept. See vol. i. pp. 223, 236, this
series.]


Chap. LVL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


567


counsel of the God and Father of all things re-
garding them, (saying) of those who yield them-
selves up to a life of pure religion, that they
ascend by means of their great deeds to God ;
but of those who do not adhere to Him, that
they place themselves at a distance from God,
and journey on to destruction through their un-
belief of Him. He then continues : " If even
the angel came to men, is he the first and only
one who came, or did others come on former
occasions? " And he thinks he can meet either
of these dilemmas at great length, although there
is not a single real Christian who asserts that
Christ was the only being that visited the human
race. For, as Celsus says, " If they should say
the only one," there are others who appeared to
different individuals.


In the next place, he proceeds to answer him-
self as he thinks fit in the following terms : "And
so he is not the only one who is recorded to have
visited the human race, as even those who, under
pretext of teaching in the name of Jesus, have
apostatized from the Creator as an inferior being,
and have given in their adherence to one who is
a superior God and father of him who visited
(the world), assert that before him certain beings
came from the Creator to visit the human race."
Now, as it is in the spirit of truth that we investi-
gate all that relates to the subject, we shall re-
mark that it is asserted by Apelles, the celebrated
disciple of Marcion, who became the founder
of a certain sect, and who treated the writings of
the Jews as fabulous, that Jesus is the only one
that came to visit the human race. Even against
1 him, then, who maintained that Jesus was the
only one that came from God to men, it would
I be in vain for Celsus to quote the statements
I regarding the descent of other angels, seeing
I Apelles discredits, as we have already mentioned,
I the miraculous narratives of the Jewish Scrip-
! turcs ; and much more will he decline to admit
what Celsus has adduced, from not understand-
in,.,^ the contents of the book of Enoch. No one,
then, convicts us of falsehood, or of making con-
' tradictory assertions, as if we maintained both
j that our Saviour was the only being that ever
came to men, and yet that many others came
j on different occasions. And in a most confused
I manner, moreover, does he adduce, when ex-
1 amining the subject of the visits of angels to
' men, what he has derived, without seeing its
meaning, from the contents of the book of
Fnoch ; for he does not appear to have read the
passages in question, nor to have been aware
, that the books which bear the name Enoch ' do
I not at all circulate in the Churches as divine,
I


[See p. 380, supra.]


although it is from this source that he might be
supposed to have obtained the statement, that
" sixty or seventy angels descended at the same
time, who fell into a state of wickedness."

CHAP. LV.

But, that we may grant to him in a spirit of
candour what he has not discovered in the con-
tents of the book of Genesis, that " the sons of
God, seeing the daughters of men, that they
were fair, took to them wives of all whom they
chose," ^ we shall nevertheless even on this point
persuade those who are capable of understand-
ing the meaning of the prophet, that even before
us there was one who referred this narrative to
the doctrine regarding souls, which became pos-
sessed with a desire for the corporeal life of
men, and this in metaphorical language, he said,
was termed " daughters of men." But whatever
may be the meaning of the " sons of God desir-
ing to possess the daughters of men," it will not
at all contribute to prove that Jesus was not the
only one who visited mankind as an angel, and
who manifestly became the Saviour and benefac-
tor of all those who depart from the flood of
wickedness. Then, mixing up and confusing
whatever he had at any time heard, or had any-
where found written — whether held to be of
divine origin among Christians or not — he adds :
" The sixty or seventy who descended together
were cast under the earth, and were punished
with chains." And he quotes (as from the book
of Enoch, but without naming it) the following :
" And hence it is that the tears of these angels
are warm springs," — a thing neither mentioned
nor heard of in the Churches of God ! For no
one was ever so foolish as to materialize into
human tears those which were shed by the angels
who had come down from heaven. And if it
were right to pass a jest upon what is advanced
against us in a serious spirit by Celsus, we might
observe that no one would ever have said that
hot springs, the greater part of which are fresh
water, were the tears of the angels, since tears
are saltish in their nature, unless indeed the
angels, in the opinion of Celsus, shed tears which
are fresh.

CHAP. LVI.

Proceeding immediately after to mix up and
compare with one another things that are dis-
similar, and incapable of being united, he sub-
joins to his statement regarding the sixty or
seventy angels who came down from heaven,
and who, according to him, shed fountains of
warm water for tears, the following : " It is re-
lated also that there came to the tomb of Jesus
himself, according to some, two angels, accord-


2 [Gen. \i 2. s.;


568


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


ing to others, one ; " having failed to notice, I
think, that Matthew and Mark speak of one, and
Luke and John of two, which statements are not
contradictory. For they who mention " one,"
say that it was he who rolled away the stone from
the sepulchre ; while they who mention " two,"
refer to those who appeared in shining raiment
to the women that repaired to the sepulchre, or
who were seen within sitting in white garments.
Each of these occurrences might now be demon-
strated to have actually taken place, and to be
indicative of a figurative meaning existing in
these " phenomena," (and intelligible) to those
who were prepared to behold the resurrecdon of
the Word. Such a task, however, does not be-
long to our present purpose, but rather to an
exposition of the Gospel.'

CHAP. LVII.

Now, that miraculous appearances have some-
times been witnessed by human beings, is related
by the Greeks ; and not only by those of them
who might be suspected of composing fabulous
narratives, but also by those who have given
every evidence of being genuine philosophers,
and of having related with perfect truth what
had happened to them. Accounts of this kind
we have read in the writings of Chrysippus of
Soli, and also some things of the same kind
relating to Pythagoras ; as well as in some of the
more recent writers who lived a very short time
ago, as in the treatise of Plutarch of Chaeronea
" on the Soul," and in the second book of the
work of Numenius the Pythagorean on the " In-
corruptibility of the Soul." Now, when such
accounts are related by the Greeks, and espe-
cially by the philosophers among them, they are
not to be received with mockery and ridicule,
nor to be regarded as fictions and fables ; but
when those who are devoted to the God of all
things, and who endure all kinds of injury, even
to death itself, rather than allow a falsehood
to escape their lips regarding God, announce
the appearances of an^:els which they have
themselves witnessed, they are to be deemed
unworthy of belief, and their words are not to
be regarded as true ! Now it is opposed to
sound reason to judge in this way whether indi-
viduals are speaking truth or falsehood. For
those who act honesdy, only after a long and
careful examination into the details of a subject,
slowly and cautiously express their opinion of
the veracity or falsehood of this or that person
with regard to the marvels which they may re-
late ; since it is the case that neither do all men


' [See Dr. Lee on The hispiraiion of Holy Scripture, p. 383,
where it is pointed out that the primitive Church was fully aware of
the difficulties urged against the historic accuracy of the Four Gos-
pels. Dr. Lee also notes that the culminating sarcasm of Gibbon's
famous fifteenth chapter " has not even the poor merit of origi-
nality." S.]


show themselves worthy of belief, nor do all
make it distincdy evident that they are relating
to men only fictions and fables. Moreover, re-
garding the resurrection of Jesus from the dead,
we have this remark to make, that it is not at
all wonderful if, on such an occasion, either one
or two angels should have appeared to announce
that Jesus had risen from the dead, and to pro-
vide for the safety of those who believed in such
an event to the advantage of their souls. Nor
does it appear to me at all unreasonable, that
those who believe in the resurrection of Jesus,
and who manifest, as a fruit of their faith not to
be lighdy esteemed, their possession of a vir-
tuous ^ life, and their withdrawal from the flood
of evils, should not be unattended by angels
who lend their help in accomplishing their con-
version to God.

CHAP. LVIIL

But Celsus challenges the account also that
an angel rolled away the stone from the sepul-
chre where the body of Jesus lay, acting like a
lad at school, who should bring a charge against
any one by help of a string of commonplaces.
And, as if he had discovered some clever objec-
tion to the narrative, he remarks : " The Son
of God, then, it appears, could not open his
tomb, but required the aid of another to roll
away the stone." Now, not- to overdo the dis-
cussion of this matter, or to have the appear-
ance of unreasonably introducing philosophical
remarks, by explaining the figurative meaning at
present, I shall simply say of the narrative alone,
that it does appear in itself a more respectful
proceeding, that the servant and interior should
have rolled away the stone, than that such an
act should have been performed by Him whose
resurrection was to be for the advantage of
mankind. I do not speak of the desire of
those who conspired against the Word, and who
wished to put Him to death, and to show to all
men that He ivas dead and non-existent,^ that
His tomb should not be opened, in order that
no one might behold the Word alive after their
conspiracy ; but the " Angel of God " who came
into the world for the salvation of men, with the
help of another angel, proved more powerful
than the conspirators, and rolled away the
weighty stone, that those who deemed the Word
to be dead might be convinced that He is not
with the " departed," but is alive, and precedes
those who are willing to follow Him, that He
may manifest to them those truths which come
after those which He formerly showed them at
the time of their first entrance (into the school
of Christianity), when they were as yet incapa-
ble of receiving deeper instruction. In the next


Chap. LX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


569


place, I do not understand what advantage he
thinks will accrue to his purpose when he ridi-
cules the account of " the angel's visit to Joseph
regarding the pregnancy of Mary ; " and again,
that of the angel to warn the parents " to take
up the new-born Child, whose life was in danger,
and to flee with it into Egypt." Concerning
these matters, however, we have in the preced-
ing pages answered his statements. But what
does Celsus mean by saying, that " according to
the Scriptures, angels are recorded to have been
sent to Moses, and others as well?" For it
appears to me to contribute nothing to his pur-
pose, and especially because none of them
made any effort to accomplish, as far as in his
power, the conversion of the human race from
their sins. Let it be granted, however, that
other angels were sent from God, but that he
came to announce something of greater impor-
tance (than any others who preceded him) ;
and when the Jews had fallen into sin, and cor-
rupted their religion, and had done unholy
deeds, transferred the kingdom of God to other
husbandmen, who in all the Churches take spe-
cial care of themselves,' and use every endeav-
our by means of a holy life, and by a doctrine
conformable thereto, to win over to the God
of all things those who would rush away from
the teaching of Jesus.^

CHAP. LIX.

■ Celsus then continues : " The Jews accord-
i ingly, and these (clearly meaning the Christians),
I have the same God;" and as if advancing a
t proposition which would not be conceded, he
proceeds to make the following assertion : " It
is certain, indeed, that the members of the great
Church ^ admit this, and adopt as true the ac-
counts regarding the creation of the world which
arc current among the Jews, viz., concerning the
six days and the seventh;" on which day, as
tiic Scripture says, God " ceased "■» from His
works, retiring into the contemplation of Him-
self, but on which, as Celsus says (who does not
abide by the letter of the history, and who does
not understand its meaning), God " rested," s —
a term which is not found in the record. With
.respect, however, to the creation of the world,
and the " resf' which is reserved after it for the
people of God," the subject is extensive, and
I mystical, and profound, and difficult of explana-
Ition. In the next place, as it appears to me.


_' fauTMi/. Guietus would read avruiv, to agree with twi/ cicicAtj-

^ Instead of ra? an'o t^s SiSacrKaKia^ toO 'IrjrroO a<l>opfid<; ,
Roherelkis conjectures tou5 . . . oi/>op/iia>»'Ta?, which has been
1 adopted in the translation.

J Tuil' OTTO (afyaAij; eKxAjjaioj.


from a desire to fill up his book, and to give it
an appearance of importance, he recklessly adds
certain statements, such as the following, relat-
ing to the first man, of whom he says : " We
give the same account as do the Jews, and de-
duce the same genealogy from him as they do."
However, as regards " the conspiracies of broth-
ers against one another," we know of none such,
save that Cain conspired against Abel, and Esau
against Jacob ; but not Abel against Cain, nor
Jacob against Esau : for if this had been the
case, Celsus would have been correct in saying
that we give the same accounts as do the Jews
of " the conspiracies of brothers against one an-
other." Let it be granted, however, that we
speak of the same descent into Egypt as they,
and of their return'' thence, which was not a
" flight," ^ as Celsus considers it to have been,
what does that avail towards founding an accu-
sation against us or against the Jews? Here,
indeed, he thought to cast ridicule upon us,
when, in speaking of the Hebrew people, he
termed their exodus a "flight ;" but when it was
his business to investigate the account of the
punishments inflicted by God upon Egypt, that
topic he purposely passed by in silence.


If, however, it be necessary to express our-
selves with precision in our answer to Celsus,
who thinks that we hold the same opinions on
the matters in question as do the Jews, we would
say that we both agree that the books (of Scrip-
ture) were written by the Spirit of God, but that
we do fio/ agree about the meaning of their con-
tents ; for we do not regulate our lives like the
Jews, because we are of opinion that the literal
acceptation of the laws is not that which con-
veys the meaning of the legislation. And we
maintain, that " when Moses is read, the veil is
upon their heart," ^ because the meaning of the
law of Mose§ has been concealed from those
who have not welcomed '° the way which is by
Jesus Christ. But we know that if one turn to
the Lord (for "the Lord is that Spirit"), the
veil being taken away, " he beholds, as in a mir-
ror with unveiled face, the glory of the Lord "
in those thoughts which are concealed in their
literal expression, and to his own glory becomes
a participator of the divine glory ; the term
" face " being used figuratively for the " under-
standing," as one would call it without a figure,
in which is the face of the "inner man," filled
with light and glory, flowing from the true com-
prehension of the contents of the law.


7 Trji' iKeldfV eiroii/oSo
9 2 Cor. iii. 15.


570


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


After the above remarks he proceeds as fol-
lows : " Let no one suppose that I am ignorant
that some of them will concede that their God
is the same as that of the Jews, while others will
maintain that he is a different one, to whom the
latter is in opposition, and that it was from the
former that the Son came." Now, if he imagine
that the existence of numerous heresies among
the Christians is a ground of accusation against
Christianity, why, in a similar way, should it not
be a ground of accusation against philosophy,
that the various sects of philosophers differ from
each other, not on small and indifferent points,
but upon those of the highest importance ? Nay,
medicine also ought to be a subject of attack,
on account of its many conflicting schools. Let
it be admitted, then, that there are amongst us
some who deny that our God is the same as that
of the Jews : nevertheless, on that account those
are not to be blamed who prove from the same
Scriptures that one and the same Deity is the
God of the Jews and of the Gentiles alike, as
Paul, too, distinctly says, who was a convert from
Judaism to Christianity, " I thank my God, whom
I serve from my forefathers with a pure con-
science." ' And let it b.e admitted also, that
there is a third class who call certain persons
" carnal," and others " spiritual," — I think he
here means the followers of Valentinus, — yet
what does this avail against us, who belong to
the Church, and who make it an accusation
against such as hold that certain natures are
saved, and that others perish in consequence of
their natural constitution ? - And let it be ad-
mitted further, that there are some who give
themselves out as Gnostics, in the same way as
those Epicureans who call themselves philoso-
phers : yet neither will they who annihilate the
doctrine of providence be deemed true philoso-
phers, nor those true Christians who introduce
monstrous inventions, which are disapproved of
by those who are the disciples of Jesus. Let it
be admitted, moreover, that there are some who
accept Jesus, and who boast on that account of
being Christians, and yet would regulate their
lives, Hke the Jewish multitude, in accordance
with the Jewish law, — and these are the twofold
sect of Ebionites, who either acknowledge with
us that Jesus was born of a virgin, or deny this,
and maintain that He was begotten like other
human beings, — what does that avail by way of
charge against such as belong to the Church,
and whom Celsus has styled " those of the mul-
titude? "^ He adds, also, that certain of the
Christians are believers in the Sibyl,-* having


' 2 Tim. i. 3.

2 CK KaTaaKevTji;,

3 dn-b Toil ttA^Sovs.

4 2i/3uA.AicrTds.


probably misunderstood some who blamed such
as believed in the existence of a prophetic Sibyl,
and termed those who held this belief Sibyllists.


CHAP. LXII.

He next pours down upon us a heap of names,
saying that he knows of the existence of certain
Simonians who worship Helene, or Helenus, as
their teacher, and are called Helenians. But it
has escaped the notice of Celsus that the Si-
monians do not at all acknowledge Jesus to be
the Son of God, but term Simon the "power"
of God, regarding whom they relate certain mar-
vellous stories, saying that he imagined that if
he could become possessed of similar powers to
those with which he believed Jesus to be en-
dowed, he too would become as powerful among
men as Jesus was amongst the multitude. But
neither Celsus nor Simon could comprehend
how Jesus, like a good husbandman of the word
of God, was able to sow the greater part of
Greece, and of barbarian lands, with His doc-
trine, and to fill these countries with words
which transform the soul from all that is evil,
and bring it back to the Creator of all things.
Celsus knows, moreover, certain Marcellians, so
called from Marcellina, and Harpocratians from
Salome, and others who derive their name from
Mariamne, and others again from Martha. We,
however, who from a love of learning examine
to the utmost of our ability not only the contents
of Scripture, and the differences to which they
give rise, but have also, from love to the truth,
investigated as far as we could the opinions of
philosophers, have never at any time met with
these sects. He makes mention also of the
Marcionites, whose leader was Marcion.


CHAP. LXIII.

In the next place, that he may have the ap-
pearance of knowing still more than he has yet
mentioned, he says, agreeably to his usual cus-
tom, that " there are others who have wickedly
invented some being as their teacher and demon,
and who wallow about in a great darkness, more
unholy and accursed than that of the companions
of the Egyptian Antinous." And he seems to me,
indeed, in touching on these matters, to say with
a certain degree of truth, that there are certain
others who liave wickedly invented another de-
mon, and who have found him to be their lord,
as they wallow about in the great darkness of
their ignorance. With respect, however, to An-
tinous, who is compared with our Jesus, we shall
not repeat what we have already said in the pre-
ceding pages. " Moreover," he continues, " these
persons utter against one another dreadful blas-
phemies, saying all manner of things shameful


Chap. LXV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


571


to be spoken ; nor will they yield in the slightest
point for the sake of harmony, hating each other
with a perfect hatred." Now,, in answer to this,
we have already said that in philosophy and medi-
cine sects are to be found warring against sects,


heretic, know of any who are styled Sirens, who
betray and deceive,^ and stop their ears, and
change into swine those whom they delude.
And yet this man, who affects to know every-
thing, uses such language as the following : " You


We, however, who are followers of the word of: may hear," he says, "all those who differ so
Jesus, and have exercised ourselves in thinking, ^ widely, and who assail each other in their dis-
and saying, and doing what is in harmony with putes with the most shameless language, uttering


His words, " when reviled, bless ; being perse-
cuted, we suffer it ; being defamed, we en-
treat ; " ' and we would not utter " all manner
of things shameful to be spoken " against those


the words, ' The world is crucified to me, and I
unto the world.' And this is the only phrase
which, it appears, Celsus could remember out
of Paul's writings ; and yet why should we not


who have adopted different opinions from ours, ; also employ innumerable other quotations from
but, if possible, use every exertion to raise them \ the Scriptures, such as, " For though we do wa.lk


to a better condition through adherence to the
Creator alone, and lead them to perform every
act as those who will (one day) be judged.
And if those who hold different opinions will not
be convinced, we observe the injunction laid
down for the treatment of such : " A man that
is a heretic, after the first and second admoni-
tion, reject, knowing that he that is such is
subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of
himself." ^ Moreover, we who know the maxim,
"Blessed are the peacemakers," and this also,
" Blessed are the meek," would not regard with
hatred the corrupters of Christianity, nor term
those who had fallen into error Circes and flat-
tering deceivers.3

CHAP. Lxrv.

Celsus appears to me to have misunderstood
the statement of the apostle, which declares that
" in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doc-
trines of devils ; speaking lies in hypocrisy, hav-
ing their conscience seared with a hot iron ;
forbidding to marry, and commandmg to abstain
from meats, which God hath created to be


in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh ; (for
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God to the pulhng down of
strongholds,) casting down imaginations, and
every high thing that exalteth itself against the
knowledge of God ? " 9


But since he asserts that " you may hear all
those who differ so widely saying, ' The world is
crucified to me, and I unto the world,' " we shall
show the falsity of such a statement. For there
are certain heretical sects which do not receive
the Epistles of the Apostle Paul, as the two sects
of Ebionites, and those who are termed Encra-
tites.'° Those, then, who do not regard the apos-
tle as a holy and wise man, will not adopt his
language, and say, "The world is crucified to
me, and I unto the world." And consequently
in this point, too, Celsus is guilty of falsehood.
He continues, moreover, to linger over the ac-
cusations which he brings against the diversity
of sects which exist, but does not appear to me
to be accurate in the language which he em-


. , •.,,,,■■ r ^1, u^ K^ ploys, nor to have carefully observed or under-

received with thanksgivu^g of them who be- j P y ' ^^^^ those Christians who have

heve ; " ^nd to have misunderstood also tho e ^^^^^.^^ ^^^^ ^^ ^^^

who employed these declarations of the apostle j ^^^^^ ^er knowledge than the Jews;

against such as had corrupted the doctrines of P ^j^^ ^^j^f ,,k„^,,,iedge the same


Christianity. And it is owing to this cause that
Celsus has said that " certain among the Chris-
tians are called ' cauterized in the ears ; ' " s and
also that some are termed " enigmas," ^ — a term
which we have never met. The expression
"stumbling-block"? is, indeed, of frequent oc-
currence in these writings, — an appellation which
wc are accustomed to apply to those who turn
away simple persons, and those who are easily
deceived, from sound doctrine. But neither we,
nor, I imagine, any other, whether Christian or


' I Cor. iv. 12, 13.

^ Tit. iii. 10, II.

3 Kip/ca? Kal KVKrfipa. at/aiiAo.

< Cf. I Tim. iv. 1-3.

5 axorj? Kauo-Tjjpia. Cf. note in Benedictine ed.

6 ainyfiara. Cf. note in Benedictine ed.


Scriptures, but interpret them differently, or
whether they do not recognise these books as
divine. For we find both of these views pre-
vailing among the sects. He then continues :
" Although they have no foundation for the doc-
trine, let us examine the system itself; and, in
the first place, let us mention the corruptions
which they have made through ignorance and
misunderstanding, when in the discussion of ele-
mentary principles they express their opinions in
the most absurd manner on things which they
do not understand, such as the following." And
then, to certain expressions which are continu-


8 efopxov'Me'i'o?

9 Cf. 2 Cor. X.
10 [Irenaeus, vol


;oi <7-0<J)t<TTpi'a5.

.5- ,

1. p. 353-]


572


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book V.


ally in the mouths of the believers in Christianity,
he opposes certain others from the writings of
the philosophers, with the object of making it
appear that the noble sentiments which Celsus
supposes to be used by Christians have been
expressed in better and clearer language by the


philosophers, in order that he might drag away ;
to the study of philosophy those who are caught 1
by opinions which at once evidence their noble
and religious character. We shall, however, here
terminate the fifth book, and begin the sixth with
what follows.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.

BOOK VI.


In beginning this our sixth book, we desire,
my reverend Ambrosius, to answer in it those
accusations which Celsus brings against the
Christians, not, as might be supposed, those
j objections which he has adduced from writers
I 071 philosophy. For he has quoted a consider-
j able number of passages, chiefly from Plato, and
I has placed alongside of these such declarations
I of holy Scripture as are fitted to impress even
I the intelligent mind ; subjoining the assertion,
j that " these things are stated much better among
! the Greeks (than in the Scriptures), and in a
j manner which is free from all exaggerations '
I and promises on the part of God, or the Son
[ of God." Now we maintain, that if it is the
j object of the ambassadors of the truth to con-
1 fer benefits upon the greatest possible number,
j and, so far as they can, to win over to its side,
j through their love to men, every one without
exception — intelligent as well as simple — not
Greeks only, but also Barbarians (and great,
indeed, is the humanity which should succeed in
converting the rustic and the ignorant^), it is
manifest that they must adopt a style of address
fitted to do good to all, and to gain over to them
men of every sort. Those, on the other hand,
j who turn away ^ from the ignorant as being mere
slaves,^ and unable to understand the flowing
periods of a poHshed and logical discourse, and
jso devote their attention solely to such as have
been brought up amongst literary pursuits,5 con-
fine their views of the public good within very
strait and narrow limits.

CHAP. II.

I have made these remarks in reply to the
charges which Celsus and others bring against


* ovaTacrecos.

^ wa\\) hi TO jjfiepoi' eai' . . . 0I09 re T15 yeVijTat eViaTpe^eif,

jroAAd ;^aipetv (fipdaavTii,
^ avSfiairo&Qi^,

5 Kai ^i) oioi re KaTaKoiiei;/ T^s iv ifipaaei \6y(»v Koi rdfei in-ay-
Miievtav aKo\ovdtai, /bidt/ui' (ippovTia-av ritv avaraanbivTuiv iv
lAoYois (cai y.a.Q'fiij.iuii.v.


lyeAAo


the simplicity of the language of Scripture, which
appears to be thrown into the shade by the splen-
dour of polished discourse. For our prophets,
and Jesus Himself, and His apostles, were care-
ful to adopt ^ a style of address which should not
merely convey the truth, but which should be
fitted to gain over the multitude, until each one,
attracted and led onwards, should ascend as far
as he could towards the comprehension of those
mysteries which are contained in these appar-
ently simple words. For, if I may venture to
say so, few have been benefited (if they have
indeed been benefited at all) by the beautiful
and polished style of Plato, and those who have
written like him ; 7 while, on the contrary, many
have received advantage from those who wrote
and taught in a simple and practical manner, and
with a view to the wants of the multitude. It is
easy, indeed, to observe that Plato is found only
in the hands of those who profess to be literary
men ; ^ while Epictetus is admired by persons
of ordinary capacity, who have a desire to be
benefited, and who perceive the improvement
which may be derived from his writings. Now
we make these remarks, not to disparage Plato
(for the great world of men has found even him
useful), but to point out the aim of those who
said : " And my speech and my preaching was
not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spirit and of power, that
our faith should not stand in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God." 9 For the word of
God declares that the preaching (although in
itself true and most worthy of belief) is not suf-
ficient to reach the human heart, unless a certain
power be imparted to the speaker from God, and
a grace appear upon his words ; and it is only by
the divine agency that this takes place in those
who speak effectually. The prophet says in the
sixty-seventh Psalm, that " the Lord will give a


[See Dr. Burton's Bampton Lectures On the Heresies of the


Apostolic Age, pp.
* AiAoAo-yiui'.
9 I Cor. ii. 4, 5,


529. S.j


573


574


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


word with great power to them who preach." '
If, then, it should be granted with respect to
certairx points, that the same doctrines are found
amon^ the Greeks as in our own Scriptures, yet
they do not possess the same power of attracting
and disposing the souls of men to follow them.
Ahd therefore the disciples of Jesus, men igno-
r:ui't so far as regards Grecian philosophy, yet
traversed many countries of the world, impress-
ing, agreeably to the desire of the Logos, each
'one of their hearers according to his deserts, so
that they received a moral amelioration in pro-
portion to the inclination of their will to accept
of that which is good.

CHAP. III.

Let the ancient sages, then, make known their
sayings to those who are capable of understand-
ing them. Suppose that Plato, for example, the
son of Ariston, in one of his Epistles, is discours-
ing about the "chief good," and that he says,
" The chief good can by no means be described
in words, but is produced by long habit, and
bursts forth suddenly as a light in the soul, as
from a fire which had leapt forth." We, then,
on hearing these words, admit that they are well
said, for it is God who revealed to men these as


a light becomes suddenly kindled in the soul, as
if by a fire springing forth, and that it now sup-
ports itself alone."

CHAP. rv.

Notwithstanding, those who have written in
this manner regarding the " chief good " will go
down to the Piraeus and offer prayer to Artemis,
as if she were God, and will look (with approval)
upon the solemn assembly held by ignorant men ;
and after giving utterance to philosophical re-
marks of such profundity regarding the soul, and
describing its passage (to a happier world) ai'ter
a virtuous life, they pass from those great topics
which God has revealed to them, and adopt
mean and trifling thoughts, and offer a cock
to y^isculapius ! ^ And although they had been
enabled to form representations both of the " in-
visible things" of God and of the "archetypal
forms" of things from the creation of the world,
and from (the contemplation of) sensible things,
from which they ascend to those objects which
are comprehended by the understanding alone,
— and although they had no mean glimpses of
His "eternal power and Godhead," 5 they never-
theless became " foolish in their imaginations,"
and their "foolish heart" was involved in dark-
ness and ignorance as to the (true) worship of


well as all other noble expressions. And for this ! Qod. Moreover, we may see those who greatly
reason it is that we maintain that those who have [ pride themselves upon their wisdom and theology

''"^""'■"worshipping the image of a corruptible man, in


entertained correct ideas regarding God, but who
have not offered to Him a worship in harmony
with the truth, are liable to the punishments which
fall on sinners. For respecting such Paul says in
express words : " The wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness and unright-
eousness of men, who hold the truth in unright-
eousness ; because that which may be known of
God is manifest in them ; for God hath showed
it unto them. For the invisible things of Him
from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made,
even His eternal power and Godhead ; so that
they are without excuse : because that, when
they knew God, they glorified Him not as God,
neither were thankful ; but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was dark-
ened. Professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools, and changed the glory of the in-
corruptible God into an image made like to cor-
ruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts,
and creeping things." ^ The truth, then, is verily
held (in unrighteousness), as our Scriptures tes-
tify, by those who are of opinion that "the chief
good cannot be described in words," but who as-
sert that, "after long custom and familiar usage,^


^the reading of the Septuagint
1 gave a word; of l'
;host." (Cf. Ps. Ixviii,


1 Such
text has; "The Lord
was a g

2 Cf. Rom. i. 18-23.

3 e/c TToAAi;; (jvvoucriai Yico/ixei/rjs nepl to irpayna.


The Masoretic
them who published it there
S.J


honour, they say, of Him, and sometimes even
descending, with the Egyptians, to the worship
of birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things ! And although some may appear to have
risen above such practices, nevertheless they will
be found to have changed the truth of God into
a lie, and to worship and serve the " creature
more than the Creator."^ As the wise and
learned among the Greeks, then, commit errors
in the service which they render to God, God
" chose the foolish things of the world to con-
found the wise ; and base things of the world,
and things that are weak, and things which are
despised, and things which are nought, to bring
to nought things that are ; " and this, truly,
" that no flesh should glory in the presence of
God." 7 Our wise men, however, — Moses, the
most ancient of them all, and the prophets who
followed him, — knowing that the chief good
could by no means be described in words, were
the first who wrote that, as God manifests Him-
self to the deserving, and to those who are quali-
fied to behold Him,^ He appeared to Abraham,


4 Cf Plato, Phcedo \\\^\.y. ii8. S

5 Kol Ta dopara ToO ®eoO, (cai to?
(CTicrews ToO xdcrfiou, Kal twc ai<r6i)Tu)i',
vaovti^va: Trji/ T6 aiSioi' aiiToO iiivafit
ifioi'Te?, etc.

*> Rom. i. 25.

7 Cf. I Cor. i. 27, 28, 29.

8 £7TiTr)6etois.


Seas ^a.vr(ia6ivT(.% airb tt)?
a.^' iiv ava^aivovaiv «ti ra
Kal eeioTijTa ovic ayevvut


Chap. VI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


575


or to Isaac, or to Jacob. But who He was that
appeared, and of what form, and in what man-
ner, and hke to which of mortal beings,' they
have left to be investigated by those who are
able to show that they resemble those persons to
whom God showed Himself : for He was seen
not by their bodily eyes, but by the pure heart.
For, according to the declaration of our Jesus,
" Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God."^


But that a light is suddenly kindled in the
soul, as by a fire leaping forth, is a fact known
long ago to our Scriptures ; as when the prophet
said, " Light ye for yourselves the light of knowl-
edge." ^ John also, who lived after him, said,
" That which was in the Logos was life, and the
life was the light of men ; " •* which " true light
lighteneth every man that cometh into the
world" (i.e., the true world, which is perceived
by the understandings), and maketh him a light
of the world : " For this light shone in our hearts,
to give the light of the glorious Gospel of God
in the face of Christ Jesus." ^ And therefore
that very ancient prophet, who prophesied many
generations before the reign of Cyrus (for he was
older than he by more than fourteen genera-
tions) , expressed himself in these words : " The
Lord is my light and my salvation : whom shall I
fear? " ? and, " Thy law is a lamp unto my feet,
and a light unto my path ; " ^ and again, " The
light of Thy countenance, O Lord, was manifested
towards us ; " 9 and, " Li Thy light we shall see
light." '° And the Logos, exhorting us to come to
this light, says, in the prophecies of Isaiah : " En-
lighten thyself, enlighten thyself, O Jerusalem ;
for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee." " The same prophet also,
when predicting the advent of Jesus, who was to
turn away men from the worship of idols, and of
images, and of demons, says, " To those that sat
in the land and shadow of death, upon them
hath the light arisen ; " '^ and again, " The
people that sat in darkness saw a great light." '^
Observe now the difference between the fine
phrases of Plato respecting the " chief good,"
and the declarations of our prophets regarding


' Kai TLi/i TMv iv ri/jLiv. Boherellus understands Ojiioios, which
has been adopted in the translation.

2 Cf Matt. V. 8.

5 Hos. X. 12. (j>ii>Ti(TaTe eauTois <t>M^ yvioo-cios (LXX.). The
Masoretic text is, n^'l TJ DdS ITJi where for j"\j,'1 (and time)
the Septuagint translator apparently read rij.'l {knowledge), T and
1 being interchanged for their similarity.

* Cf. John i. 3, 4.

5 TO I' (L\Tf]f)i.vov Ka.\ vorfTov,

' Cf. 2 Cor. iv. 6.

' Ps. xxvii. I (attributed to David) .

' Ps. cxix. 105.

9 Ps. iv. 6 (Heb. " Lift up upon us," etc.).
'^ Ps. xxxvi. q.
" Cf. Isa. Ix. I.
" Cf Isa. ix. 2.


the "light " of the blessed ; and notice that the
truth as it is contained in Plato concerning this
subject did not at all help his readers to attain
to a pure worship of God, nor even himself, who
could philosophize so grandly about the " chief
good," whereas the simple language of the holy
Scriptures has led to their honest readers being
filled with a divine spirit • "3 and this light is
nourished within them by the oil, which in a
certain parable is said to have preserved the
light of the torches of the five wise virgins.'^


Seeing, however, that Celsus quotes from an
epistle of Plato another statement to the follow-
ing effect, viz. : " If it appeared to me that these
matters could be adequately explained to the
multitude in writing and in oral address, what
nobler pursuit in life could have been followed
by me, than to commit to writing what was to
prove of such advantage to human beings, and
to lead the nature of all men onwards to the
light?" — let us then consider this point briefly,
viz., whether or not Plato were acquainted with
any doctrines more profound than are contained
in his writings, or more divine than those which
he has left behind him, leaving it to each one to
investigate the subject according to his ability,
while we demonstrate that our prophets did know
of greater things than any in the Scriptures, but
which they did not commit to writing. Ezekiel,
e.g., received a roll,'^ written within and without,
in which were contained "lamentations," and
" songs," and " denunciations ; " '^ but at the
command of the Logos he swallowed the book,
in order that its contents might not be written,
and so made known to unworthy persons. John
also is recorded to have seen and done a similar
thing.'? Nay, Paul even heard "unspeakable
words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter." '^
And it is related of Jesus, who was greater than
all these, that He conversed with His disciples
in private, and especially in their sacred retreats,
concerning the Gospel of God ; but the words
which He uttered have not been preserved, be-
cause it appeared to the evangelists that they
could not be adequately conveyed to the multi-
tude in writing or in speech. And if it were
not tire.some to repeat the truth regarding these
illustrious individuals, I would say that they saw
better than Plato (by means of the intelligence
which they received by the grace of God), what
things were to be committed to ivriting, an3
how this was to be done, and what was by no


i-t Cf Matt. XXV. 4.

•S Kt<^a.Ki.h<x 3iSAiov.

16 oi/ai: cf. Ezek. ii. 9, 10.

'7 Cf Rev. X. 9.

'8 2 Cor. xii. 4.


5/6


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


means to be written to the multitude, and what
was to be expressed in words, and what was not
to be so conveyed. And once more, John, in
teaching us the difference between what ought to
be committed to writing and what not, declares
that he heard seven thunders instructing him on
certain matters, and forbidding him to commit
their words to writing.'


CHAP. VII.

There might also be found in the writings of
Moses and of the prophets, who are older not
only than Plato, but even than Homer and the
invention of letters among the Greeks, passages
worthy of the grace of God bestowed upon them,
and filled with great thoughts, to which they
gave utterance, but not because they understood
Plato imperfectly, as Celsus imagines. For how
was it possible that they should have heard one
who was not yet born ? And if any one should
apply the words of Celsus to the apostles of
Jesus, who were younger than Plato, say whether
it is not on the very face of it an incredible
assertion, that Paul the tentmaker, and Peter the
fisherman, and John who left his father's nets,
should, through misunderstanding the language
of Plato in his Epistles, have expressed them-
selves as they have done regarding God ? But
as Celsus now, after having often required of us
immediate assent (to his views), as if he were
babbling forth something new in addition to what
he has already advanced, only repeats himself,^
what we have said in reply may suffice. Seeing,
however, he produces another quotation from
Plato, in which he asserts that the employment
of the method of question and answer sheds
light on the thoughts of those who philosophize
like him, let us show from the holy Scriptures
that the word of God also encourages us to the
practice of dialectics : Solomon, e.g., declaring
in one passage, that "instruction unquestioned
goes astray ; " ^ and Jesus the son of Sirach, who
has left us the treatise called "Wisdom," declar-
ing in another, that " the knowledge of the unwise
is as words that will not stand investigation." ■*
Our methods of discussion, however, are rather
of a gentle kind ; for we have learned that he
who presides over the preaching of the word
ought to be able to confute gainsayers. But if
some continue indolent, and do not train them-
selves so as to attend to the reading of the word,
and " to search the Scriptures," and, agreeably
to the command of Jesus, to investigate the


meaning of the sacred writings, and to ask of
God concerning them, and to keep " knocking "
at what may be closed within them, the Scripture
is not on that account to be regarded as devoid
of wisdom.

CHAP. VIII.

In the next place, after other Platonic decla-
rations, which demonstrate that " the good " can
be known by few, he adds : " Since the multi-
tude, being puffed up with a contempt for others,
which is far from right, and being filled with vain
and lofty hopes, assert that, because they have
come to the knowledge of some venerable doc-
trines, certain things are true." "Yet although
Plato predicted these things, he nevertheless
does not talk marvels, 5 nor shut the mouth of
those who wish to ask him for information on
the subject of his promises ; nor does he com-
mand them to come at once and believe that a
God of a particular kind exists, and that he has
a son of a particular nature, who descended (to
earth) and conversed with me." Now, in answer
to this we have to say, that with regard to Plato,
it is Aristander, I think, who has related that he
was not the son of Ariston, but of a phantom,
which approached Amphictione in the guise of
Apollo. And there are several other of the
followers of Plato who, in their lives of their
master, have made the Same statement. What
are we to say, moreover, about Pythagoras, who
relates the greatest possible amount of wonders,
and who, in a general assembly of the Greeks,
showed his ivory thigh, and asserted that he
recognised the shield which he wore when he
was Euphorbus, and who is said to have ap-
peared on one day in two different cities ! He,
moreover, who will declare that what is related
of Plato and Socrates belongs to the marvellous,
will quote the story of the swan which was rec-
ommended to Socrates while he was asleep, and
of the master saying when he met the young
man, "This, then, was the swan!"^ Nay, the
third eye which Plato saw that he himself pos-
sessed, he will fefer to the category of prodigies.^
But occasion for slanderous accusations will never
be wanting to those who are ill-disposed, and who
wish to speak evil of what has happened to such
as are raised above the multitude. Such persons
will deride as a fiction even the demon of Socrates.
We do not, then, relate marvels when we narrate
the history of Jesus, nor have His genuine disci-
ples recorded any such stories of Him ; whereas
this Celsus, who professes universal knowledge,
and who quotes many of the sayings of Plato, is,


1 Cf. Rev. X. 4.

2 TToAAa/ci; 66 rySr) 6 KeAcros 0puAA)j(ras 105 a|iou;u.6rov eufleajs
TncTTeiieii', 105 Kaivov Ti jrapd to. npoTeaov eiprj/iiera. Guietus thus
amends the passage: xroAAaKi! Se r;6)j o KeA<705 a^iovixd/o^ eiideuis
TTiCTTeueii', 109 KaLvov TC wapa to. jrpoTepoi' elprjixeva SpuAArJtras, etc.
Boherellus would change a^iovixevoi' into a^LoOfxev.

3 TratSeia ai/ffeAeyKTo? TrAaj/arai : cf. Prov. X. 17 (Sept.).
* yvwo-i! dauvcTov d6tefeTa<7TOi Aoyoi; cf. Ecclus. xxi. 18.


i ou TepareveTai.

6 The night before Ariston brought Plato to Socrates ?s his
pupil, the latter dreamed that a swan from the altar of Cupid alighted
on his bosom. Cf. Pausanias in Aiticis, p. 58. . .

7 "Alicubi forsan occurrit: me vero uspiam legisse non memmi.
Credo Platonem per tertium oculum suam -aoKvixaeiiav et scientiam,
qua ceteris anteibat, denotare voluisse." — Spencer.


Chap. X.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


577


I think, intentionally silent on the discourse con-
cerning the Son of God which is related in Plato's
Epistle to Hermeas and Coriscus. Plato's words
are as follows : " And calling to witness the God
of all things — the ruler both of things present
and things to come, father and lord both of the
ruler and cause — whom, if we are philosophers
indeed, we shall all clearly know, so far as it is
possible for happy human beings to attain such
knowledge." '


Celsus quotes another saying of Plato to the
following effect : " It has occurred to me to
speak once more upon these subjects at greater
length, as perhaps I might express myself about
them more clearly than I have already done :
for there is a certain ' real ' cause, which proves
a hindrance in the way of him who has ven-
tured, even to a slight extent, to write on such
topics ; and as this has been frequently men-
tioned by me on former occasions, it appears to
me that it ought to be stated now. In each of
existing things, which are necessarily employed
in the acquisition of knowledge, there are three
elements ; knowledge itself is the fourth ; and
that ought to be laid down as the fifth which is
both capable of being known and is true. Of
these, one is ' name ; ' the second is ' word ; '
the third, ' image ; ' the fourth, ' knowledge.' " ^
Now, according to this division, John is intro-
duced before Jesus as the voice of one crying
in the wilderness, so as to correspond with the
"name" of Plato; and the second after John,
who is pointed out by him, is Jesus, with whom
agrees the statement, "The Word became flesh,"
and that corresponds to the "word" of Plato.
Plato terms the third " image ; " but we, who
apply the expression " image " to something dif-
ferent, would say with greater precision, that the
mark of the wounds which is made in the soul
by the word is the Christ which is in each one
of us and this mark is impressed by Christ the
Word.3 And whether Christ, the wisdom which
is in those of us who are perfect, correspond to
the "fourth" element — knowledge — will be-
come known to him who has the capacity to
ascertain it.


He next continues : " You see how Plato,
although maintaining that (the chief good) can-
not be described in words, yet, to avoid the
appearance of^ retreating to an irrefutable posi-
tion, subjoins a reason in explanation of this


difficulty, as even ' nothing ' ^ might perhaps be
explained in words." But as Celsus adduces
this to prove that we ought not to yield a simple
assent, but to furnish a reason for our belief, we
shall quote also the words of Paul, where he
says, in censuring the hasty 5 believer, "unless ye
have believed inconsiderately." *^ Now, through
his practice of repeating himself, Celsus, so far
as he can, forces us to be guilty of tautology,
reiterating, after the boastful language which has
been quoted, that " Plato is not guilty of boast-
ing and falsehood, giving out that he has made
some new discovery, or that he has come down
from heaven to announce it, but acknowledges
whence these statements are derived." Now, if
one wished to reply to Celsus, one might say in
answer to such assertions, that even Plato is:
guilty of boasting, when in the Tiniceus ? he puts,
the following language in the mouth of Zeus :.
"Gods of gods, whose creator and father I am,"
and so on. And if any one will defend such

j language on account of the meaning w^hich is
conveyed under the name of Zeus, thus speaking
in the dialogue of Plato, why should not he who
investigates the meaning of the words of the Son
of God, or those of the Creator ^ in the proph-^
ets, express a profounder meaning than any
conveyed by the words of Zeus in the Timccus?
For the characteristic of divinity is the announce-
ment of future events, predicted not by human
power, but shown by the result to be due to a
divine spirit in him who made the announce-
ment. Accordingly, we do not say to each of
our hearers, " Believe, first of all, that He whom
I introduce to thee is the Son of God ; " but we
put the Gospel before each one, as his character
and disposition may fit him to receive it, inas-
much as we have learned to know " how we
ought to answer every man."^ And there are
some who are capable of receiving nothing more
than an exhortation to believe, and to these we

■ address that alone ; while we approach others,
again, as far as possible, in the way of demon-
stration, by means of question and answer. Nor
do we at all say, as Celsus scoffingly alleges,
" Believe that he whom I introduce to thee is
the Son of God, although he was shamefully
bound, and disgracefully punished, and very re-
cently '° was most contumeliously treated before
the eyes of all men ; " neither do we add, " Be-
lieve it even the more (on that account)." For
it is our endeavour to state, on each individual

' point, arguments more numerous even than we

! have brought forward in the preceding pages.


euTepov 6> XoYOS* to tk rpiTOv el&u


' Plato, Eptsi., vi.

2 cue cv fikv ot'ofj.a*
T€TapTOV 6e e77L(TT)7^i7.

3 TpavoTepov tfir^aofxev iv T)j ijjvxrj yivoiievov ixera rhv \6yov Twi'
Tpa.vp.aTiuv TUTTOV, TOUTOf elvai TOi' iv exacTTa) XptaTOf, owo XpicrTOu
\6yov.


TO i^riSfv.
fiici) TT-io-TeuovTi.
I Cor. XV. 2.
[p. 4.1. S.] ,
Tou Srjfxiovpyov,

Cf. Col. iv. 6.
' x^ts itai irpuiiji'.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


After this Celsus continues : " If these (mean-
ing the Christians) bring forward this person,
and others, again, a different individual (as the
Christ), while the common and ready cry' of
all parties is, ' Believe, if thou wilt be saved, or
else begone,' what shall those do who are in
earnest about their salvation? Shall they cast
the dice, in order to divine whither they may
betake themselves, and whom they shall join?"
Now we shall answer this objection in the follow-
ing manner, as the clearness of the case impels
us to do. If it had been recorded that several
individuals had appeared in human life as sons
of God in the manner in which Jesus did, and
if each of them had drawn a party of adherents
to his side, so that, on account of the similarity
of the profession (in the case of each individual)
that he was the Son of God, he to whom his
followers bore testimony to that effect was an
object of dispute, there would have been ground
for his saying, " If these bring forward this per-
son, and others a different individual, while the
common and ready cry of all parties is, ' Believe,
if thou wilt be saved, or else begone,' " and so
on ; whereas it has been proclaimed to the entire
world that Jesus Christ is the only Son of God
who visited the human race : for those who, like
Celsus, have supposed that (the acts of Jesus)
were a series of prodigies,^ and who for that rea-
son wished to perform acts of the same kind,^
that they, too, might gain a similar mastery over
the minds of men, were convicted of being utter
nonentities.4 Such were Simon, the Magus of
Samaria, and Dositheus, who was a native of the
same place ; since the former gave out that he
was the power of God that is called great,5 and
the latter that he was the Son of God. Now
Simonians are found nowhere throughout the
world ; and yet, in order to gain over to himself
many followers, Simon freed his disciples from
the danger of death, which the Christians were
taught to prefer, by teaching them to regard
idolatry as a matter of indifference. But even
at the beginning of their existence the followers
of Simon were not exposed to persecution. For
that wicked demon who was conspiring against
the doctrine of Jesus, was well aware that none
of his own maxims would be weakened by the
teaching of Simon. The Dositheans, again, even
in former times, did not rise to any eminence,
and now they are completely extinguished, so
that it is said their whole number does not


' KOLvov &k voLVTuiv r/ Kal irpox^i-pov. For rj, Boherellus reads fi.

2 oi 7ap buouo'; KeA(r<u v7roAa86vT(^ TerepaTivadaL. The word
0|iioico5 formerly stood, iri the text of Spencer and Ruaeus, before
T6Tepa.T60(T#ai, bnt is properly expnnged, as arising from the preced-
ing onoi'ws. Boherellus remarks: " Forte aliud quid exciderit, verbi
gratia, TO. ToO Irjaov."


* Tb 0V«6V.

5 Cf. Acts 1


lo [and vol. i. p. 187, this series].


amount to thirty. Judas of Galilee also, as Luke
relates in the Acts of the Apostles,^ wished to
call himself some great personage, as did Theu-
das before him ; but as their doctrine was not
of God, they were destroyed, and all who obeyed
them were immediately dispersed. We do not,
then, " cast the dice in order to divine whither
we shall betake ourselves, and whom we shall
join," as if there were many claimants able to
draw us after them by the profession of their
having come down from God to visit the human
race. On these points, however, we have said
enough.


Accordingly, let us pass on to another charge
made by Celsus, who is not even acquainted with
the words (of our sacred books), but who, from
misunderstanding them, has said that " we de-
clare the wisdom that is among men to be fool-
ishness with God ; " Paul having said that " the
wisdom of the world 'vs, foolishness with God." ?
Celsus says that " the reason of this has been
stated long ago.'' And the reason he imagines
to be, " our desire to win over by means of this
saying the ignorant and foolish alone." But, as
he himself has intimated, he has said the same
thing before ; and we, to the best of our ability,
replied to it. Notwithstanding this, however, he
wished to show that this statement was an inven- !
tion ^ of ours, and borrowed from the Grecian I
sages, who declare that human wisdom is of one i
kind, and divine of another. And he quotes '
the words of Heraclitus, where he says in one i
passage, that " man's method of action is not
regulated by fixed principles, but that of God
is ; " 9 and in another, that " a foolish man lis-
tens to a demon, as a boy does to a man." He
quotes, moreover, the following from the Apology
of Socrates, of which Plato was the author:
" For I, O men of Athens, have obtained this i
name by no other means than by my wisdom. ;
And of what sort is this wisdom ? Such, prob-
ably, as is human ; for in that respect I venture
to think that I am in reality wise." ■° Such are j
the passages adduced by Celsus. But I shall |
subjoin also the following from Plato's letter to i
Hermeas, and Erastus, and Coriscus : " To Eras- ;
tus and Coriscus I say, although I am an old i
man, that, in addition to this noble knowledge 1
of 'forms' (which they possess), they need a
wisdom, with regard to the class of wicked and
unjust persons, which may serve as a protective
and repelling force against them. For they are
inexperienced, in consequence of having passed
a large portion of their lives with us, who are


6 Cf. Acts V. 36, 37.
1 Cf. I Cor. iii. 19. _

9 ^Co; viip av^pMrniov ixiv oiiK e^ei 7^1011105, delov &e e^et,
1° Cf. Plato's ^/oA'ir-. V.


Chap. XIV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


579


moderate ' individuals, and not wicked. I have those who have given in their adherence to
accordingly said that they need these things, in Christianity ; for it is not " to the most ignorant,
order that they may not be compelled to neglect j or servile, or most uninstructed of mankind,"
the true wisdom, and to apply themselves in a i that one would discourse upon the topics relat-
greater degree than is proper to that which is i ing to the divine wisdom,
necessary and human."


CHAP. XIII.

According to the foregoing, then, the one kind
of wisdom is human, and the other divine. Now
the " human " wisdom is that which is termed
by us the wisdom of the " world," which is " fool-
ishness with God;" whereas the "divine" — I
being different from the " human," because it is
"divine" — comes, through the grace of God
who bestows it, to those who have evinced their
capacity for receiving it, and especially to those
who, from knowing the difference between either
kind of wisdom, say, in their prayers to God,
" Even if one among the sons of men be per-
fect, while the wisdom is wanting that comes,
from Thee, he shall be accounted as nothing." ^
We maintain, indeed, that " human " wisdom is
an exercise for the soul, but that " divine " wis-
dom is the " end," being also termed the
" strong " meat of the soul by him who has said
that " strong meat belongeth to them that are
perfect,^ even those who by reason of use have
their senses exercised to discern both good and
evil." + This opinion, moreover, is truly an an-
cient one, its antiquity not being referred back,


CHAP. XIV.

In designating others, by the epithets of " un-
instructed, and servile, and ignorant," Celsus, I
suppose, means, those who are not acquainted
with his laws, nor trained in the branches of
Greek learning ;. while Ave, on the other hand,
deem those to be " uninstructed " who are not
ashamed to address (supplications) to inanimate
objects, and to call upon those for health that
have no strength, and to ask the dead for life,
and to entreat the helpless for assistance.* And
although some may say that these objects are
not gods, but only imitations and symbols of real
divinities, nevertheless these very individuals, in
imagining that the hands of low mechanics ^ can
frame imitadons of divinity, are " uninstructed,
and servile, and ignorant ; " for we assert that
the lowest '° among us have been set free from
this ignorance and want of knowledge, while the
most intelligent can understand and grasp the
divine hope. We do not maintain, however, that
it is impossible for one who has not been trained
in earthly wisdom to receive the "divine," but
we do acknowledge that all human wasdom is
'folly" in comparison with the "divine." In


as Celsus thinks, merely to Heraclitus and Plato. , the next place, instead of endeavouring to ad


For before these individuals lived, the prophets
distinguished between the two kinds of wisdom.
It is sufficient for the present to quote from the
words of David what he says regarding the man
who is wise, according to divine wisdom, that
" he will not see corruption when he beholds
wise men dying." 5 Divine wisdom, according-
ly, being different from faith, is the " first " of
the so-called " charismata " of God ; and the
"second" after it — in the estimation of those
who know how to distinguish such things accu-
rately— is what is called "knowledge;"^ and


duce reasons, as he ought, for his assertions, he
terms us " sorcerers," " and asserts that "we flee
away with headlong speed '^ from the more pol-
ished "3 class of persons, because they are not
suitable subjects for our impositions, while we
seek to decoy'-* those who are more rustic."
Now he did not observe that from the very be-
ginning our wise men were trained in the external
branches of learning : Moses, e.g., in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians ; Daniel, and Ananias,
and Azariah, and Mishael, in all Assyrian learn-
ing, so that they were found to surpass in tenfold


the "third " — seeing that even the more simple I degree all the wise men of that country. At the
class of men who adhere to the service of God, i present time, moreover, the Churches have, in
so far as they can, must be saved — is faith. | proportion to the multitudes (of ordinary be-
""^ ' ' ' lievers), a few "wise" men, who have come


And therefore Paul says : " To one is given by
the Spirit the word of wisdom ; to another the
word of knowledge by the same Spirit ; to an-
other faith by the same Spirit." ^ And therefore
it is no ordinary individuals whom you will find
to have participated in the " divine " wisdom,
but the more excellent and distinguished among


♦ Heb. V. 14.
5 Ps. xlix. 9, I


(LXX.).


^ I Cor. xii. 8, 9. [.See Gieseler's Church History, on'
Alexandrian Theology," vol. i. p. 212. S.]


over to them from that wisdom which is said by
us to be " according to the flesh ; " '5 and they
have also some who have advanced from it to
that wisdom which is "divine."


8 ToOs fir) oierxucojie't'OV! iv tm Tot9 ai>uxo'? n-po<rAaAcu', itai
Trepi ju.fi' i/yeia? to oCTdefes fjriKaAounei'OV?, Trepi hk ^lo^? to vtKfiav
ifioOi'Ta!, Trepi hi k-niKovfiia.% To diropuTaToi' Uereuoi'Taj.

1° ToO? ea^aTovs.

■■ YorjTa?.

12 TrpoTpoiraSTji/.

13 T0U5 \<if>t.(a-rioov<;.

•■» TToAeuouei'. [See note supra, p. 482. S.J
IS Cf. I Cor. i. 26.


58o


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


Celsus, in the next place, as one who has
heard the subject of humihty greatly talked
about,' but who has not been at the pains to
understand it,- would wish to speak evil of that
humility which is practised among us, and im-
agines that it is borrowed from some words of
Plato imperfectly understood, where he expresses
himself in the Laws as follows : " Now God,
according to the ancient account, having in
Himself both the beginning and end and middle
of all existing things, proceeds according to
nature, and marches straight on.^ He is con-
stantly followed by justice, which is the avenger
of all breaches of the divine law : he who is
about to become happy follows her closely in
humility, and becomingly adorned." ^ He did
not observe, however, that in writers much older
than Plato the following words occur in a prayer :
" Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes
lofty, neither do I walk in great matters, nor in
things too wonderful for me ; if I had not been
humble," s etc. Now these words show that he
who is of humble mind does not by any means
humble himself in an unseemly or inauspicious
manner, falling down upon his knees, or casting
himself headlong on the ground, putting on the
dress of the miserable, or sprinkling himself with
dust. But he who is of humble mind in the
sense of the prophet, while "walking in great
and wonderful things," which are above his ca-
pacity— viz., those doctrines that are truly great,
and those thoughts that are wonderful — "hum-
bles himself under the mighty hand of God."
If there are some, however, who through their
stupidity ^ have not clearly understood the doc-
trine of humiliation, and act as they do, it is not
our doctrine which is to be blamed ; but we
must extend our forgiveness to the stupidity ^ of
those who aim at higher things, and owing to
their fatuity of mind 7 fail to attain them. He
who is " humble and becomingly adorned," is so
in a greater degree than Plato's " humble and
becomingly adorned " individual : for he is be-
comingly adorned, on the one hand, because
" he walks in things great and wonderful," which
are beyond his capacity ; and humble, on the
other hand, because, while being in the midst of
such, he yet voluntarily humbles himself, not
under any one at random, but under " the
mighty hand of God," through Jesus Christ, the
teacher of such instruction, "who did not deem
equality with God a thing to be eagerly clung to,
but made Himself of no reputation, and took on


3 ev0eiti jTcpaiVei Kara <f>v(nv irapanopevofj.evo';.
* Plato, tie Legibus, iv. p. 716.

5 Ps. cxxxi. I, 2 (LXX.)- The clause, " If I had not been hum-
ble," seems to belong to the following verse.
'^ Tij iSiioTeca.
7 hia. Tov i6iioTi<r/j.d»'.


Him the form of a servant, and being found in
fashion as a man, humbled Himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross." ^ And so great is this doctrine of humil-
iation, that it has no ordinary individual as its
teacher ; but our great Saviour Himself says :
" Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of
heart, and ye shall find rest for your souls." 9


In the next place, with regard to the declara-
tion of Jesus against rich men, when He said,
" It is easier for a camel to go through the eye
of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into
the kingdom of God," ■° Celsus alleges that this
saying manifesdy proceeded from Plato, and
that Jesus perverted the words of the philoso-
pher, which were, that " it was impossible to be
distinguished for goodness, and at the same time
for riches." " Now who is there that is capable
of giving even moderate attention to affairs —
not merely among the believers on Jesus, but
among the rest of mankind — that would not
laugh at Celsus, on hearing that Jesus, who was
born and brought up among the Jews, and was
supposed to be the son of Joseph the carpenter,
and who had not studied literature — not merely
that of the Greeks, but not even that of the
Hebrews — as the truth-loving Scriptures testify
regarding Him,'^ had read Plato, and being
pleased with the opinion he expressed regarding
rich men, to the effect that " it was impossible
to be distinguished for goodness and riches at
the same time," had perverted this, and changed
it into, " It is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of God ! " Now, if Celsus
had not perused the Gospels in a spirit of hatred
and dislike, but had been imbued with a love
of truth, he would have turned his attention to
the point why a camel — that one of animals
which, as regards its physical structure, is crooked
— was chosen as an object of comparison with
a rich man, and what signification the " narrow
eye of a needle " had for him who saw that
" strait and narrow was the way that leadeth unto
life ; '3 and to this point also, that this animal,
according to the law, is described as " unclean,"
having one element of acceptability, viz., that it
ruminates, but one of condemnation, viz., that
it does not divide the hoof. He would have
inquired, moreover, how often the camel was
adduced as an object of comparison in the
sacred Scriptures, and in reference to what
objects, that he might thus ascertain the mean-


8 Cf Phil ii. 6, 8.

9 Cf. Matt. XI. 20.
10 Cf. Matt. xix. 24.

" Cf Plato, cic Legibus, v. p. 743.

'2 Cf. Matt. xiii. 54, Mark vi. 2, and John vii. 15.

13 Cf. Matt. vii. 14


Chap. XVIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


581


ing of the Logos concerning the rich men. Nor i
would he have left without examination the fact
that "the poor" are termed "blessed" by
Jesus, while " the rich " are designated as " mis-
erable ; " and whether these words refer to the
rich and poor who are visible to the senses, or
whether there is any kind of poverty known to
the Logos which is to be deemed " altogether
blessed," and any rich man who is to be wholly
condemned. For even a common individual
would not thus indiscriminately have praised
the poor, many of whom lead most wicked
lives. But on this point we have said enough.


Since Celsus, moreover, from a desire to de-
preciate the accounts which our Scriptures give
of the kingdom of God, has quoted none of
them, as if they were unworthy of being recorded
by him (or perhaps because he was unacquainted
with them), while, on the other hand, he quotes
the sayings of Plato, both from his Epistles and
the FhcBdrus, as if these were divinely inspired,
but our Scriptures were not, let us set forth a '
few points, for the sake of comparison with these \
plausible declarations of Plato, which did not, !
however, dispose the philosopher to worship in :
a manner worthy of him the Maker of all things, j
For he ought not to have adulterated or polluted ;
this worship with what we call " idolatry," but '
what the many would describe by the term
"superstition." Now, according to a Hebrew
figure of speech, it is said of God in the eigh-
teenth Psalm, that " He made darkness His
secret place," ' to signify that those notions
which should be worthily entertained of God are
invisible and unknowable, because God conceals
Himself in darkness, as it were, from those who
cannot endure the splendours of His knowledge,
or are incapable of looking at them, partly owing
to the pollution of their understanding, which is
clothed with the body of mortal lowliness, and
partly owing to its feebler power of comprehend-
ing God. And in order that it may appear that
the knowledge of God has rarely been vouch-
safed to men, and has been found in very few
individuals, iVIoses is related to have entered
into the darkness where God was.^ And again,
with regard to Moses it is said : " Moses alone
shall come near the Lord, but the rest shall not
come nigh." ^ And again, that the prophet may
show the depth of the doctrines which relate to
God, and which is unattainable by those who do
not possess the " Spirit which searcheth all things,
even the deep things of God," he added : " The
abyss like a garment is His covering." ■♦ Nay,


' Cf. Ps. xviii. II.
^ Cf. Ex. XX. 21.
3 Cf. Ex. xxiv. 2.
* Cf. Ps. civ. 6.


our Lord and Saviour, the Logos of God, mani-
festing that the greatness of the knowledge of
the Father is appropriately comprehended and
known pre-eminently by Him alone, and in the
second place by those whose minds are en-
lightened by the Logos Himself and God, de-
clares : " No man knoweth the Son, but the
Father ; neither knoweth any man the Father
but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal Him." s For no one can worthily know
the " uncreated " ^ and first-born of all created
nature like the Fathftr who begat Him, nor any
one the Father like the living Logos, and His
Wisdom and Truth.^ By sharing in Him who
takes away from the Father what is called " dark-
ness," which He " made His secret place," and
" the abyss," which is called His " covering,"
and in this way unveiling the Father, every one
knows the Father who ^ is capable of knowing
Him.

CHAP. XVIII.

I thought it right to quote these few instances
from a much larger number of passages, in which
our sacred writers express their ideas regarding
God, in order to show that, to those who have
eyes to behold the venerable character of Scrip-
ture, the sacred writings of the prophets contain
things more worthy of reverence than those say-
ings of Plato which Celsus admires. Now the
declaration of Plato, quoted by Celsus, runs as
follows : " All things are around the King of all,
and all things exist for his sake, and he is the
cause of all good things. With things of the
second rank he is second, and with those of
the third rank he is third. The human soul,
accordingly, is eager to learn what these things
are, looking to such things as are kindred to
itself, none of which is perfect. But as regards
the King and those things which I mentioned,
there is nothing which resembles them." 9 I
might have mentioned, moreover, what is said
of those beings which are called seraphim by
the Hebrews, and described in Isaiah,'° who
cover the face and feet of God, and of those
called cherubim, whom Ezekiel " has described,
and the postures of these, and of the manner in
which God is said to be borne upon the cheru-
bim. But since they are mentioned in a very
mysterious manner, on account of the unworthy
and the indecent, who are unable to enter into


5 Cf. Matt. xi. 27.

6 ayiv-qrov. Locus diligenter notandus, ubi Films e creatiir.-irum
numero diserte eximitur, dum a.yivr,TO'; dicitur. At non dissimu-
landum in unico Cod. Anglicano secundo legi: xoi' yivvriTov: cl.
Ori^ciiiauorum, lib. ii. qiia;stio 2, num. 23. — Ru.ci'S.

^ [Bishop Bull, in the Defonio Fidei Nicnia, book n. cap. ix.
says, " In these w
proves the absolutely

8 o Tt jtot" ai" xiopij ytyi'ioo-
a.v \uior\, etc.

9 Cf. Plato, Ef-ist., ii., ad Dionys.
>o Cf. Isa. vi. 2.
" Cf. Ezck. i. and x.


says, " In these words, which are clearer than any light, Origen
)ves the absolutely divine and uncreated nature of the Son." S.J _
Boherellus proposes octtis itot


I


58^


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


the great thoughts and venerable nature of things which are not seen : for the things which
theology, I have not deemed it becoming to are seen are temporal ; but the things which are
discourse of them in this treatise. unseen are eternal." ^


CHAP. XIX.

Celsus in the next place alleges, that " certain
Christians, having misunderstood the words of
Plato, loudly boast of a ' super-celestial ' God,
thus ascending beyond the heaven of the Jews."
By these words, indeed, he does not make it
clear whether they also ascand beyond the God
of the Jews, or only beyond the heaven by which
they swear. It is not our purpose at present,
however, to speak of those who acknowledge
another god than the one worshipped by the
Jews, but to defend ourselves, and to show that
it was impossible for the prophets of the Jews,
whose writings are reckoned among ours, to have
borrowed anything from Plato, because they were
older than he. They did not then borrow from
him the declaration, that " all things are around
the King of all, and that all exist on account of 1
him ; " for we have learned that nobler thoughts [
than these have been uttered by the prophets, j
by Jesus Himself and His disciples, who have j
clearly indicated the meaning of the spirit that !
was in them, which was none other than the spirit
of Christ. Nor was the philosopher the first to
present to view the " super-celestial " place ; for
David long ago brought to view the profundity
and multitude of the thoughts concerning God
entertained by those who have ascended above
visible things, when he said in the book of
Psalms : " Praise God, ye heaven of heavens ;
and ye waters that be above the heavens, let
them praise the name of the Lord." ' I do not, j
indeed, deny that Plato learned from certain i
Hebrews the words quoted from the Phcedrus, or '
even, as some have recorded, that he quoted
them from a perusal of our prophetic writings, !
when he said : " No poet here below has ever
sung of the super-celestial place, or ever will
sing in a becoming manner," and so on. And
in the same passage is the following : " For the
essence, which is both colourless and formless,
and which cannot be touched, which really exists,
is the pilot of the soul, and is beheld by the un-
derstanding alone ; and around it the genus of
true knowledge holds this place." ^ Our Paul,
moreover, educated by these words, and long-
ing after things "supra-mundane" and "super-
celestial," and doing his utmost for their sake to
attain them, says in the second Epistle to the
Corinthians : " For our light affliction, which is
but for a moment, worketh for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory ; while we
look not at the things which are seen, but at the


Now, to those who are capable of understand-
ing him, the apostle manifestly presents to view
" things which are the objects of perception,"
calling them " things seen ; " while he terms
" unseen," things which are the object of the
understanding, and cognisable by it alone. He
knows, also, that things "seen" and visible are
" temporal," but that things cognisable by the
mind, and " not seen," are " eternal ; " and de-
siring to remain in the contemplation of these,
and being assisted by his earnest longing for
them, he deemed all affliction as " light " and as
" nothing," and during the season of afflictions
and troubles was not at all bowed down by
them, but by his contemplation of (divine) things
deemed every calamity a light thing, seeing we
also have " a great High Priest," who by the
greatness of His power and understanding " has
passed through the heavens, even Jesus the Son
of God," who has promised to all that have truly
learned di\'ine things, and have lived lives in
harmony with them, to go before them to the
things that are supra-mundane ; for His words
are : " That where I go, ye may be also." '' And
therefore we hope, after the troubles and strug-
gles which we suffer here, to reach the highest
heavens, 5 and receiving, agreeably to the teach-
ing of Jesus, the fountains of water that spring
up unto eternal life, and being filled with the
rivers of knowledge,^ shall be united with those
waters that are said to be above the heavens, and
which praise His name. And as many of us ^ as
praise Him shall not be carried about by the
revolution of the heaven, but shall be ever en-
gaged in the contemplation of the invisible things
of God, which are no longer understood by us
through the things which He hath made from
the creation of the world, but seeing, as it was
expressed by the true disciple of Jesus in these
words, " then face to face ; " ** and in these,
" When that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part will be done away." 9

CHAP. XXI.

The Scriptures which are current in the
Churches'" of God do not speak of "seven"


1 Ps. cxlviii. 4.

2 Cf. Plato in Phi£dro, p. 247.


3 Cf. 2 Cor. iv. 17, 18.
•* Cf. John xiv. 3.

5 rrpo? dxpois Tof? ovpavo'i^.

6 TTOTaMOi;? Twi' 0eu)p>)«aTwi'. .

7 For '6<Tov ye Boherellus proposes oo-oi ye, which is adopted m
the translation.

8 Cf. I Cor. xiii. 12.

9 Cf 1 Cor. xiii. 10. ^ „.
10 [Bishop Pearson, in his Exposition of the Creed, Art. l.v,

notes that " Origen for the most part speaks of the Church m the
plural number, ax kKiLK-r\ai.a.i." S.j


Chap. XXIIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


583


heavens, or of any definite number at all,' but
they do appear to teach the existence of " heav-
ens," whether that means the " spheres " of those
bodies which the Greeks call " planets," or some-
thing more mysterious. Celsus, too, agreeably to
the opinion of Plato,^ asserts that souls can
make their way to and from the earth through
the planets ; while Moses, our most ancient
prophet, says that a divine vision was presented
to the view of our prophet Jacob, ^ — a ladder
stretching to heaven, and the angels of God as-
cending and descending upon it, and the Lord
supported ■♦ upon its top, — obscurely pointing,
by this matter of the ladder, either to the same
truths which Plato had in view, or to something
greater than these. On this subject Philo has
composed a treatise which deserves the thought-
ful and intelligent investigation of all lovers of
truth.

CHAP. XXII.

After this, Celsus, desiring to exhibit his learn-
ing in his treatise against us, quotes also cer-
tain Persian mysteries, where he says : " These
things are obscurely hinted at in the accounts
of the Persians, and especially in the mysteries
of Mithras, which are celebrated amongst them.
For in the latter there is a representation of the
two heavenly revolutions, — of the movement,
viz., of the fixed s stars, and of that which takes
place among the planets, and of the passage of
the soul through these. The representation is
of the following nature : There is a ladder with
lofty gates,*" and on the top of it an eighth gate.
The first gate consists of lead, the second of
tin, the third of copper, the fourth of iron, the
fifth of a mixture of metals,'' the sixth of silver,
and the seventh of gold. The first gate they
assign to Saturn, indicating by the ' lead ' the
slowness of this star; the second to Venus, com-
paring her to the splendour and softness of tin ;
the third to Jupiter, being firm ^ and solid ; the
fourth to Mercury, for both Mercury and iron
are fit to endure all things, and are money-mak-
ing and laborious ; 9 the fifth to Mars, because,
being composed of a mixture of metals, it is
varied and unequal ; the sixth, of silver, to the
Moon ; the seventh, of gold, to the Sun, — thus
imitating the different colours of the two latter."
He next proceeds to examine the reason of the
stars being arranged in this order, which is sym-
bolized by the names of the rest of matter.'"


I FBi


— 2 Cor. xii. 2, and also Irenaeus, vol. i. p. 405.]

Jf. Plato in TimtTO, p. 42.
' Cf. Gen. xxviii. 12, 13.

' T^9 re aTrAai'ov?.

I K\iiia^ i^iTTvAo?. Boherellus conjectures tTrTairi/Ao?.

KfpaaTov I'Ofi.t'crjuaTo?.
' Tr)!/ \a\KoPdTrii' Ka'i o-reppa^.

I rXriixoi'a yap epyuiv a.iTai'Tu>v,Ka.\. XPI/^aTio-TJii", Kai 7roAuK^ir)Tov
I, Toi' re (Ti&y]pov Kai Tor 'Ep/Liiji'.
' Ty)% Aoin-ijs vAjjs. For uAtjj, another reading is ttuAtj^,


Musical reasons, moreover, are added or quoted
by the Persian theology ; and to these, again,
he strives to add a second explanation, con-
nected also with musical considerations. But it
seems to me, that to quote the language of Cel-
sus upon these matters would be absurd, and
similar to what he himself has done, when, in
his accusations against Christians and Jews, he
quoted, most inappropriately, not only the words
of Plato; but, dissatisfied even with these," he
adduced in addition the mysteries of the Persian
Mithras, and the explanation of them. Now,
whatever be the case with regard to these, —
whether the Persians and those who conduct the
mysteries of Mithras give false or true accounts
regarding them, — why did he select these for
quotation, rather than some of the other mys-
teries, with the explanation of them? For the
mysteries of Mithras do not appear to be more
famous among the Greeks than those of Eleusis,
or than those in ^gina, where individuals are
initiated in the rites of Hecate. But if he must
introduce barbarian mysteries with their expla-
nation, why not rather those of the Egyptians,
which are highly regarded by many,'^ or those
of the Cappadocians regarding the Comanian
Diana, or those of the Thracians, or even those
of the Romans themselves, who initiate the
noblest members of their senate ?'3 But if he
deemed it inappropriate to institute a compari-
son with any of these, because they furnished no
aid in the way of accusing Jews or Christians,
why did it not also appear to him inappropri-
ate to adduce the instance of the mysteries of
Mithras ?

CHAP. XXIII.

If one wished to obtain means for a pro-
founder contemplation of the entrance of souls
into divine things, not from the statements of
that very insignificant sect from which he quoted,
but from books — pardy those of the Jews, which
are read in their synagogues, and adopted by
Christians, and partly from those of Christians
alone — let him peruse, at the end of Ezekiel's
prophecies, the visions beheld by the prophet,
in which gates of different kinds are enumerated, '■♦
which obscurely refer to the different modes in
which divine souls enter into a better world ; '5
and let him peruse also, from the Apocalypse of
John, what is related of the city of God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and of its foundations and
gates."^ And if he is capable of finding out also
the road, which is indicated by symbols, of those
who will march on to divine things, let him read


" For ois cfceiVoi? apxercrCai, Spencer introduced info his text,
ovb' e/ceiVoi? apKelaSai, which has been adopted in the translation.

'2 (V oU TToAAo'l <7«/Xl'lil'0l'Tai.

^3 ano rr)<; (Tuy»cAijTou /3ouA^5.
'■' Cf. Ezek. xlviii.

»<> Cf. Rev. xxi.


5S4


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


the book of Moses entitled Numbers, and let j
him seek the help of one who is capable of initi-
ating him into the meaning of the narratives
concerning the encampments of the children of
Israel ; viz., of what sort those were which were
arranged towards the east, as was the case with
the first; and what, those towards the south-west
and south ; and what towards the sea ; and what
the last were, which were stationed towards the
north. For he will see that there is in the re-
spective places a meaning ' not to be lightly
treated, nor, as Celsus imagines, such as calls
only for silly and servile listeners : but he will
distinguish in the encampments certain things
relating to the numbers that are enumerated, and
which are specially adapted to each tribe, of
which the present does not appear to us to be
the proper time to speak. Let Celsus know,
moreover, as well as those who read his book,
that in no part of the genuine and divinely ac-
credited Scriptures are "seven" heavens men-
tioned ; neither do our prophets, nor the apostles
of Jesus, nor the Son of God Himself, repeat
anything which they borrowed from the Persians
or the Cabiri.

CHAP. XXIV.

After the instance borrowed from the Mithraic
mysteries, Celsus declares that he who would
investigate the Christian mysteries, along with
the aforesaid Persian, will, on comparing the two
together; and on unveiling the ritesof the Chris-
tians, see in this way the difi^rence between
them. • Now, wherever he was able to give the
names of the various sects, he was nothing loth
to quote those with which he thought himself
acquainted ; but when he ought most of all to
have done this, if* they were really known to him,
and to have informed us which was the sect that
makes use of the diagram he has drawn, he has
not done so. It seems to me, however, that it
is from some statements of a very insignificant
sect called Ophites,^ which he has misunder-
stood, that, in my opinion, he has partly bor-
rowed what he says about the diagram. ^ Now,
as we have always been animated by a love of
learning,-* we have fallen in with this diagram,
and we have found in it the representations of
men who, as Paul says, " creep into houses, and
lead captive silly women laden with sins, led
away with divers lusts ; ever learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth." 5
The diagram was, however, so destitute of all
credibility, that neither these easily deceived
-women, nor the most rustic class of men, nor
those who were ready to be led away by any


1 BiuiprifnaTa.

2 [Vol. i. p. 354. this series.] _ _ .

3 " Utinam exslaret!. Multum enim lucis procul dubio antiquis-
■simorum Patrum libris, priscae ecclesiae temporibus, et quibusdam
sacroE Scripturae locis, accederet." — Spenckr.

* Kara to </)tAo/xat^e^ y^/xcut'.
S Cf. 2 Tim. iii. 6, 7.


plausible pretender whatever, ever gave their
assent to the diagram. Nor, indeed, have we
ever met any individual, although we have visited
many parts of the earth, and have sought out all
those who anywhere made profession of knowl-
edge, that placed any faith in this diagram.


In this diagram were described ten circles,
distinct from each other, but united by one cir-
cle, which was said to be the soul of all things,
and was called " Leviathan." ^ This Leviathan,
the Jewish Scriptures say, whatever they mean
by the expression, was created by God for a
plaything ; 7 for we find in the Psalms : " In
wisdom hast Thou made all things : the earth is
full of Thy creatures ; so is this great and wide
sea. There go the ships ; small animals with
great ; there is this dragon, which Thou hast
formed to play therein."'^ Instead of the word
" dragon," the term " leviathan " is in the Hebrew.
This impious diagram, then, said of this leviathan,
which is so clearly depreciated by the Psalmist,
that it was the soul which had travelled through
all things ! We observed, also, in the diagram,
the being named " Behemoth," placed as it were
under the lowest circle. The inventor of this
accursed diagram had inscribed this leviathan at
its circumference and centre, thus placing its
name in two separate places. Moreover, Cel-
sus says that the diagram was " divided by a
thick black hne, and this Une he asserted was
called Gehenna, which is Tartarus." Now as
we found that Gehenna was mentioned in the
Gospel as a place of punishment, we searched
to see whether it is mentioned anywhere in the
ancient Scriptures, and especially because the
Jews too use the word. And we ascertained
that where the valley of the son of Ennom was
named in Scripture in the Hebrew, instead of
" valley," with fimdamentally the same meaning,
it was termed both the valley of Ennom and also
Geenna. And continuing our researches, we
find that what was termed " Geenna," or " the
valley of Ennom," was included in. the lot of
the tribe of Benjamin, in which Jerusalem also
was situated. And seeking to ascertain what
might be the inference from the heavenly Jeru-
salem belonging to the lot of Benjamin and the
valley of Ennom, we find a certain confirmation
of what is said regarding the place of punish-
ment, intended for the purification of such souls
as are to be purified by torments, agreeably to
the saying : " The Lord cometh like a refiner's
fire, and like fullers' soap : and He shall sit as a
refiner and purifier of silver and of gold." ^


Cf. note in Spencer's edition.


8 Cf. Ps. civ. 24-26.

9 Cf. Mai. iii. 2, 3.


Chap. XXVIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


585


CHAP. XXVI. to have occurred even among the heretics. In

It is in the precincts of Jerusalem, then, that ^^^ "5'''' P^^S^' ^e determines even the number

punishments will be inflicted upon those who 'ii^^ntioned by those who deliver over the seal,

undergo the process of purification,' who have 1 '^^ ^^^^ " ^^ seven angels, who attach themselves

received into the substance of their soul the i ^° '^°^^ ^^'^^^^. ^^ the soul of the dying body ; the


one party being named angels of light, the others
'archontics j ' " 7 and he asserts that the " ruler
of those named ' archontics ' is termed the ' ac-
cursed ' god." Then, laying hold of the ex-
pression, he assails, not without reason, those


elements of wickedness, which in a certain place
is figuratively termed " lead," and on that ac-
count iniquity is represented in Zechariah as
sitting upon a " talent of lead." 3 But the re-
marks which might be made on this topic are

neither to be made to all, nor to be uttered on | "'"^ venture to use such language ; and on that
the present occasion ; for it is not unattended j account we entertain a similar feeling of indig-
with danger to commit to writing the explana- | f^^.^'o^^ with those who censure such individuals,
tion of such subjects, seeing the multitude need i '^ '"deed there exist any who call the God of the
no further instruction than that which relates to 'Jews — who sends rain and thunder, and who is
the punishment of sinners ; while to ascend ' ^^""^ Creator of this world, and the God of Moses,
beyond this is not expedient, for the sake of ^J^^ ^^ ^^^ cosmogony which he records — an
those who are with difficulty restrained, even by I "accursed " divinity. Celsus, however, appears
fear of eternal punishment, from plunging into { ^? ^''^^^ '""^^ "^^ v\q\n, in employing these expres-
any degree of wickedness, and into the flood i ^^°"^' ^^^^ ^. ^(itional'^ object, but one of a most
of evils which result from sin.* The doctrine ii^ational kind, arising out of his hatred towards
of Geenna, then, is unknown both to the diagram I .^' which is so unlike a philosopher. For his
and to Celsus: for had it been otherwise, the^f^'"^ ^^^' ^^^^ th°^e who are unacquainted with
framers of the former would not have boasted I °"^' customs should, on perusing his treatise, at
of their pictures of animals and diagrams, as if °'"^^^ .^^^^^^ "^ ^^ if we called the noble Creator


the truth were represented by these ; nor would
Celsus, in his treatise against the Christians,
have introduced among the charges directed
against them statements which they never uttered,
instead of what was spoken by some who per-
haps are no longer in existence, but have alto-
gether disappeared, or been reduced to a very
kw individuals, and these easily counted. And
as it does not beseem those who profess the
doctrines of Plato to off'er a defence of Epicu-
rus and his impious opinions, so neither is it for
us to defend the diagram, or to refute the accu-
sations brought against it by Celsus. We may
therefore allow his charges oh these points to
pass as superfluous and useless,5 for we would
censure more severely than Celsus any who
should be carried away by such opinions.

CHAP. XXVII.

After the matter of the diagram, he brings
forward certain monstrous statements, in the
form of question and answer,*^ regarding what is
called by ecclesiastical writers the "seal," state-
ments which did not arise from imperfect in-
formation ; such as that " he who impresses the
seal is called father, and he who is sealed is
called young man and son ; " and who answers,
" I have been anointed with white ointment from
the tree of life," — things which we never heard


3 Cf. Zech. V. 7.

.^ [See Dean Plumptre's The S/>irits in Pris
Umversalism of Origen," p. 137, el seqq. S.]

aAAoKOTa ical a/iocj3atas ^iov6.%.


of this world an " accursed divinity." He ap-
pears to me, indeed, to have acted like those
Jews who, when Christianity began to be first
preached, scattered abroad false reports of the
Gospel, such as that " Christians offered up an
infant in sacrifice, and partook of its flesh ; "
and again, " that the professors of Christianity,
wishing to do "the 'works of darkness,' used to
extinguish the lights (in their meetings), and
each one to have sexual intercourse with any
woman whom he chanced to meet." These
calumnies have long exercised, although unrea-
sonably, an influence over the minds of very
many, leading those who are aliens to the Gos-
pel to believe that Chrisdans are men of such a
character; and even at the present day they
mislead some, and prevent them from entering
even into the simple intercourse of conversation
with those who are Christians.

CHAP. XXVIII.

With some such object as this in view does
Celsus seem to have been actuated, when he
alleged that Christians term the Creator an " ac-
cursed divinity ; " in order that he who believes
these charges of his against us, should, if possi-
ble, arise and exterminate the Christians as the
most impious of mankind. Confusing, more-
over, things that are distinct,? he states also the
reason why the God of the Mosaic cosmogony
is termed "accursed," asserting that "such is
his character, and worthy of execration in the


avK iv-^vu>uov aWa. . . .
pvpuv 6e rd irpdyfLaru,


3tyi/<jj^oi't'<rTaTor


586


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


opinion of those who so regard him, inasmuch
as he pronounced a curse upon the serpent, who
introduced the first human beings to the knowl-
edge of good and evil." Now he ought to have
known that those who have espoused the cause
of the serpent, because he gave good advice to
the first human beings, and who go far beyond
the Titans and Giants of fable, and are on this
account called Ophites, are so far from being
Christians, that they bring accusations against
Jesus to as great a degree as Celsus himself; and
they do not admit any one into their assembly ' |
until he has uttered maledictions against Jesus.
See, then, how irrational is the procedure of
Celsus, who, in his discourse against the Chris-
tians, represents as such those who will not even
listen to the name of Jesus, or omit even that
He was a wise man, or a person of virtuous ^
character ! What, then, could evince greater
folly or madness, not only on the part of those
who wish to derive their name from the serpent
as the author of good,^ but also on the part of
Celsus, who thinks that the accusations with
which the Ophites •* are charged, are chargeable
also against the Christians ! Long ago, indeed,
that Greek philosopher who preferred a state of
poverty,5 and who exhibited the pattern of a
happy life, showing that he was not excluded
from happiness although he was possessed of
nothing,^ termed himself a Cynic ; while these
impious wretches, as not being human beings,
whose enemy the serpent is, but as being ser-
pents, pride themselves upon being called Ophites
from the serpent, which is an animal most hos-
tile to and greatly dreaded by man, and boast
of one Euphrates ^ as the introducer of these
unhallowed opinions.

CHAP. XXIX.

In the next place, as if it were the Christians
whom he was calumniating, he continues his ac-
cusations against those who termed the God of
Moses and of his law an " accursed " divinity ;
and imagining that it is the Christians who so
speak, he expresses himself thus : " What could
be more foolish or insane than such senseless -
wisdom? For what blunder has the Jewish law-
giver committed? and why do you accept, by
means, as you say,'' of a certain allegorical and
typical method of interpretation, the cosmogony
which he gives, and the law of the Jews, while it
is with unwillingness, O most impious man, that


1 <jvvihpt.ov,

2 |u.€Tpios TO. rfir\.

3 ap;^T)yoO TtiiV KoXZiV,

4 'Ocj[)iii/oi: cf. Irenseus, vol. i. pp. 354-3S8.

5 Tr\v evTe\eiav ayanriaa^,

6 anb TTj? TTavT^Xov^ aKTrjfjLoavi'rj^.

7 " Euphraten hujiis hsresis auctorem solus Origenes tradil
Spencer; cf. note in Spencer's edition.

9 Boherellus proposes i^j/s for the textual reading 4>W^-


you give praise to the Creator of the world, who
promised to give them all things ; who promised
to multiply their race to the ends of the earth,
and to raise them up from the dead with the
same flesh and blood, and who gave inspiration ■°
to their prophets ; and, again, you slander Him !
When you feel the force of such considerations,
indeed, you acknowledge that you worship the
same God ; but when your teacher Jesus and
the Jewish Moses give contradictory decisions,"
you seek another (iod, instead of Him, and the
Father ! " Now, by such statements, this illus-
trious philosopher Celsus distinctly slanders the
Christians, asserting that, when the Jews press
them hard, they acknowledge the same God as
they do ; but that when Jesus legislates differ-
ently from Moses, they seek another god instead
of Him. Now, whether we are conversing with
the Jews, or are alone with ourselves, we know
of only one and the same God, whom the Jews
also worshipped of old time, and still profess to
worship as God, and we are guilty of no impiety
towards Him. We do no^ assert, however, that
God will raise men from the dead with the same
flesh and blood, as has been shown in the pre-
ceding pages ; for we do not maintain that the
natural '^ body, which is sown in corruption, and
in dishonour, and in weakness, will rise again
such as it was sown. On such subjects, how-
ever, we have spoken at adequate length in the
foregoing pages.

CHAP. XXX.

He next returns to the subject of the Seven
ruling Demons,'^ whose names are not found
among Christians, but who, I think, are accepted
by the Ophites. We found, indeed, that in the
diagram, which on their account we procured a
sight of, the same order was laid down as that
which Celsus has given. Celsus says that " the
goat was shaped like a lion," not mentioning the
name given him by those who are truly the most
impious of individuals ; whereas 7oe discovered
that He who is honoured in holy Scripture as
the angel of the Creator is called by this ac-
cursed diagram Michael the Lion-like. Again,
Celsus says that the " second in order is a bull ; "
whereas the diagram which we possessed made
him to be Suriel, the bull-like. Further, Celsus
termed the third " an amphibious sort of animal,
and one that hissed frightfully ; " while the dia-
gram described the third as Raphael, the ser-
pent-like. Moreover, Celsus asserted that the
" fourth had the form of an eagle ; " the dia-
gram representing him as Gabriel, the eagle-like.
Again, the "fifth," according to Celsus, "had


10 Kttt TOis 7rpo(|)T)Tais €/iffi'eoi'Ta.

" OTav 6e Ta evavTia 6 (rbs 6i5a(7(caAo5 'IrjaoO;, Koi i
(uiicrrj?, vonoflcT^.
12 kI,vxi.k6i'.
'^ Cf. Spencer's note, as quoted in Benedictine edition.


Chap. XXXIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


587


the countenance of a bear ; " and this, accord-
ing to the diagram, was Thauthabaoth,' the
bear-Hke. Celsus continues his account, that
the " sixth was described as having the face of a
dog ; " and him the diagram called Erataoth.
The " seventh," he adds, " had the countenance of
an ass, and was named Thaphabaoth or Onoel ; "
whereas we discovered that in the diagram he is
called Onoel, or Thartharaoth, being somewhat
asinine in appearance. We have thought it
proper to be exact in stating these matters, that
we might not appear to be ignorant of those
things which Celsus professed to know, but that
we Christians, knowing them better than he,
may demonstrate that these are not the words
of Christians, but of those who are altogether
alienated from salvation, and who neither ac-
knowledge Jesus as Saviour, nor God, nor
Teacher, nor Son of God.

CHAP. XXXI.

Moreover, if any one would wish to become
acquainted with the artifices of those sorcerers,
through which they desire to lead men away by
their teaching (as if they possessed the knowl-
edge of certain secret rites), but are not at all
successful in so doing, let him listen to the in-
struction which they receive after passing through
what is termed the " fence of wickedness," ^ —
gates which are subjected to the world of ruhng
spirits.^ (The following, then, is the manner in
which they proceed) : " I salute the one-formed •>
king, the bond of blindness, complete 5 oblivion,
the first power, preserved by the spirit of provi-
dence and by wisdom, from whom I am sent
forth pure, being already part of the light of the
son and of the father : grace be with me ; yea,
O father, let it be with me." They say also that
the beginnings of the Ogdoad^ are derived from
this. In the next place, they are taught to say
as follows, while passing through what they call
laldabaoth : "Thou, O first and seventh, who
art born to command with confidence, thou, O
laldabaoth, who art the rational ruler of a pure
mind, and a perfect work to son and father, bear-
ing the symbol of life in the character of a type,
and opening to the world the gate which thou
didst close against thy kingdom, I pass again in
freedom through thy realm. Let grace be with
me ; yea, O father, let it be with me." They
say, moreover, that the star Phcenon ^ is in sym-


' " Nescio, an haeresiiim Scriptores hiijiis Thauthabaoth, Erata-
oth, Thaphabaoth, Onoeles, et 'I'hartharaoth, usquam meminerint.
Hujus generis vocabula innumera invenies apiid Epiphan., Hter., 31,
quEc est Valentinianorum, pp. 165-171." — SfENCER.

^ <i>pa.yii.'ov Kaxias.

■* MO''OTpo7roi'.

5 \ri9-qi/ aTTipicTKfTrTov.

^ 'O-ySoaSo?. Cf. Tertullian, de Prcescript. ad7'. Harciicos,
cap. xxxiii. (vol. iii. p. 259), and other references in Benedictine ed.

7 'Pau'wi'. " Ea, quae Saturni Stella dicitur, '\>a.iviav que a
Grsecis dicitur." — Ciceko, de Nat Deorum, book ii. c. 20.


pathy ^ with the lion-like ruler. They next im-
agine that he who has passed through laldabaoth
and arrived at lao ought thus to speak : " Thou,

0 second lao, who shinest by night,'^ who art the
ruler of the secret mysteries of son and father,
first prince of death, and portion of the inno-
cent, bearing now mine own beard as symbol,

1 am ready to pass through thy realm, having
strengthened him who is born of thee by the
living word. Grace be with me ; father, let it
be with me." They next come to Sabaoth, to
whom they think the following should be ad-
dressed : " O governor of the fifth realm, power-
ful Sabaoth, defender of the law of thy creatures,
who are liberated by thy grace through the help
of a more powerful Pentad, '° admit me, seeing
the faultless symbol of their art, preserved by
the stamp of an image, a body liberated by a
Pentad. Let grace be with me, O father, let
grace be with me." And after Sabaoth they
come to Astaphseus, to whom they believe the fol-
lowing prayer should be offered : " O Astaph?eus,
ruler of the third gate, overseer of the first prin-
ciple of water, look upon me as one of thine
initiated," admit me who am purified with the
spirit of a virgin, thou who seest the essence of
the world. Let grace be with me, O father, let
grace be with me." After him comes Aloteus,
who is to be thus addressed : " O Aloceus, gov-
ernor of the second gate, let me pass, seeing I
bring to thee the symbol of thy mother, a grace
which is hidden by the powers of the realms.'^
Let grace be with me, O father, let it be with
me." And last of all they name Horaeiis, and
think that the following prayer ought to be offered
to him : " Thou who didst fearlessly overleap the
rampart of fire, O Horeeus, who didst obtain the
government of the first gate, let me pass, seeing
thou beholdest the symbol of thine own power,
sculptured '^ on the figure of the tree of life, and
formed after this image, in the likeness of inno-
cence. Let grace be with me, O father, let grace
be with me."

CHAP. XXXII.

The supposed great learning of Celsus, which
is composed, however, rather of curious trifles
and silly talk than anything else, has made us
touch upon these topics, from a wish to show to
every one who peruses his treatise and our reply,
that we have no lack of information on those
subjects, from which he takes occasion to calum-
niate the Christians, who neither are acquainted
with, nor concern themselves about, such mat-


8 (rv^iTraSeii'.

'-3 Trei/ToiSi ii/faTWTe'po.
'' y.v<jTi]v,

>2 ya.piv KpvnTOUfvrii' Svva^.t<Tiv ((-^vmoiv.

'3 For KaraXvOev Boherellus conjectures KaToyAi;<;)flti, which has
been adopted in the translation.


588


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


ters. For we, too, desired both to learn and set
forth these things, in order that sorcerers might
not, under pretext of knowing more than we,
delude those who are easily carried away by the
glitter' of names. And I could have given many
more illustrations to show that we are acquainted
with the opinions of these deluders,^ and that we
disown them, as being alien to ours, and impious,
and not in harmony with the doctrines of true
Christians, of which we are ready to make con-
fession even to the death. It must be noticed,
too, that those who have drawn up this array of
fictions, have, from neither understanding magic,
nor discriminating the meaning of holy Scrip-
ture, thrown everything into confusion ; seeing
that they have borrowed from magic the names
of laldabaoth, and Astaphaeus, and Horaeus, and
from the Hebrew Scriptures him who is termed in
Hebrew lao or Jah, and Sabaoth, and Adonaeus,
and Eloseus. Now the names taken from the
Scriptures are names of one and the same God ;
which, not being understood by the enemies of
God, as even themselves acknowledge, led to
their imagining that lao was a different God,
and Sabaoth another, and Adonaeus, whom the
Scriptures term Adonai, a third besides, and that
Eloaeus, whom the prophets name in Hebrew
Eloi, was also different.

CHAP. XXXIII.

Celsus next relates other fables, to the effect
that " certain persons return to the shapes of the
archontics,3 so that some are called lions, others
bulls, others dragons, or eagles, or bears, or
dogs." We found also in the diagram which we
possessed, and which Celsus called the " square
pattern," the statements "* made by these un-
happy beings concerning the gates of Paradise.
The flaming sword was depicted as the diameter
of a flaming circle, and as if mounting guard
over the tree of knowledge and of life. Celsus,
however, either would not or could not repeat
the harangues which, according to the fables
of these impious individuals, are represented as
spoken at each of the gates by those who pass
through them ; but this we have done in order
to show to Celsus and those who read his treatise,
that we know the depth of these unhallowed j
mysteries, 5 and that they are far removed from
the worship which Christians offer up to God. [

CHAP. XXXIV,

After finishing the foregoing, and those analo-
gous matters which we ourselves have added,


3 ei5 Ta? apxavTiKOLi; fj.op<f>d^.

* Guietus thinks that some word has been omitted here,
which seems very probable.

5 TO T^s axeAccTTou TeAeT^s wepas.


^'<|)0S,


Celsus continues as follows : " They continue to
heap together one thing after another, — dis-
courses of prophets, and circles upon circles,
and effluents^ from an earthly church, and from
circumcision ; and a power flowing from one
Prunicos, a virgin and a living soul ; and a
heaven slain in order to live, and an earth
slaughtered by the sword, and many put to
death that they may live, and death ceasing in
the world, when the sin of the world is dead ;
and, again, a narrow way, and gates that open
spontaneously. And in all their writings (is
mention made) of the tree of life, and a resur-
rection of the flesh by means ^ of the 'tree,'
because, I imagine, their teacher was nailed to
a cross, and was a carpenter by craft ; so that if
he had chanced to have been cast from a preci-
pice, or thrust into a pit, or suffocated by hang-
ing, or had been a leather-cutter, or stone-cutter,
or worker in iron, there would have been (in-
vented) a precipice of life beyond the heavens,
or a pit of resurrection, or a cord of immortality,
or a blessed stone, or an iron of love, or a sacred
leather ! Now what old woman would not be
ashamed to utter such things in a whisper, even
when making stories to lull an infant to sleep ? "
In using such language as this, Celsus appears to
me to confuse together matters which he has
imperfectly heard. For it seems likely that, even
supposing that he had heard a few words trace-
able to some existing heresy, he did not clearly
understand the meaning intended to be con-
veyed ; but heaping the words together, he
wished to show before those who knew nothing
either of our opinions or of those of the heretics,
that he was acquainted with all the doctrines of
the Christians. And this is evident also from the
foregoing words.

CHAP. XXXV,

It is our practice, indeed, to make use of the
words of the prophets, who demonstrate that
Jesus is the Christ predicted by them, and who
show from the prophetic writings the events in
the Gospels regarding Jesus have been fulfilled.
But when Celsus speaks of " circles upon cir-
cles," (he perhaps borrowed the expression)
from the aforementioned heresy, which includes
in one circle (which they call the soul of all
things, and Leviathan) the seven circles of ar-
chontic demons, or perhaps it arises from misun-
derstanding the preacher, when he says : " The
wind goeth in a circle of circles, and returneth
again upon its circles." ^ The expression, too,
" effluents of an earthly church and of circum-
cision," was probably taken from the fact that
the church on earth was called by some an efflu-


° avoppoiai.

7 cLTTO ^uAov,

8 Eccles. i. 6 (literally rendered). [Modern science demonstrates
this physical truth.J


Chap. XXXVIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


589


ent from a heavenly church and a better world ;
and that the circumcision described in the law
was a symbol of the circumcision performed
there, in a certain place set apart for purifica-
tion. The adherents of Valentinus, moreover,
in keeping with their system of error,' give the
name of Prunicos to a certain kind of wisdom,
of which they would have the woman afflicted
with the twelve years' issue of blood to be the
symbol ; so that Celsus, who confuses together I
all sorts of opinions — Greek, Barbarian, and
Heretical — having heard of her, asserted that I
it was a power flowing forth from one Prunicos,
a virgin. The " living soul," again, is perhaps ,
mysteriously referred by some of the followers
of Valentinus to the being whom they term the
psychic^ creator of the world ; or perhaps, in
I contradistinction to a " dead " soul, the " living " |
i soul is termed by some, not inelegantly,^ the ^
' soul of " him who is saved." I know nothing,
I however, of a " heaven which is said to be slain,"
I or of an " earth slaughtered by the sword," or
of many persons slain in order that they might
live ; for it is not unlikely that these were coined
by Celsus out of his own brain.

CHAP, xxxvi.

We would say, moreover, that death ceases in
the world when the sin of the world dies, refer-
ring the saying to the mystical words of the
apostle, which run as follows : " When He shall
have put all enemies under His feet, then the
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death."-*
And also : " When this corruptible shall have \
put on incorruption, then shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written. Death is svval- |
lowed up in victory." 5 The " strait descent,"^,
again, may perhaps be referred by those who
hold the doctrine of transmigration of souls to
that view of things. And it is not incredible
that the gates which are said to open spontane-
ously are referred obscurely by some to the
words, '• Open to me the gates of righteousness,
that I may go into them, and praise the Lord ;
this gate of the Lord, into it the righteous shall
enter ; " 7 and again, to what is said in the ninth
psalm, " Thou that liftest me up from the gates
of death, that I may show forth all Thy praise
in the gates of the daughter of Zion."*^ The
Scripture further gives the name of " gates of
death " to those sins which lead to destruction,
as it terms, on the contrary, good actions the
" gates of Zion." So also " the gates of right-


eousness," which is an equivalent expression to
"the gates of virtue," and these are ready to be
opened to him who follows after virtuous pur-
suits. The subject of the " tree of life " will be
more appropriately explained when we interpret
the statements in the book of Genesis regarding
the paradise planted by God. Celsus, moreover,
has often mocked at the subject of a resurrec-
tion,— a doctrine which he did not compre-
hend ; and on the present occasion, not satisfied
with what he has formerly said, he adds, " And
there is said to be a resurrection of the flesh by
means of the tree ; " not understanding, I think,
the symbolical expression, that " through the tree
came death, and through the tree comes life," 9
because death was in Adam, and life in Christ.
He next scoffs at the " tree," assailing it on two
grounds, and saying, " For this reason is the
tree introduced, either because our teacher was
nailed to a cross, or because he was a carpenter
by trade ; " not observing that the tree of life is
mentioned in the Mosaic writings, and being
blind also to this, that in none of the Gospels
current in the Churches '° is Jesus Himself ever
described as being a carpenter."

CHAP. XXXVII.

Celsus, moreover, thinks that we have invented
this "tree of life" to give an allegorical meaning
to the cross ; and in consequence of his error
upon this point, he adds : " If he had happened
to be cast down a precipice, or shoved into a
pit, or suffocated by hanging, there would have
been invented a precipice of life far beyond the
heavens, or a pit of resurrection, or a cord of
immortality." And again : "If the ' tree of life'
were an invention, because he — Jesus — (is re-
ported) to have been a carpenter, it would follow
that if he had been a leather-cutter, something
would have been said about holy leather ; or had
he been a stone-cutter, about a blessed stone ;
or if a worker in iron, about an iron of love."
Now, who does not see at once "^ the paltry na-
ture of his charge, in thus calumniating men
whom he professed to convert on the ground of
their being deceived ? And after these remarks,
he goes on to speak in a way quite in harmony
with the tone of those who have invented the
fictions of lion-like, and ass-headed, and serpent-
like ruling angels,'3 and other similar absurdities,
but which does not affect those who belong to
the Church. Of a truth, even a drunken old
woman would be ashamed to chaunt or whisper


* Kara T'r]v 7reTTKavT}fxevT}i' eauTwi' (7o0ti

3 OVK ayevvio<;.

* Cf. I Cor. XV. 25, 26.

s Cf. I Cor. XV. 54; cf. Hos. xiii. 14.

6 Kadofiov (Trevriv.

' Cf. Ps cxviii. 19, 20.

8 Cf. Ps. ix. 13. 14.


9 Cf. 1 Cor. XV. 22

'° [See note supra

" Cf., however, M

value, have the reading

ter's son, the son of .Mar>- ?

gelist. See .'Mford, in loc.

'3 o.(>\(iV7a.%.


\ 22.

■prn, p. 582. S.l
r, Mark vi. 3. [;
ading here (Mark


Some Mss., though not of much
■ ' Is "ot this the carpen-

O risen seems to have so read the evan-

S.j


590


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


to an infant, in order to lull him to sleep, any
such fables as those have done who invented the
beings with asses' heads, and the harangues, so
to speak, which are delivered at each of the
gates. But Celsus is not acquainted with the
doctrines of the members of the Church, which
very few have been able to comprehend, even
of those who have devoted all their lives, in
conformity with the command of Jesus, to the
searching of the Scriptures, and have laboured
to investigate the meaning of the sacred books,
to a greater degree than Greek philosophers in
their efforts to attain a so-called wisdom.

CHAP. XXXVIII.

Our noble (friend), moreover, not satisfied
with the objections which he has drawn from the
diagram, desires, in order to strengthen his ac-
cusations against us, who have nothing m com-
mon with it, to introduce certain other charges,
which he adduces from the same (heretics), but
yet as if they were from a different source. His
words are : " And that is not the least of their
marvels, for there are between the upper circles
— those that are above the heavens — certain
inscriptions of which ,they give the interpreta-
tion, and among others two words especially, 'a
greater and a less,' which they refer to Father
and Son." ■ Now, in the diagram referred to,
we found the greater and the lesser circle, upon
the diameter of which was inscribed " Father and
Son ; " and between the greater circle (in which
the lesser was contained) and another^ com-
posed of two circles, — the outer one of which
was yellow, and the inner blue, — a barrier in-
scribed in the shape of a hatchet. And above
it, a short circle, close to the greater of the two
former, having the inscription " Love ; " and lower
down, one touching the same circle, with the word
"Life." And on the second 'circle, which was
intertwined with and included two other circles,
another figure, like a rhomboid, (entided) "The
foresight of wisdom." And within their point
of common section was "The nature of wisdom."
And above their point of common section was a
circle, on which was inscribed " Knowledge ; "
and lower down another, on which was the in-
scription, " Understanding." We have introduced
these matters into our reply to Celsus, to show
to our readers that we know better than he, and
not by mere report, those things, even although
we also disapprove of them. Moreover, if those
who pride themselves upon such matters profess
also a kind of magic and sorcery, — which, in
their opinion, is the summit of wisdom, — we,


' a.^Ka re, Kai Suo oitto, ^letfov re /cai fxiKporepov vioO koi
Trarpd?.

2 For dAAov?, the textual reading, Gelenius, with the approval of
Boherellus, proposes »cai aAAou o-vy/cei^ei'ou, which has been followed
in the translation.


on the other hand, make no affirmation about
it, seeing we never have discovered anything of
the kind. Let Celsus, however, who has been
already often convicted of false witness and irra-
tional accusations, see whether he is not guilty
of falsehood in these also, or whether he has not
extracted and introduced into his treatise, state-
ments taken from the writings of those who are
foreigners and strangers to our Christian faith.

CHAP. XXXIX.

In the next place, speaking of those who em-
ploy the arts of magic and sorcery, and who
invoke the barbarous names of demons, he re-
marks that such persons act like those who, in
reference to the same things,^ perform marvels
before those who are ignorant that the names of
demons among the Greeks are different from
what they are among the Scythians. He then
quotes a passage from Herodotus, stating that
" Apollo is called Gongosyrus by the Scythians ;
Poseidon, Thagimasada ; Aphrodite, Argimpa-
san ; Hestia, Tabiti." * Now, he who has the
capacity can inquire whether in these matters
Celsus and Herodotus are not both wrong ; for
the Scythians do not understand the same thing
as the Greeks, in what relates to those beings
which are deemed to be gods. For how is it
credible 5 that Apollo should be called Gongosy-
rus by the Scythians? I do not suppose that
Gongosyrus, when transferred into the Greek
language, yields the same etymology as Apollo ;
or that Apollo, in the dialect of the Scythians,
has the signification of Gongosyrus. Nor has any
such assertion hitherto been made regarding the
other names,*" for the Greeks took occasion from
different circumstances and etymologies to give
to those who are by them deemed gods the
names which they bear ; and the Scythians, again,
from another set of circumstances ; and the same
also was the case with the Persians, or Indians,
or Ethiopians, or Libyans, or with those who de-
light to bestow names (from fancy), and who do
not abide by the just and pure idea of the Cre-
ator of all things. Enough, however, has been
said by us in the preceding pages, where we
wished to demonstrate that Sabaoth and Zeus
were not the same deity, and where also we made
some remarks, derived from the holy Scriptures,
regarding the different dialects. We willingly,
then, pass by these points, on which Celsus would
make us repeat ourselves. In the next place,
again, mixing up together matters which belong
to magic and sorcery, and referring them per-
haps to no one, — because of the non-existence


■5 eTTi Tois auTOi? i/rroKetfxecots.
* Cf. Herodot., iv. 59.

5 TTOia yap Tn.dav6Tr)^.

6 For the textual reading, ovttu) Se ovSe nepX tmv Aoittmi' ravTOV
Ti ipel, Boherellus conjectures eiprjxai, which has been adopted in
the translation.


Chap. XLII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


591


of any who practise magic under pretence of a
worship of this character, — and yet, perhaps,
having in view some who do employ such prac-
tices in the presence of the simple (that they
may have the appearance of acting by divine
power), he adds: "What need to number up
all those who have taught methods of purifica-
tion, or expiatory hymns, or spells for averting
evil, or (the making of) images, or resemblances
of demons, or the various sorts of antidotes
against poison (to be found) ' in clothes, or in
numbers, or stones, or plants, or roots, or gen-
erally in all kinds of things?" In respect to
these matters, reason does not require us to offer
any defence, since we are not liable in the slight-
est degree to suspicions of such a nature.

CHAP. XL.

After these things, Celsus appears to me to
act like those who, in their intense hatred of the
Christians, maintain, in the presence of those
who are utterly ignorant of the Christian faith,
that they have actually ascertained that Chris-
tians devour the flesh of infants, and give them-
selves without restraint to sexual intercourse with
their women. Now, as these statements have
been condemned as falsehoods invented against
the Christians, and this admission made by the
multitude and those altogether aliens to our
faith ; so would the following statements of Cel-
sus be found to be calumnies invented against
the Christians, where he says that " he has seen
in the hands of certain presbyters belonging to
our faith ^ barbarous books, containing the names
and marvellous doings of demons ; " asserting
I further, that " these presbyters of our faith pro-
' fessed to do no good, but all that was calculated
to injure human beings." Would, indeed, that
all that is said by Celsus against the Christians
was of such a nature as to be refuted by the
multitude, who have ascertained by experience
that such things are untrue, seeing that most of
them have lived as neighbours with the Chris-
tians, and have not even heard of the existence
of any such alleged practices !


In the next place, as if he had forgotten that
it was his object to write against the Christians,
he says that, " having become acquainted with
one Dionysius, an Egyptian musician, the latter
told him, with respect to magic arts, that it was
only over the uneducated and men of corrupt
morals that they had any power, while on phil-
osophers they were unable to produce any effect,
because they were careful to observe a healthy


' For aicr^r)Tu)»', Lommatzsch adopts the conjecture of Boherel.
lus, approved by Ruaeus, k(jQr\Tu>v,
2 bofi)?.


manner of life." If, now, it had been our pur-
pose to treat of magic, we could have added a
few remarks in addition to what we have already
said on this topic ; but since it is only the more
important matters which we have to notice in
answer to Celsus, we shall say of magic, that any
one who chooses to inquire whether philosophers
were ever led captive by it or not, can read what
has been written by Moiragenes regarding the
memoirs of the magician and philosopher Apol-
lonius of Tyana, in which this individual, who is
not a Christian, but a philosopher, asserts that
some philosophers of no mean note were won
over by the magic power possessed by Apollo-
nius, and resorted to him as a sorcerer ; and
among these, I think, he especially mentioned
Euphrates and a certain Epicurean. Now we,
on the other hand, affirm, and have learned by
experience, that they who worship the God of
all things in conformity with the Christianity
which comes by Jesus, and who live according
to His Gospel, using night and day, continuously
and becomingly, the prescribed prayers, are not
carried away either by magic or demons. For
verily " the angel of the Lord encamps round
about them that fear Him, and delivereth them "3
from all evil ; and the angels of the little ones
in the Church, who are appointed to watch over
them, are said always to behold the face of their
Father who is in heaven,'' whatever be the mean-
ing of " face " or of " behold."

CHAP. XLII.

After these matters, Celsus brings the follow-
ing charges against us from another quarter :
" Certain most impious errors," he says, " are
committed by them, due to their extreme igno-
rance, in which they have wandered away from
the meaning of the divine enigmas, creating an
adversary to God, the devil, and naming him in
the Hebrew tongue, Satan. Now, of a truth,
such statements are altogether of mortal inven-
tion,s and not even proper to be repeated, viz.,
that the mighty God, in His desire to confer
good upon men, has yet one counterworking
Him, and is helpless. The Son of God, it follows,
is vanquished by the devil ; and being punished
by him, teaches us also to despise the punish-
ments which he inflicts, telling us beforehand
that Satan, after appearing to men as He Him-
self had done, will exhibit great and mar\ellous
works, claiming for himself the glory of God,
but that those who wish to keep him at a dis-
tance ought to pay no attention to these works
of Satan, but to place their faith in Him alone.
Such statements are manifestly the words of a


3 Cf. Ps. xxxiy. 7.
< Cf. Malt, xviii. lo.

5 8iT)To. Instead of this reading, Guietus conjectures itttikto,
vhich is approved of by Ruxus.


592


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


deluder, planning and manoeuvring against those
who are opposed to his views, and who rank
themselves against them." In the next place,
desiring to point out the " enigmas," our mis-
takes regarding which lead to the introduction
of our views concerning Satan, he continues :
" The ancients allude obscurely to a certain war
among the gods, Heraclitus speaking thus of it :
' If one must say that there is a general war and
discord, and that all things are done and admin-
istered in strife.' Pherecydes, again, who is
much older than Heraclitu§, relates a myth of
one army drawn up in hostile array against
another, and names Kronos as the leader of the
one, and Ophioneus of the other, and recounts
their challenges and struggles, and mentions that
agreements were entered into between them, to
the end that whichever party should fall into the
Ocean ' should be held as vanquished, while
those who had expelled and conquered them
should have possession of heaven. The mys-
teries relating to the Titans and Giants also had
some such (symbolical) meaning, as well as the
Egyptian mysteries of Typhon, and Horus, and
Osiris." After having made such statements,
and not having got over the difficulty ^ as to the
way in which these accounts contain a higher
view of things, while our accounts are erroneous
copies of them, he continues his abuse of us,
remarking that " these are not like the stories
which are related of a devil, or demon, or, as he
remarks with more truth, of a man who is an
impostor, who wishes to establish an opposite
doctrine." And in the same way he under-
stands Homer, as if he referred obscurely to
matters similar to those mentioned by Hera-
clitus, and Pherecydes, and the originators of
the mysteries about the Titans and Giants, in
those words which Hephaestus addresses to Hera,
as follows : —

" Once in your cause I felt his matchless might,
Hurled headlong downward from the ethereal height." ^

And in those of Zeus to Hera : —

" Hast thou forgot, when, bound and fix'd on high.
From the vast concave of the spangled sky,
I hung thee trembling in a golden chain,
And all the raging gods opposed in vain?
Headlong I hurled them from the Olympian hall,
Stunn'd in the whirl, and breathless with the fall."'*

Interpreting, moreover, the words of Homer, he
adds : " The words of Zeus addressed to Hera
are the words of God addressed to matter ; and
the words addressed to matter obscurely signify
that the matter which at the beginning was in a
state of discord (with God), was taken by Him,
and bound together and arranged under laws,


which may be analogically compared to chains ;5
and that by way of chastising the demons who
create disorder in it, he hurls them down head-
long to this lower world." These words of
Homer, he alleges, were so understood by
Pherecydes, when he said that beneath that
region is the region of Tartarus, which is guarded
by the Harpies and Tempest, daughters of
Boreas, and to which Zeus banishes any one of
the gods who becomes disorderly. With the
same ideas also are closely connected the peplos
of Athena, which is beheld by all in the proces-
sion of the Panatheticea. For it is manifest
from this, he continues, that a motherless and
unsullied demon ^ has the mastery over the
daring of the Giants. While accepting, more-
over, the fictions of the Greeks, he continues to
heap against us such accusations as the follow-
ing, viz., that " the Son of God is punished by
the devil, and teaches us that we also, when
punished by him, ought to endure it. Now these
statements are altogether ridiculous. For it is
the devil, I think, who ought rather to be pun-
ished, and those human beings who are calum-
niated by him ought not to be threatened with
chastisement."

CHAP. XLIII.

Mark now, whether he who charges us with
having committed errors of the most impious
kind, and with having wandered away from the
(true meaning) of the divine enigmas, is not
himself clearly in error, from not observing that
in the writings of Moses, which are much older
not merely than Heraclitus and Pherecydes, but
even than Homer, mention is made of this
wicked one, and of his having fallen from heaven.
For the serpent ^ — from whom the Ophioneus
spoken of by Pherecydes is derived — having
become the cause of man's expulsion from the
divine Paradise, obscurely shadows forth some-
thing similar, having deceived the woman ^ by a
promise of divinity and of greater blessings;
and her example is said to have been followed
also by the man. And, further, who else could
the destroying angel mentioned in the Exodus
of Moses 9 be, than he who was the author of
destruction to them that obeyed him, and did
not withstand his wicked deeds, nor struggle
against them? Moreover (the goat), which in
t the book of Leviticus '° is sent away (into the
I wilderness), and which in the Hebrew language
I is named Azazel, was none other than this ; and
it was necessary to send it away into the desert,
and to treat it as an expiatory sacrifice, because


' '0,Y<\v6v, i.e., in Oceanum, Hesych.; 'fiy^v, lu/ceai'ds, Suid.

2 Kat jU-T) 7rapa/xvOr)TdjU€vo?.

3 Cf. Iliad, i. 590 (Pope's translation).

* Cf, Iliad, XV. 18-24 (Pope's translation).


5 ot/aAoYiais Ticrl <TvveSri<7e Ka\ e/cdo'fujo'ei'

6 rtutJTup Ti? (cat oypoi'TOS Saiixuv,

7 Cf, Gen. iii.

8 TO drfAvTcpov yeVos.

9 Cf. Ex, xii. 23.
10 Cf. Lev. xvi. 8.


Chap. XLV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


593


on it the lot fell. For all who belong to the
"worse" part, on account of their wickedness,
being opposed to those who are God's heritage,
are deserted by God.' Nay, with respect to the
sons of Belial in the book of JudgeSj^^ whose
sons are they said to be, save his, on account
of their wickedness? And besides all these
instances, in the book of Job, which is older
even than Moses hiiTiself,^ the devil is distinctly
described as presenting himself before (iod,-*
and asking for power against Job, that he might
involve him in trials 5 of the most painful kind ;
the first of which consisted in the loss of all
his goods and of his children, and the second
in afflicting the whole body of Job with the so-
called disease of elephantiasis.*" I pass by what
might be quoted from the Gospels regarding the
devil who tempted the Saviour, that I may not
appear to quote in reply to Celsus from more
recent writings on this question. In the last
(chapter) ^ also of Job, in which the Lord
utters to Job amid tempest and clouds what is
recorded in the book which bears his name,
there are not a few things referring to the ser-
pent. I have not yet mentioned the passages
in Ezekiel,** where he speaks, as it were, of
Pharaoh, or Nebuchadnezzar, or the prince of
Tyre ; or those in Isaiah,^ where lament is made
for the king of Babylon, from which not a little
might be learned concerning evil, as to the nature
of its origin and generation, and as to how it de-
rived its existence from some who had lost their
wings, '° and who had followed him who was the
first to lose his own.

CHAP. XLIV.

For it is impossible that the good which is
the result of accident, or of communication,
should be like that good which comes by nature ;
and yet the former will never be lost by him
who, so to speak, partakes of the " living "
bread with a view to his own preservation. But
if it should fail any one, it must be through his
own fault, in being slothful to partake of this
1 " living bread " and " genuine drink," by means
' of which the wings, nourished and watered, are
fitted for their purpose, even according to the
saying of Solomon, the wisest of men, concern-
ing the truly rich man, that " he made to
himself wings like an eagle, and returns to the
house of his patron." For it became God, who


' evai'Tioi OfTf? to"? otto tow icAijpou ToC ©eoO, «pi7Hoi eiai ft)eoO.

* rjudg. xix. 22. S.]

3 [See "the elaborate article on the book of Job, by Canon Cook,
n Dr. Smith's Dictionary of the Bible, vol. i pp. 1087-1100. S.].
« Cf. Jobi.,ii.
5 TTepiffTao-eo-i.

* avpiu) iM<^o.vri..
' Cf. Job xl. 20.

8 Cf. Ezek. xxxii. 1-28.

9 Isa. xiv. 4 sqq.

'° JTTepoppvTjo-ai'TMi'. Cf. supra, bk. iv. cap. xl. p. 516.
" Cf. Prov. xxiii. 5. [See Neander's History 0/ the Church,
'ol. ii. p. 299, with Rose's note. S.]


knows how to turn to proper account even those
who in their wickedness have apostatized from
Him, to place wickedness of this sort in some
part of the universe, and to appoint a training-
school of virtue, wherein those must exercise
themselves who would desire to recover in a
" lawful manner " '^ the possession (which they
had lost) ; in order that being tested, like gold
in the fire, by the wickedness of these, and
having exerted themselves to the utmost to pre-
vent anything base injuring their rational nature,
they may appear deserving of an ascent to
divine things, and may be elevated by the \^^ord
to the blessedness which is above all things, and
so to speak, to the very summit of goodness.
Now he who in the Hebrew language is named
Satan, and by some Satanas — as being more in
conformity with the genius of the Greek lan-
guage — signifies, when translated • into Greek,
"adversary." But every one who prefers vice
and a vicious life, is (because acting in a manner
contrary to virtue) Satanas, that is, an "adver-
sary" to the Son of God, who is righteousness,
and truth, and wisdom. '^ With more propriety,
however, is he called " adversary," who was the
first among those that were living a peaceful
and happy life to lose his wings, and to fall
from blessedness ; he who, according to Ezekiel,
walked faultlessly in all his ways, " until iniquity
was found in him," '^ and who being the "seal
of resemblance " and the " crown of beauty " in
the paradise of God, being filled as it were with
good things, fell into destruction, in accordance
with the word which said to him in a mystic
sense : " Thou hast fallen into destruction, and
shalt not abide for ever." '5 We have ventured
somewhat rashly to make these few remarks,
although in so doing we have added nothing of
importance to this treatise. If any one, how-
ever, who has leisure for the examination of
the sacred writings, should collect together from
all sources and form into one body of doctrine
what is recorded concerning the origin of evil,
and the manner of its dissolution, he would see
that the views of Moses and the prophets re-
garding Satan had not been even dreamed of
either by Celsus or any one of those whose soul
had been dragged down, and torn away from
God, and from right views of Him, and from
His word, by this wicked demon.

CH.\P. XLV.

But since Celsus rejects the statements con-
cerning Antichrist, as it is termed, having neither
read what is said of him in the book of Daniel ""


"2 Cf. 2 Tim. ii. 5.
'3 Cf. I Cor. i. 30.
U Cf. Ezek. xxviii. IS.
•5 Cf. Ezek. xxviii. 19.
"> Cf. Dan. viii. 23.


594


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


nor in the writings of Paul,' nor what the Saviour
in the Gospels ^ has predicted about his coming,
we must make a few remarks upon this subject
also ; because, " as faces do not resemble faces," ^
so also neither do men's " hearts " resemble one
another. It is certain, then, that there will be
diversities amongst the hearts of men, — those
which are inclined to virtue not being all mod-
elled and shaped towards it in the same or like
degree ; while others, through neglect of virtue,
rush to the opposite extreme. And amongst the
latter are some in whom evil is deeply engrained,
and others in whom it is less deeply rooted.
Where is the absurdity, then, in holding that
there exist among men, so to speak, two ex-
tremes,-* — the one of virtue, and the other of its
opposite ; so that the perfection of virtue dwells
in the man who realizes the ideal given in Jesus,
from whom there flowed to the human race so
great a conversion, and healing, and ameliora-
tion, while the opposite extreme is in the man
who embodies the notion of him that is named
Antichrist? For God, comprehending all things
by means of His foreknowledge, and foreseeing
what consequences would result from both of
these, wished to make these known to mankind
by His prophets, that those who understand
their words might be familiarized with the good,
and be on their guard against its opposite. It
was proper, moreover, that the one of these
extremes, and the best of the two, should be
styled the Son of God, on account of His pre-
eminence ; and the other, who is diametrically
opposite, be termed the son of the wicked de-
mon, and of Satan, and of the devil. And, in
the next place, since evil is specially character-
ized by its diffusion, and attains its greatest
height when it simulates the appearance of the
good, for that reason are signs, and marvels, and
lying miracles found to accompany evil, through
the co-operation of its father the devil. For,
far surpassing the help which these demons give
to jugglers (who deceive men for the basest of
purposes), is the aid which the devil himself
affords in order to deceive the human race.
Paul, indeed, speaks of him who is called Anti-
christ, describing, though with a certain reserve, 5
both the manner, and time, and cause of his
coming to the human race. And notice whether
his language on this subject is not most be-
coming, and undeserving of being treated with
even the slightest degree of ridicule.

CHAP. XLVI.

It is thus that the apostle expresses himself:
" We beseech you, brethren, by the coming of


' Cf. 2 Thess. ii. 3, 4.

2 Cf. Matt. xxiv. 4, 5.

3 Cf. Prov. xxvii. 19.

^ OLKpOTTJTa?.

5 /ieTo Ttco! eiriKpui/(«a)S.


our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering
together unto Him, that ye be not soon shaken
in mind, or be troubled, neither by word, nor by
spirit, nor by letter as from us, as that the day
of the Lord is at hand. Let no man deceive
you by any means : for that day shall ?iot come,
except there come a falling away first, and that
man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition ;
who opposeth and exalteth himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped ; so that
he sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. Remember ye not, that, when
I was yet with you, I told you these things?
And now ye know what withholdeth, that he
might be revealed in his time. For the mystery
of iniquity doth already work : only he who now
letteth 7vill let, until he be taken out of the way.
And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of His
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of
His coming : even him, whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with all power, and signs,
and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness
of unrighteousness in them that perish ; because
they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved. And for this cause God shall
send them strong delusion, that they should be-
lieve a lie ; that they all might be damned who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in un-
righteousness." ^ To explain each particular

j here referred to does not belong to our present
purpose. The prophecy also regarding Anti-
christ is stated in the book of Daniel, and is
fitted to make an intelligent and candid reader
admire the words as truly divine and prophetic ;
for in them are mentioned the things relating to
the coming kingdom, beginning with the times

j of Daniel, and continuing to the destruction of
the world. And any one who chooses may read
it. Observe, however, whether the prophecy
regarding Antichrist be not as follows : " And at
the latter time of their kingdom, when their sins
are coming to the full, there shall arise a king,
bold in countenance, and understanding riddles.
And his power shall be great, and he shall de-
stroy wonderfully, and prosper, and practise;
and shall destroy mighty men, and the holy peo-
ple. And the yoke of his chain shall prosper :
there is craft in his hand, and he shall magnify
himself in his heart, and by craft shall destroy
many ; and he shall stand up for the destruction
of many, and shall crush them as eggs in his
hand." ^ What is stated by Paul in the words
quoted from him, where he says, " so that he
sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God," ^ is in Daniel referred to in the
following fashion : " And on the temple shall be


6 2 Thess. ii. 1-12.

7 Cf. Dan. viii. 23-25 (LXX ).

8 Cf. 2 Thess. ii. 4.


Chap. XLIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


595


the abomination of desolations, and at the end
of the time an end shall be put to the desola-
tion." ' So many, out of a greater number of
passages, have I thought it right to adduce, that
the hearer may understand in some slight degree
the meaning of holy Scripture, when it gives us
information concerning the devil and Antichrist ;
and being satisfied with what we have quoted for
this purpose, let us look at another of the charges
of Celsus, and reply to it as we best may.

CHAP. XLVII.

Celsus, after what has been said, goes on as
follows : " I can tell how the very thing occurred,
viz., that they should call him ' Son of God.'
Men of ancient times termed this world, as being
born of God, both his child and his son.^ Both
the one and other ' Son of God,' then, gready
resembled each other." He is therefore of opin-
ion that we employed the expression " Son of
God," having perverted ^ what is said of the
world, as being born of God, and being His
'* Son," and " a God." For he was unable so to
consider the times of Moses and the prophets,
as to see that the Jewish prophets predicted gen-
erally that there was a " Son of God " long before
the Greeks and those men of ancient time of
whom Celsus speaks. Nay, he would not even
quote the passage in the letters of Plato, to which
we referred in the preceding pages, concerning
Him who so beautifully arranged this world, as
being the Son of God ; lest he too should be
compelled by Plato, whom he often mentions
with respect, to admit that the architect of this
world is the Son of God, and that His Father is
the first God and Sovereign Ruler over all things.^
Nor is it at all wonderful if we maintain that the
soul of Jesus is made one with so great a Son
of God through the highest union with Him, be-
ing no longer in a state of separation from Him.
For the sacred language of holy Scripture knows
of other things also, which, although " dual " in
their own nature, are considered to be, and really
are, " one " in respect to one another. It is
said of husband and wife, " They are no longer
twain, but one flesh ; " 5 and of the perfect man,
and of him who is joined to the true Lord,
Word, and Wisdom, and Truth, that " he who is
joined to the Lord is one spirit."^' And if he
who " is joined to the Lord is one spirit," who
has been joined to the Lord, the Very Word,
and Wisdom, and Truth, and Righteousness, in
a more intimate union, or even in a manner at all


' Cr.Dan. ix. 27 (LXX.).
2 nalSd Te avTov Kai nideov.


* [See Dr. Burton's learned discussion as to the Locos of Plato,
and the connection of Plato's doctrines with the Gospel of the Son of
God: Bampton Lectures, x>V- 2ii-223> 537-547- ^ee also Fisher's
Beginnings of Christianity, p. 147 (1877). S]

5 Cf. Gen. ii. 24.

6 Cf. I Cor. vi. 17.


approaching to it than the soul of Jesus? And
if this be so, then the soul of Jesus and God the
Word — the first-born of every creature — are
no longer two, (but one).

CHAP. XLVIII.

In the next place, when the philosophers of
the Porch, who assert that the virtue of Cod and
man is the same, maintain that the God who is
over all things is not happier than their wise man,
but that the happiness of both is equal, Celsus
neither ridicules nor scoffs at their opinion. If,
however, holy Scripture says that the perfect
man is joined to and made one with the Very
Word by means of virtue, so that we infer tliat
the soul of Jesus is not separated from the first-
born of all creation, he laughs at Jesus being
called " Son of God," not observing what is said
of Him with a secret and mystical signification
in the holy Scriptures. But that we may win
over to the reception of our views those who are
willing to accept the inferences which flow from
our doctrines, and to be benefited thereby, we
say that the holy Scriptures declare the body of
Christ, animated by the Son of God, to be the
whole Church of God, and the members of this
body — considered as a whole — to consist of
those who are believers ; since, as a soul vivifies
and moves the body, which of itself has not the
natural power of motion like a living being, so
the Word, arousing and moving the whole body,
the Church, to befitting action, awakens, more-
over, each individual member belonging to the
Church, so that they do nothing apart from the
Word. Since all this, then, follows by a train of
reasoning not to be depreciated, where is the
difficulty in maintaining that, as the j-<?/// of Jesus
is joined in a perfect and inconceivable manner
with the very Word, so the person of Jesus, gen-
erally speaking,^ is not separated from the only-
begotten and first-born of all creation, and is not
a different being from Him ? But enough here
on this subject.

CHAP. XLIX.

Let us notice now what follows, where, ex-
pressing in a single word his opinion regarding
the Mosaic cosmogony, without offering, however,
a single argument in its support, he finds fault
with it, saying : " Moreover, their cosmogony is
extremely silly." ** Now, if he had produced
some credible proofs of its silly character, we
should have endeavoured to answer them ; but it
does not appear to me rea.sonable that I should
be called upon to demonstrate, in answer to his
mere assertion, that it is not " silly." If any one,
however, wishes to see the reasons which led us
to accept the Mosaic account, and the arguments


airafaTrAu?.


596


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


by which it may be defended, he may read what
we have written upon Genesis, from the begin-
ning of the book up to the passage, " And this
is the book of the generation of men," ' where
we have tried to show from the holy Scriptures
themselves what the "heaven" was which was
created in the beginning; and what the "earth,"
and the " invisible part of the earth," and that
which was " without form ; " ^ and what the
" deep " was, and the " darkness " that was upon
it; and what the "water" was, and the "Spirit
of God " which was " borne over it ; " and what
the " light " which was created, and what the
"firmament," as distinct from the "heaven"
which was created in the beginning ; and so on
with the other subjects that follow. Celsus has
also expressed his opinion that the narrative of
the creation of man is " exceedingly silly," with-
out stating any proofs, or endeavouring to answer
our arguments ; for he had no evidence, in my
judgment, which was fitted to overthrow the
statement that "man has been made in the image
of God." 3 He does not even understand the
meaning of the " Paradise " that was planted by
God, and of the life which man first led in it ;
and of that which resulted from accident,4 when
man was cast forth on account of his sin, and was
settled opposite the Paradise of delight. Now,
as he asserts that these are silly statements, let
him turn his attention not merely to each one
of them (in general), but to this in particular,
" He placed the cherubim, and the flaming sword,
which turned every way, to keep the way of the
tree of life," 5 and say whether Moses wrote these
words with no serious object in view, but in the
spirit of the writers of the old Comedy, who
have sportively related that " Proetus slew Belle-
rophon," and that "Pegasus came from Arcadia."
Now their object was to create laughter in com-
posing such stories ; whereas it is incredible that
he who left behind him laws^ for a whole nation,
regarding which he wished to persuade his sub-
jects that they were given by God, should have
written words so little to the purpose, ^ and have
said without any meaning, " He placed the cheru-
bim, and the flaming sword, which turned every
way, to keep the way of the tree of life," or made
any other statement regarding the creation of
man, which is the subject of philosophic investi
gation by the Hebrew sages.


In the next place, Celsus, after heaping to-
gether, simply as mere assertions, the varying


I Cf. Gen. V. I.


* TYjv (X TreptcTTao-ews yevoiievqv.
S Gen. iii. 24.

' anp6<jKoya.


opinions of some of the ancients regarding the
world, and the origin of man, alleges that " Moses
and the prophets, who have left to us our books,
not knowing at all what the nature of the world
is, and of man, have woven together a web of
sheer nonsense."*^ If he had shown, now, kow
it appeared to him that the holy Scriptures con-
tained " sheer nonsense," we should have tried
to demolish the arguments which appeared to
him to estabhsh their nonsensical character ; but
on the present occasion, following his own ex-
ample, we also sportively give it as our opinion
that Celsus, knowing nothing at all about the
nature of the meaning and language of the proph-
ets,9 composed a work which contained " sheer
nonsense," and boastfully gave it the title of a
" true discourse." And since he makes the
statements about the " days of creation " ground
of accusation, — as if he understood them clearly
and correctly, some of which elapsed before the
creation of light and heaven, and sun, and moon,
and stars, and some of them after the creation
of these, — we shall only make this observation,
that Moses must then have forgotten that he had
said a little before, " that in six days the creation
of the world had been finished," and that in con-
sequence of this act of forgetfulness he subjoins
to these words the following : " This is the book
of the creation of man, in the day when God
made the heaven and the earth ! " But it is not
in the least credible, that after what he had said
respecting the six days, Moses should immedi-
ately add, without a special meaning, the words,
" in the day that God made the heavens and
the earth ; " and if any one thinks that these
words may be referred to the statement, " In the
beginning God made the heaven and the earth,"
let him observe that before the words, " Let there
be light, and there was hght," and these, " God
called the light day," it has been stated that "in
the beginning God made the heaven and the
earth."

CHAP. LI.

On the present occasion, however, it is not
our object to enter into an explanation of the
subject of intelligent and sensible beings, ■" nor
of the manner in which the different kinds " of
days were allotted to both sorts, nor to investi-
gate the details which belong to the subject, for
we should need whole treatises for the exposition
of the Mosaic cosmogony ; and that work we
had already performed, to the best of our ability,
a considerable time before the commencement
of this answer to Celsus, when we discussed with
such measure of capacity as we then possessed


8 avvQti.va.1. Kfip

9 OTl t'
Koyov,

'o jrepl I'oijTaii' Koi ai<T0r)TS>v,
" ai <f>vcreii tuv riiiepiay.


ioTLv 17 (^licns ToO vo\i, (cai toO iv rots irpo^itTtM


Chap. LIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


597


the question of the Mosaic cosmogony of the six
days. We must keep in mind, however, that
the Word promises to the righteous through the
mouth of Isaiah, that days will come ' when not
the sun, but the Lord Himself, will be to them
an everlasting light, and God will be their glory. ^
And it is from misunderstanding, I think, some
pestilent heresy which gave an erroneous inter-
pretation to the words, " Let there be light," as
if they were the expression of a wish ^ merely on
the part of the Creator, that Celsus made the
remark : " The Creator did not borrow light
from above, like those persons who kindle their
lamps at those of their neighbours." Misunder-
standing, moreover, another impious heresy, he
has said : " If, indeed, there did exist an accursed
god opposed to the great God, who did this con-
trary to his approval, why did he lend him the
light?" So far are we from offering a defence
of such puerilities, that we desire, on the con-
trary, distinctly to arraign the statements of these
heretics as erroneous, and to undertake to refute,
not those of their opinions with which we are
unacquainted, as Celsus does, but those of which
we have attained an accurate knowledge, derived
in part from the statements of their own adher-
ents, and partly from a careful perusal of their
writings.

CHAP. LII.

Celsus proceeds as follows : " With regard to
the origin of the world and its destruction,
whether it is to be regarded as uncreated and
indestructible, or as created indeed, but not de-
structible, or the reverse, I at present say noth-
ing." For this reason we too say nothing on
these points, as the work in hand does not re-
quire it. Nor do we allege that the Spirit of the
universal God mingled itself in things here below
as in things alien to itself,^ as might appear from
the expression, " The Spirit of God moved upon
the water ; " nor do we assert that certain wicked
devices directed against His Spirit, as if by a dif-
ferent creator from the great God, and which
were tolerated by the Supreme Divinity, needed
to be completely frustrated. And, accordingly,
I have nothing further to say to those 5 who utter
such absurdities ; nor to Celsus, who does not
refute them with ability. For he ought either
not to have mentioned such matters at all, or
else, in keeping with that character for philan-
thropy which he assumes, have carefully set them
forth, and then endeavoured to rebut these im-
pious assertions. Nor have we ever heard that
the great God, after giving his spirit to the crea-
tor, demands it back again. Proceeding next


foolishly to assail these impious assertions, he
j asks : " What god gives anything with the inten-
1 tion of demanding it back? For it is the mark
^ of a needy person to demand back (what he has
given), whereas God stands in need of nothing."
I To this he adds, as if saying something clever
' against certain parties : "Why, when he lent (his
\ spirit), was he ignorant that he was lending it to
an evil being?" He asks, further : " Why does
he pass without notice^ a wicked creator who
was counter-working his purposes? "


In the next place, mixing up together various
heresies, and not observing that some statements
are the utterances of one heretical sect, and
others of a different one, he brings forward the
objections which we raised against Marcion.^
And, probably, having heard them from some
paltry and ignorant individuals,^ he assails the
very arguments which combat them, but not in
a way that shows much intelligence. Quoting
then our arguments against Marcion, and not
observing that it is agaitisf Marcion that he is
speaking, he asks : " ^Vhy does he send secretly,
and destroy the works which he has created?
Why does he secretly employ force, and persua-
sion, and deceit ? Why does he allure those who,
as ye assert, have been condemned or accused
by him, and carry them away like a slave-dealer?
Why does he teach them to steal away from their
Lord? Why to flee from their father? Why
does he claim them for himself against the
father's will? Why does he profess to be the
father of strange children? " To these questions
he subjoins the following remark, as if by way of
expressing his surprise : 9 " Venerable, indeed, is
the god who desires to be the father of those
sinners who are condemned by another (god),
and of the needy,'° and, as themselves say, of the
very offscourings " (of men), and who is unable
to capture and punish his messenger, who es-
caped from him ! " After this, as if addressing
us who acknowledge that this world is not tbe
work of a different antl strange god, he continues
in the following strain : " If these are his works,
how is it that God created evil ? And how is it
that he cannot persuade and admonish (men) ?
And how is it that he repents on account of the
ingratitude and wickedness of men? He finds
fault, moreover, with his own handwork,'- antl
hates, and threatens, and destroys his own off-


' (V (caTao-Tacrci iaeaBai rj/xtpas.
^ Cf. Isa. Ix. 19.

■* (u9 iv aAAoTpioi; Toi? T))5e.


" Trepiopa.

7 Cf. bk. V. cap. liv.

^ The te.xtii.il reading is, ott
which Rija;us reads, an-o Tii'iui' 6
dation has been adopted in the translation.

9 oioi'ti OavfiacTtKun,
'° aKXriptuy,

12 TtX"")".


cuTeAw? #cat i6twTt*fa»?. for
Kol ifiuTiKuii', which omen-


598


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


spring? Whither can he transport them out of
this world, which he himself has made ? " Now
it does not appear to me that by these remarks
he makes clear what " evil " is ; and although
there have been among the Greeks many sects
who differ as to the nature of good and evil, he
hastily concludes, as if it were a consequence of
our maintaining that this world also is a work
of the universal God, that in our judgment God
is the author of evil. Let it be, however, regard-
ing evil as it may — whether created by God
or not — it nevertheless follows only as a result
when you compare the principal design.' And
I am greatly surprised if the inference regarding
God's authorship of evil, which he thinks follows
from our maintaining that this world also is the
work of the universal God, does not follow too
from his own statements. For one might say to
Celsus : " If these are His works, how is it that
God created evil? and how is it that He cannot
persuade and admonish men?" It is indeed
the greatest error in reasoning to accuse those
who are of different opinions of holding unsound
doctrines, when the accuser himself is much
more liable to the same charge with regard to
his own.


Let us see, then, briefly what holy Scripture
has to say regarding good and evil, and what an-
swer we are to return to the questions, " How is
it that God created evil?" and, "How is He
incapable of persuading and admonishing men ? "
Now, according to holy Scripture, properly
speaking, virtues and virtuous actions are good,
as, properly speaking, the reverse of these are
evil. We shall be satisfied with quoting on the
present occasion some verses from the 34th
Psalm, to the following effect : " They that seek
the Lord shall not want any good thing. Come,
ye children, hearken unto me ; I will teach you
the fear of the Lord. What man is he that de-
sireth life, and loveth many days, that he may
see good ? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and
do good." ^ Now, the injunctions to " depart
from evil, and to do good," do not refer either
to corporeal evils or coi-poreal blessings, as they
are termed by some, nor to external things at
all, but to blessings and evils of a spiritual'kmd ;
since he who departs from such evils, and per-
forms such virtuous actions, will, as one who
desires the true life, come to the enjoyment of
it ; and as one loving to see " good days," in
which the word of righteousness will be the Sun,
he will see them, God taking him away from this
" present evil world," ^ and from those evil days


1 6/c TrapaKoAou6r)crea)s yeyeVrjrai T))S Trpbs Ta TrpoTj-you^ei'a.

2 Cf. Ps. xxxiv. 10-14.

3 Cf. Gal. i. 4.


concerning which Paul said : " Redeeming the
time, because the days are evil." ^


Passages, indeed, might be found where cor-
poreal and external (benefits) are improperly s
called " good," — those things, viz., which con-
tribute to the natural life, while those which do
the reverse are termed " evil." It is in this
sense that Job says to his wife : " If we have
received good at the hand of the Lord, shall we
not also receive evil ! " ^ Since, then, there is
found in the sacred Scriptures, in a certain pas-
sage, this statement put into the mouth of God,
" I make peace, and create evil ; " ? and again
another, where it is said of Him that " evil came
down from the Lord to the gate of Jerusalem,
the noise of chariots and horsemen,"** — pas-
sages which have disturbed many readers of
Scripture, who are unable to see what Scripture
means by "good" and "evil," — it is probable
that Celsus, being perplexed thereby, gave utter-
ance to the question, " How is it that God cre-
ated evil?" or, perhaps, having heard some one
discussing the matters relating to it in an ignorant
manner, he made this statement which we have
noticed. We, on the other hand, maintain that
" evil," or " wickedness," and the actions which
proceed from it, were not created by God. For
if God created that which is 7-eally evil, how was
it possible that the proclamation regarding (the
last) judgment should be confidently announced,^
which informs us that the wicked are to be pun-
ished for their evil deeds in proportion to the
amount of their wickedness, while those who
have lived a virtuous life, or performed virtuous
actions, will be in the enjoyment of blessedness,
and will receive rewards from God ? I am well
aware that those who would daringly assert that
these evils were created by God will quote cer-
tain expressions of Scripture (in their support),
because we are not able to show one consistent
series '° of passages ; for although Scripture
(generally) blames the wicked and approves of
the righteous, it nevertheless contains some
statements which, although comparatively " few
in number, seem to disturb the minds of ignorant
readers of holy Scripture. I have not, how-
ever, deemed it appropriate to my present treatise
to quote on the present occasion those discord-
ant statements, which are many in number,'^ and


* Cf. Eph. V. 16.

5 KaTa\pT)<rTtKcoTepoi'.

6 Cf. Job ii. 10.

7 Cf. Isa. xlv. 7.

8 Cf. Mic. i. 12, 13. The rendering of the Heb. in the first clause
of the thirteenth verse is different from that of the LXX.

9 TTap'pr\<jiav ixn-v.
1° ii<i>o<;.

It oAiya must be taken comparatively, on account of the n-oAAa?
that follows afterwards.
I^ TToAAds. See note ii.


Chap. LVII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


599


their explanations, which would require a long
array of proofs. Evils, then, if those be meant
which are properly sO called, were not created
by God ; but some, although /^ay in comparison
with the order of the luhole world, have resulted
from His principal works, as there follow from
the chief works of the carpenter such things as
spiral sha\'ings and sawdust,' or as architects
might appear to be the cause of the rubbish ^
which lies around their buildings in the form of
the filth which drops from the stones and the
plaster.

CHAP. LVI.

If we speak, however, of what are called " cor-
poreal" and "external" evils, — which are im-
properly so termed, — then it may be granted
that there are occasions when some of these
have been called into existence by God, in order
that by their means the conversion of certain
individuals might be eftected. And what absurd-
ity would follow from such a course ? For as,
if we should hear those sufferings ^ improperly
termed " evils " which are inflicted by fathers,
and instructors, and pedagogues upon those who
are under their care, or upon patients who are
operated upon or cauterized by the surgeons in
order to effect a cure, we were to say that a
father was ill-treating his son, or pedagogues
and instructors their pupils, or physicians their
patients, no blame would be laid upon the oper-
ators or chastisers ; so, in the same way, if God
is said to bring upon men such evils for the con-
version and cure of those who need this disci-
pline, there would be no absurdity in the view,
nor would " evils come down from the Lord
upon the gates of Jerusalem," * — which evils
consist of the punishments inflicted upon the
Israelites by their enemies with a view to their
conversion ; nor would one visit " with a rod the
transgressions of those who forsake the law of
the Lord, and their iniquities with stripes ; " 5
nor could it be said, "Thou hast coals of fire to
set upon them ; they shall be to thee a help." ^
In the same way also we explain the expressions,
"I, who make peace, and create evil ; " ? for He
calls into existence " corporeal " or " external "
evils, while purifying and training those who
would not be disciplined by the word and sound
doctrine. This, then, is our answer to the ques-
tion, " How is it that God created evil? "


With respect to the question, " How is he in-
capable of persuading and admonishing men?"


I TO. eAiKoeiS^ fecr/xaTa /cai Trpicrfiara.
- TO. TTapaKfCixeva,

' Cf.TlTc. i. 12.

5 Cf. Ps. Ixxxix. 32.

6 Cf. Isa. xlvii. 14,15 (LXX.).
' Cf. Isa. xlv. 7.


it has been already stated that, if such an objec-
tion were really a ground of charge, then the
objection of Celsus might be brought against
those who accept the doctrine of providence.
Any one might answer the charge that God is
incapable of admonishing men ; for He conveys
His admonitions throughout the whole of Scrip-
ture, and by means of those persons who, through
God's gracious appointment, are the instructors
of His hearers. Unless, indeed, some peculiar
meaning be understood to attach to the word
" admonish," as if it signified both to penetrate
into the mind of the person admonished, and to
make him hear the words of his^ instructor,
which is contrary to the usual meaning of the
word. To the objection, " How is he incapable
of persuading?" — which also might be brought
against all who believe in providence, — we have
to make the following remarks. Since the ex-
pression " to be persuaded " belongs to those
words which are termed, so to speak, " recipro-
cal " 9 (compare the phrase "to shave a man,"
when he makes an effort to submit himself to the
barber '°), there is for this reason needed not
merely the effort of him whd persuades, but also
the submission, so to speak, which is to be
yielded to the persuader, or the acceptance of
what is said by him. And therefore it must not
be said that it is because God is incapable of
persuading men that they are not persuaded, but
because they will not accept the faithful words
of God. And if one were to apply this expres-
sion to men who are the " artificers of persua-
sion," " he would not be wrong ; for it is possible
for a man who has thoroughly learned the prin-
ciples of rhetoric, and who employs them prop-
erly, to do his utmost to persuade, and yet appear
to fail, because he cannot overcome the will of
him who ought to yield to his persuasive arts.
Moreover, that persuasion does not come from
God, although persuasive words may be uttered
by him, is distinctly taught by Paul, when he
says : " This persuasion cometh not of him that
calleth you." '^ Such also is the view indicated
by these words : " If ye be willing and obedient,
ye shall eat the good of the land ; but if ye re-
fuse and rebel, a sword shall devour you." '-^ For
that one may (really) desire what is addressed
to him by one who admonishes, and may become
deserving of those promises of God which he
hears, it is necessary to secure the will of the
hearer, and his inclination to what is atldressed
to him. And therefore it api)ears to me, that in
the book of Deuteronomy the following words


8 TO ical «jrtTU7)(ai'€ti' ei' Tcp covScrovfic'vu koX oKOuetc TOf ToO
5t5a(rK0i'T09 AdyOF.

9 oxTTrepet Tuiv Ka\ovfievu}V avTiirenovOoTOJv ccttiV.

1° ai>d\oyoi' Tcu Keipe<T0ai, avBpionof, evepyouvTa to Trapextiv

iaVTOV TO) KfipOVTl.

'' iTfidovi; &riu.i.ovpyijjv,

«^ Cf. Gal. V. 8.
'■J Cf. Isa. i. 19, 20.


6oo


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


are uttered with peculiar emphasis : "And now,
O Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require
of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to
walk in all His ways, and to love Him, and to
keep His commandments? " '


CHAP. LVIII.

There is next to be answered the following
query: "And how is it that he repents when
men become ungrateful and wicked ; and finds
fault with his own handwork, and hates, and
threatens, and destroys his own offspring?"
Now Celsus here calumniates and falsifies what
is written in the book of Genesis to the following
effect: "And the Lord God, seeing that the
wickedness of men upon the earth was increas-
ing, and that every one in his heart carefully
meditated to do evil continually, was grieved -
He had made man upon the earth. And God
meditated in His heart, and said, I will destroy
man, whom I have made, from the face of the
earth, both man and beast, and creeping thing,
and fowl of the air, because I am grieved ^ that
I made them ; " ■* quoting words which are not
written in Scripture, as if they conveyed the
meaning of what was actually written. For there
is no mention in these words of the repentance
of God, nor of His blaming and hating His own
handwork. And if there is the appearance of
God threatening the catastrophe of the deluge,
and thus destroying His own children in it, we
have to answer that, as the soul of man is im-
mortal, the supposed threatening has for its ob-
ject the conversion of the hearers, while the
destruction of men by the flood is a purification
of the earth, as certain among the Greek phil-
osophers of no mean repute have indicated by
the expression : " When the gods purify the
earth." 5 And with respect to the transference
to God of those anthropopathic phrases, some
remarks have been already made by us in the
preceding pages.

CHAP. LIX.

Celsus, in the next place, suspecting, or per-
haps seeing clearly enough, the answer which
might be returned by those who defend the de-
struction of men by the deluge, continues :
" But if he does not destroy his own offspring,
whither does he convey them out of this world ^
which he himself created ? " To this we reply,
that God by no means removes out of the whole
world, consisting of heaven and earth, those


1 Cf. Deut. X. 12, 13. _

2 ivtBviJL-qd-i], in all probability a corruption for i6vyi.u>9r), which
Hoeschel places in the text, and Spencer in the margin of his ed. :

Heb. Dnri..

3 iv(6vfxri6rfv, Cf. remark in note 2.
* Cf. Gen. vi. 5-7.

s Cf. Plato in Timao.

^ K6tJii.O<i.


who suffered death by the deluge, but removes
them from a Hfe in the flesh, and, having set
them free from their bocfies, liberates them at
the same time from an existence upon earth,
which in many parts of Scripture it is usual to
call the " world." Li the Gospel according to
John especially, we may frequently find the re-
gions of earth 7 termed "world," as in the pas-
sage, " He was the true Light, which lighteneth
every man that cometh into the ' world • ' " ^ ^g
also in this, " In the world ye shall have tribula-
tion ; but be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world." 9 If, then, we understand by " re-
moving out of the world " a transference from
" regions on earth," there is nothing absurd in
the expression. If, on the contrary, the system
of things which consists of heaven and earth be
termed " world," then those who perished in the
deluge are by no means removed out of the so-
called " world." And yet, indeed, if we have
regard to the words, " Looking not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen ; " '° and also to these, " For the invisible
things of Him from the creation of the world
are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made,"" — we might say that he who
dwells amid the " invisible " things, and what are
called generally " things not seen," is gone out
of the world, the Word having removed him
hence, and transported him to the heavenly
regions, in order to behold all beautiful things.


But after this investigation of his assertions,
as if his object were to swell his book by many
words, he repeats, in different language, the same
charges which we have examined a little ago,
saying : " By far the most silly thing is the dis-
tribution of the creation of the world over cer-
tain days, before days existed : for, as the heaven
was not yet created, nor the foundation of the
earth yet laid,'^ nor the sun yet revolving, '3 how
could there be days ? " Now, what difference is
there between these words and the following :
" Moreover, taking and looking at these things
from the beginning, would it not be absurd in
the first and greatest God to issue the command,
Let this (first thing) come into existence, and
this second thing, and this (third) ; and after
accomplishing so much on the first day, to do so
much more again on the second, and third, and
fourth, and fifth, and sixth?" We answered to
the best of our ability this objection to God's
" commanding this first, second, and third thing


' TOi' Trepiyeiov Toirov.

* Cf John i. g.

9 Cf. John xvi. 33.
■° Cf. 2 Cor. IV. 18.
" Cf. Rom. i. 20.
•^ epjIpeKj-niei/T)?.
'3 Ti'^fie (f>eDOU€i'OV.


Chap. LXIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


60 1


to be created," when we quoted the words, "He
said, and it was done ; He commanded, and all
things stood fast;"' remarking that the imme-
diate- Creator, and, as it were, very Maker ^ of
the world was the Word, the Son of God ; while
the Father of the Word, by commanding His
own Son — the Word — to create the world,
is primarily Creator. And with regard to the
creation of the light upon the first day, and of
the firmament upon the second, and of the gath-
ering together of the waters that are under the
heaven into their several reservoirs'* on the third
(the earth tlius causing to sprout forth those
(fruits) which are under the control of nature
alone 5), and of the (great) lights and stars upon
the fourth, and of aquatic*^ animals upon the
fifth, and of land animals and man upon the
sixth, we have treated to the best of our ability
in our notes upon Genesis, as well as in the fore-
going pages, when we found fault with those who,
taking the words in their apparent signification,
said that the time of six days was occupied in
the creation of the world, and quoted the words :
" These are the generations of the heavens and
of the earth when they were created, in the day
that the Lord God made the earth and the
heavens." ^

CHAP. LXI.

Again, not understanding the meaning of the
words, " And God ended ^ on the sixth day His
works which He had made, and ceased ^ on the
seventh day from all His works which He had
made : and God blessed the seventh day, and
hallowed it, because on it He had ceased 9 from
all His works which He had begun to make ; " '°
and imagining the expression, " He ceased on the
seventh day," to be the same as this, " He 7-ested''^
on the seventh day," he makes the remark :
" After this, indeed, he is weary, like a very bad
workman, who stands in need of rest to refresh
himself ! " For he knows nothing of the day of
the Sabbath and rest of God, which follows the
completion of the world's creation, and which
lasts during the duration of the world, and in
which all those will keep festival with God who
have done all their works in their six days, and
who, because they have .omitted none of their
duties,'^ will ascend to the contemplation (of ce-
lestial things), and to the assembly of righteous
and blessed beings. In the next place, as if
either the Scriptures made such a statement, or


' Cf. Ps. xxxiii. 9.

2 Toi/ 7rpoo"e;^w? ^Tj/xtoup'yoi',

3 ai'Toi'p'yoi'.
* (J\iva.-^iay6.<i.

5 Ta \)T!0 M0H)5 <f>u'o-€ws SlOlKOli/U.CI'a.

7 Cf. Gen."{i. 4.

8 [(TureTeAeo-ei', complevit. S.]

9 Ka.TiTza.vaiV.

1° Cf. Gen. ii. 2, 3.

'^ av^Travurxjo,

'2 liiv ini^aWovToiv.


as if we ourselves so spoke of God as having
rested from fatigue, he continues : " It is not in
keeping with the fitness of things '^ that the first
God should feel fatigue, or work with His hands,'-*
or give forth commands." Celsus says, that " it is
not in keeping with the fitness of things that the
first God should feel fatigue. Now we would say
that neither does God the Word feel fatigue, nor
any of those beings who belong to a better and
diviner order of things, because the sensation
of fatigue is peculiar to those who are in the
body. You can examine whether this is true of
those who possess a body of any kind, or of those
who have an earthly body, or one a little better
than this. But " neither is it consistent with the
fitness of things that the first God should work
with His own hands." If you understand the
words " work with His own hands " literally, then
neither are they applicable to the second God,
nor to any other being partaking of divinity. But
suppose that they are spoken in an improper and
figurative sense, so that we may translate the
following expressions, " And the firmament show-
eth forth His handywork," "s and "the heavens
are the work of Thy hands," '^ and any other
similar phrases, in a figurative manner, so far as
respects the "hands" and "limbs" of Deity,
where is the absurdity in the words, " God thus
working with His own hands?" And as there
is no absurdity in God thus working, so neither
is there in His issuing " commands ; " so that
what is done at His bidding should be beautiful
and praiseworthy, because it was God who com-
manded it to be performed.

CH.4P. LXII.

Celsus, again, having perhaps misunderstood
the words, " For the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it," '7 or perhaps because some ignorant
individuals had rashly ventured upon the expla-
nation of such things, and not understanding,
moreover, on what principles parts called after
the names of the bodily members are assigned
to the attributes '^ of God, asserts : " He has
neither mouth nor voice." Truly, indeed, God
can have no voice, if the voice is a concussion
of the air, or a stroke on the air, or a species of
air, or any other definition which may be given
to the voice by those who are skilled in such
matters ; but what is called the " voice of God "
is said to be seen as " God's voice " by the peo-
ple in the passage, " And all the people saw the
voice of God ; " '^ the word " saw " being taken,
agreeably to the custom of Scripture, in a spiritual


•3 ov 9e|iiis.
U Yeipoupveri-.
>5 Cf. Ps. xix. I.
>6 Cf. Ps. cii. 25.
'7 Cf. Isa. 1. 20.

19 Cf. Ex. XX- 18 (LXX.). The Masoretic text is difTerent.


602


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


sense. Moreover, he alleges that " God possesses
nothing else of which we have any knowledge ; "
but of what things we have knowledge he gives
no indication. If he means " limbs," we agree
with him, understanding the things " of which
we have knowledge "to be those called corpo-
real, and pretty generally so termed. But if we
are to understand the words " of which we have
knowledge " in a universal sense, then there are
many things of which we have knowledge, (and
which may be attributed to God) ; for He pos-
sesses virtue, and blessedness, and divinity. If we,
however, put a higher meaning upon the words,
" of which we have knowledge," since all that we
know is less than God, there is no absurdity in
our also admitting that God possesses none of
those things " of which we have knowledge." For
the attributes which belong to God are far supe-
rior to all things with which not merely the nature
of man is acquainted, but even that of those who
have risen far above it. And if he had read the
writings of the prophets, David on the one hand
saying, " But Thou art the same," ' and Malachi
on the other, "I am (the Lord), and change
not," ^ he would have observed that none of us
assert that there is any change in God, either in
act or thought. For abiding the same, He ad-
ministers mutable things according to their na-
ture, and His word elects to undertake their
administration.

CHAP. LXIII.

Celsus, not observing the difference between
" after the image of God " and " God's image,"
next asserts that the " first-bom of every crea-
ture " is the image of God, — the very word and
truth, and also the very wisdom, being the image
of His goodness, while man has been created
after the image of God \ moreover, that every
man whose head is Christ is the image and glory
of God ; — and further, not observing to which
of the characteristics of humanity the expression
"after the image of God" belongs, and that it
consists in a nature which never had nor longer
has " the old man with his deeds," being called
"after the image of Him who created it," from
its not possessing these qualities, — he main-
tains : " Neither did He make man His image ;
for God is not such an one, nor hke any other
species of (visible) being." Is it possible to
suppose that the element which is " after the
image of God " should exist in the inferior part
— I mean the body — of a compound being like
man, because Celsus has explained that to be
made after the image of God ? For if that which
is " after the image of God " be in the body
only, the better part, the soul, has been deprived
of that which is "after His image," and this


' Cf. Ps. Cii. 27.

2 Cf. Mai. iii. 6.


(distinction) exists in the corruptible body, —
an assertion which is made by none of us. But
if that which is " after the image of God " be
in both together, then God must necessarily be a
compound being, and consist, as it were, of soul
and body, in order that the element which is
" after God's image," the better part, may be in
the soul ; while the inferior part, and that which
" is according to the body," may be in the body,
— an assertion, again, which is made by none
of us. It remains, therefore, that that which is
"after the image of God " must be understood
to be in our " inner man," which is also renewed,
and whose nature it is to be " after the image
of Him who created it," when a man becomes
" perfect," as " our Father in heaven is perfect,"
and hears the command, "Be ye holy, for I the
Lord -your God am holy," ^ and learning the
precept, " Be ye followers of God," ■♦ receives
into his virtuous soul ihe traits of God's image.
The body, moreover, of him who possesses such
a soul is a temple of God ; and in the soul
God dwells, because it has been made after His
image. 5

CHAP. LXIV.

Celsus, again, brings together a number of
statements, which he gives as admissions on our
part, but which no intelligent Christian would
allow. For not one of us asserts that " God par-
takes of form or colour." Nor does He even
partake of "motion," because He stands firm,
and His nature is permanent, and He invites
the righteous man also to do the same, saying :
" But as for thee, stand thou here by Me." ^
And if certain expressions indicate a kind of
motion, as it were, on His part, such as this,
" They heard the voice of the Lord God walk-
ing in the garden in the cool of the day," ^ we
must understand them in this way, that it is by
sinners that God is understood as moving, or as
we understand the " sleep " of God, which is
taken in a figurative sense, or His " anger," or
any other similar attribute. But " God does not
partake even of substance."* For He is par-
taken of (by others) rather than that Himself
partakes of them, and He is partaken of by
those who have the Spirit of God. Our Saviour,
also, does not partake of righteousness ; but be-
ing Himself " righteousness," He is partaken of
by the righteous. A discussion about " sub-
stance " would be protracted and diificult, and
especially if it were a question whether that
which is permanent and immaterial be "sub-


3 I,ev. xi. 44.

< Cf. Eph. V. I (u.ifi.r;Tai)-

5 The words as they stand in the te.\t are probably corrupt :
have adopted in the translation the emendation of Guietus: fTii
va.0% eo-Ti ToO ©coO to cii^ca Toi) ToiauTrji' exovTOS \\ivxi\v., KOX
Tfi tl/vxTj Sia TO Kar e'lKova, Tbi* Qeov.

* Deut. V. ^i.

7 Cf. Gen. "iii. 8.

^ ovaia.


Chap. LXVI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


603


1 stance " properly so called, so that it would be
I found that God is (!^(?)'(?«^/ " substance," commu-
! nicating of His " substance," by means of office
1 and power,' to those to whom He communi-
cates Himself by His Word, as He does to the
Word Himself; or even if He is "substance,"
yet He is said be in His nature "invisible," in
these words respecting our Saviour, who is said
to be " the image of the invisible God," ^ while
from the term " invisible " it is indicated that
He is " immaterial." It is also a question for
investigation, whether the " only-begotten " and
" first-born of every creature "is to be called
" substance of substances," and " idea of ideas,"
and the "principle of all things," while above
all there is His Father and God.^


Celsus proceeds to say of God that " of Him
are all things," abandoning (in so speaking), I
know not how, all his principles ; * while our Paul
declares, that " of Him, and through Him, and
to Him are all things," 5 showing that He is the
beginning of the substance of all things by the
words " of Him," and the bond of their subsist-
ence by the expression "through Him," and their
final end by the terms " to Him." Of a truth,
God is of nothing. But when Celsus adds, that
" He is not to be reached by word," ^ I make a
distinction, and say that if he means the word
that is in us — whether the word conceived in
the mind, or the word that is uttered ^ — I, too,
admit that God is not to be reached by word.
If, however, we attend to the passage, " In the
I beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
I God, and the Word was God,"^ we are of opin-
ion that God is to be reached by this Word, and
is comprehended not by Him only, but by any
one whatever to whom He may reveal the Father ;
and thus we shall prove the falsity of the asser-
tion of Celsus, when he says, " Neither is God
to be reached by word." The statement, more-
over, that " He cannot be expressed by name,"
retjuires to be taken with a distinction. If he
means, indeed, that there is no word or sign^
that can represent the attributes of God, the
statement is true, since there are many qualities
which cannot be indicated by words. Who, for


' noea-Qda (cat Swaixei..

2 Cf. Col. i. 15.

3 [" It is a remarkable fact, that it was Origen who discerned the
heresy outside the Church on its first rise, and actually gave the
alarm, sixty years before Arius's day. See Athanasius, be Decrct.
Nic., § 27; also the n-epi apy^yiv (if Rufinus may be trusted), for
Origen's denouncement of the still more characteristic Arianism of
the i]v ore ovk. r^v and the e^ oux orrwi'." — Newman's The Arians
of the Fourth Century, p. 97. See also Hagcnbach's History 0/
Doctrines, yol._ i. pp. 130-133. S.]

■* For aiiToD Boherellus conjectures aiiToi), and translates, "Pro-
pria ipse frincipia, quse sunt Epicuri, subrueiis."
5 Rom. xi. 36.
° ou5e Ao-yJi €(^tKT69.
' fiT€ iv&La6iTu> i'ne xai npo<i>opi.Ku>.
' John i. I.
9 uiiikv Tuiv iv Ki^ttji. (cai <rr)/iaii'0(xe'i'ois.


example, could describe in words the difference
betwixt the quality of sweetness in a palm and
that in a fig ? And who could distinguish and
set forth in words the peculiar qualities of each
individual thing? It is no wonder, then, if in
this way God cannot be described by name.
But if you take the phrase to mean that it is
possible to represent by words something of
God's attributes, in order to lead the hearer by
the hand,'° as it were, and so enable him to com-
prehend something of God, so far as attainable
by human nature, then there is no absurdity in
saying that " He can be described by name."
And we make a similar distinction with regard to
the expression, " for He has undergone no suffer-
ing that can be conveyed by words." It is true
that the Deity is beyond all suffering. And so
much on this point.

CHAP. LXVI.

Let us look also at his next statement, in
which he introduces, as it were, a certain per-
son, who, after hearing what has been said, ex-
presses himself in the following manner, " How,
then, shall I know God ? and how shall I learn
the way that leads to Him? And how will you
show Him to me? Because now, indeed, you
throw darkness before my eyes, and I see noth-
ing distinctly." He then answers, as it were,
the individual who is thus perplexed, and thinks
that he assigns the reason why darkness has
been poured upon the eyes of him who uttered
the foregoing words, when he asserts that " those
whom one would lead forth out of darkness into
the brightness of light, being unable to withstand
its splendours, have their power of vision af-
fected " and injured, and so imagine that they
are smitten with blindness." In answer to this,
we would say that all those indeed sit in dark-
ness, and are rooted in it, who fix their gaze
upon the evil handiwork of j)ainters, and mould-
ers and sculptors, and who will not look upwards,
and ascend in thought from all visible and sensi-
ble things, to the Creator of all things, who is
light ; while, on the other hand, every one is in
light who has followed the radiance of the Word,
who has shown in consequence of what igno-
rance, and impiety, and want of knowledge of
divine things these objects were worshipped in-
stead of God, and who has conducted the soul
of him who desires to be saved towards the un-
created God, who is over all. For " the people
that sat in darkness — the Gentiles — saw a great
light, and to them who sat in the region and
shadow of death light is spning up," '^ — the God
Jesus. No Christian, then, would give Celsus,
or any accuser of the divine Word, the answer,
"How shall I know God?" for each one of


**^ \€ipayit}yT)(Tai,

" KoKaC,taeai.

1= Cf. Matt. iv. 16 and Is


6o4


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


them knows God according to his capacity.
And no one asks, " How shall I learn the way
which leads to Him?" because he has heard
Him who says, " I am the way, and the truth,
and the life," ' and has tasted, in the course of
the journey, the happiness which results from it.
And not a single Christian would say to Celsus,
" How will you show me God ? "

CHAP. LXVII.

The remark, indeed, was true which Celsus
made, that any one, on hearing his words, would
answer, seeing that his words are words of dark-
ness, " You pour darkness before my eyes."
Celsus verily, and those like him, do desire to
pour darkness before our eyes : we, however, by
means of the light of the Word, disperse the
darkness of their impious opinions. The Chris-
tian, indeed, could retort on Celsus, who says
nothing that is distinct or true, "I see nothing
that is distinct among all your statements." It
is not, therefore, "out of darkness" into "the
brightness of light" that Celsus leads us forth:
he wishes, on the contrary, to transport us from
light into darkness, making the darkness light
and the light darkness, and exposing himself to
the woe well described by the prophet Isaiah in
the following manner ; " Woe unto them that
put darkness for light, and light for darkness." ^
But we, the eyes of whose soul have been opened
by the Word, and who see the difference between
light and darkness, prefer by all means to take
our stand " in the light," and will have nothing
to do with darkness at all. The true light, more-
over, being endued with life, knows to whom his
full splendours are to be manifested, and to whom
his light ; for he does not display his brilliancy
on account of the still existing weakness in the
eyes of the recipient. And if we must speak at
all of " sight being affected and injured," what
other eyes shall we say are in this condition, than
his who is involved in ignorance of God, and
who is prevented by his passions from seeing the
truth ? Christians, however, by no means con-
sider that they are blinded by the words of
Celsus, or any other who is opposed to the wor-
ship of God. But let those who perceive that
they are blinded by following multitudes who are
in error, and tribes of those who keep festivals to
demons, draw near to the Word, who can bestow
the gift of sight,3 in order that, like those poor
and blind who had thrown themselves down by
the wayside, and who were healed by Jesus be-
cause they said to Him, "Son of David, have
mercy upon me," they too may receive mercy
and recover their eyesight,^ fresh and beautiful,
as the Word of God can create it.


' John xiv. 6.
^ Cf. Isa. V. 20

^ 6</)0aA/xous.


CHAP. LXVIII,

Accordingly, if Celsus were to ask us how we
think we know God, and how we shall be saved
by Him, we would answer that the Word of God,
which entered into those who seek Him, or who
accept Him when He appears, is able to make
known and to reveal the Father, who was not
seen (by any one) before the appearance of the
Word. And who else is able to save and con-
duct the soul of man to the God of all things,
save God the Word, who, " being in the begin-
ning with God," became flesh for the sake of
those who had cleaved to the flesh, and had be-
come as flesh, that He might be received by
those who could not behold Him, inasmuch as
He was the Word, and was with God, and was
God? And discoursing in human form,'^ and
announcing Himself as flesh, He calls to Him-
self those who are flesh, that He may in the first
place cause them to be transformed according to
the Word that was made flesh, and afterwards
may lead them upwards to behold Him as He
was before He became flesh ; so that they, re-
ceiving the benefit, and ascending from their
great introduction to Him, which was according
to the flesh, say, " Even if we have known Christ
after the flesh, yet henceforth know we Him no
more." 5 Therefore He became flesh, and hav-
ing become flesh, " He tabernacled among us," ^
not dwelling without us ; and after tabernacling
and dwelling within us. He did not continue in
the form in which He first presented Himself,
but caused us to ascend to the lofty mountain of
His word, and showed us His own glorious form,
and the splendour of His garments ; and not His
own form alone, but that also of the spiritual law,
which is Moses, seen in glory along with Jesus.
He showed to us, moreover, all prophecy, which
did not perish even after His incarnation, but
was received up into heaven, and whose symbol
was Elijah. And he who beheld these things
could say, " We beheld His glory, the glory as
of the only-begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth." ^ Celsus, then, has exhibited con-
siderable ignorance in the imaginary answer to
his question which he puts into our mouth, " How
we think we can know God ? and how we know
we shall be saved by Him?" for our answer is
what we have just stated. '

CHAP. LXIX. Y

Celsus, however, asserts that the answer which
we give is based upon a probable conjecture,' |
admitting that he describes our answer in the
following terms : " Since God is great and diffi-


Cor. V. 16. S.]
John i. 14.


6 Cf,


Chap. LXX]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


60:


cult to see," He put His own Spirit into a body
that resembled ours, and sent it down to us, that
we might be enabled to hear Him and become
acquainted with Him." But the God and Father
of all things is not the only being that is great in
our judgment ; for He has imparted (a share)
of Himself and His greatness to His Only-begot-
ten and First-born of every creature, in order
that He, being the image of the invisible God,
might preserve, even in His greatness, the image
of the Father. For it was not possible that there
could exist a well-proportioned,^ so to speak,
and beautiful image of the invisible God, which
did not at the same time preserve the image of
His greatness. God, moreover, is in our judg-
ment invisible, because He is not a body, while
He can be seen by those who see with the heart,
that is, the understanding ; not indeed with any
kind of heart, but with one which is pure. For
it is inconsistent with the fitness of things that a
polluted heart should look upon God ; for that
must be itself pure which would worthily behold
that which is pure. Let it be granted, indeed,
that God is " difficult to see," yet He is not the
only being who is so ; for His Only-begotten also
is " difficult to see." For God the Word is " dif-
ficult to see," and so also is His^ wisdom, by
which God created all things. For who is capa-
ble of seeing the wisdom which is displayed in
each individual part of the whole system of
things, and by which Crod created every individual
thing? It was not, then, because God was " dif-
ficult to see " that He sent God His Son to be
an object "easy to be seen.""* And because
Celsus does not understand this, he has repre-
sented us as saying, " Because God was ' difficult
to see,' He put His own Spirit in a body resem-
bling ours, and sent it down to us, that we might
be enabled to hear Him and become acquainted
with Him." Now, as we have stated, the Son
also is " difficult to see," because He is God the
Word, through whom all things were made, and
who " tabernacled amongst us."


If Celsus, indeed, had understood our teach-
ing regarding the Spirit of God, and had known
that " as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
these are the sons of God," s he would not have
returned to himself the answer which he repre-
sents as coming from us, that " God put His own
Spirit into a body, and sent it down to us ; " for
God is perpetually bestowing of His own Spirit
to those who are capable of receiving it, although


' 6i;(rdeulp?)T05.

* (rufx/ieTpof.

3 For ouTuio-i we have adopted the conjecture of Guietus, tou'tou.

^ Rom. viii, 14,


it is not by way of division and separation that
I He dwells in (the hearts of) the desewing. Nor
: is the Spirit, in our o])inion, a " body," any more
' than fire is a " body," which God is said to be
: in the passage, " Our God is a consuming fire."^
[ For all these are figurative expressions, employed
to denote the nature of " intelligent beings " by
means of familiar and corporeal terms. In the
same way, too, if sins are called " wood, and
^ straw, and stubble," we shall not maintain that
j sins are corporeal ; and if blessings are termed
" gold, and silver, and precious stones," ? we
I shall not maintain that blessings are "corporeal ; "
so also, if God be said to be a fire that consumes
wood, and straw, and stubble, and all substance **
of sin, we shall not understand Him to be a
" body," so neither do we understand Him to
be a body if He should be called " fire." In
this way, if God be called " spirit," 9 we do not
mean that He is a " body." For it 'is the cus-
tom of Scripture to give to " intelligent beings "
the names of " spirits " and " spiritual things,"
by way of distinction from those which are the
objects of " sense ; " as when Paul says, " But
our sufficiency is of God ; who hath also made
us able ministers of the New Testament ; not of
the letter, but of the spirit ; for the letter killeth,
but the spirit giveth life," '° where by the " letter"
he means that " exposition of Scripture which is
apparent to the senses," " while by the " spirit"
that which is the object of the " understanding."
It is the same, too, with the expression, " God is
a Spirit." And because the prescriptions of the
law were obeyed both by Samaritans and Jews
in a corporeal and literal '^ manner, our Saviour
said to the Samaritan woman, " The hour is com-
ing, when neither in Jerusalem, nor in this moun-
tain, shall ye worship the Father. God is a
Spirit ; and they that worship Him must worship
Him in spirit and in truth." '^ And by these
words He taught men that God must be wor-
shipped not in the flesh, and with fleshly sacri-
fices, but in the spirit. And He will be under-
stood to be a Spirit in proportion as the worship
rendered to Him is rendered in spirit, and with
understanding. It is not, however, with images '+
that we are to worship the Father, but " in truth,"
which " came by Jesus Christ," after the giving
of the law by Moses. For when we turn to the
Lord (and the Lord is a Spirit '5), He takes away
the veil which lies upon the heart when Moses is
read.


6 Cf, Heb. xii. 29.
' Cf. I Cor. iii 12,
' jrdcrov oOaiat-.

9 TTKUfia. There is an allusion to the two meanings of nvtvixa,
' wind" and " spirit."
'0 2 Cor. iii. 5, 6. _

»2 TuiriK.is here evidently must have the above meaning.
" Cf. Johniv. 21, 24-

" Cf. 2 Cor." iii. 17.


6o6


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


CHAP. LXXI.

Celsiis accordingly, as not understanding the
doctrine relating to the Spirit of God ("for the
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit
of God, for they are foolishness unto him ;
neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned " ' ), weaves together (such
a web) as pleases himself,^ imagining that we,
in calling God a Spirit, differ in no respect in
this particular from the Stoics among the Greeks,
who maintain that " God is a Spirit, diffused
through all things, and containing all things
within Himself." Now the superintendence and
providence of God does extend through all
things, but not in the way that spirit does,
according to the Stoics. Providence indeed
contains all things that are its objects, and com-
prehends them all, but not as a containing body
includes its contents, because they also are
" body," 3 but as a divine power does it com-
prehend what it contains. According to the
philosophers of the Porch, indeed, who assert
that principles are "corporeal," and who on
that account make all things perishable, and
who venture even to make the God of all things
capable of perishing, the very Word of God,
who descends even to the lowest of mankind,
would be — did it not appear to them to be
too gross an incongruity ^ — nothing else than a
" corporeal " spirit ; whereas, in our opinion, —
who endeavour to demonstrate that the rational
soul is superior to all " corporeal " nature, and
that it is an invisible substance, and incorporeal,
— God the Word, by whom all things were
made, who came, in order that all things might
be made by the Word, not to men only, but to
what are deemed the very lowest of things,
under the dominion of nature alone, would be
no body. The Stoics, then, may consign all
things to destruction by fire ; we, however, know
of no incorporeal substance that is destructible
by fire, nor (do we believe) that the soul of
man, or the substance of " angels," or of
" thrones," or dominions," or " principalities,"
or " powers," can be dissolved by fire.

CHAP. LXXII.

It is therefore in vain that Celsus asserts, as
one who knows not the nature of the Spirit of
God, that " as the Son of God, who existed in
a human body, is a Spirit, this very Son of God
would not be immortal." He next becomes
confused in his statements, as if there were some
of us who did not admit that God is a Spirit,
but maintain that only with regard to His Son,


' Cf. I Cor. ii. 14.
* «avT(p crui'dTrTei.

3 ovx u)S truiua hk irepLe\ov Trcpie\(i, on Kal cu>iJ.a. etrri
TTipi^Xoixevov .

4 tt6.vv an^^t^txivov.


and he thinks that he can answer us by saying
that there " is no kind of spirit which lasts for
ever." This is much the same as if, when we
term God a " consuming fire," he were to say
that there " is no kind of fire which lasts for
ever ; " not observing the sense in which we say
that our God is a fire, and what the things are
which He consumes, viz., sins, and wickedness.
For it becomes a God of goodness, after each
individual has shown, by his efforts, what kind
of combatant he has been, to consume vice by
the fire of His chastisements. He proceeds,
in the next place, to assume what we do not
maintain, that " God must necessarily have given
up the ghost ; " from which also it follows that
Jesus could not have risen again with His body.
For God would not have received back the
spirit which He had surrendered after it had
been stained by contact with the body. It is
foolish, however, for us to answer statements as
ours which were never made by us.

CHAP. LXXIII.

He proceeds to repeat himself, and after say-
ing a great deal which he had said before, and
ridiculing the birth of God from a virgin, — to
which we have already replied as we best could,
— he adds the following : " If God had wished
to send down His Spirit from Himself, what
need was there to breathe it into the womb of
a woman? For as one who knew already how
to form men. He could also have fashioned a
body for this person, without casting His own
Spirit into so much pollution ; s and in this way
He would not have been received with incredu-
lity, if He had derived His existence imme-
diately from above." He had made these
remarks, because he knows not the pure and
virgin birth, unaccompanied by any corruption,
of that body which was to minister to the sal-
vation of men. For, quoting the sayings of
the Stoics,^ and affecting not to know the doc-
trine about " things indifferent," he thinks that
the divine nature was cast amid pollution, and
was stained either by being in the body of a
woman, until a body was formed around it, or
by assuming a body. And in this he acts like
those who imagine that the sun's rays are pol-
luted by dung and by foul-smelling bodies, and
do not remain pure amid such things. If, how-
ever, according to the view of Celsus, the body
of Jesus had been fashioned without generation,
those who beheld the body would at once have
believed that it had not been formed by genera-
tion ; and yet an object, when seen, does not at
the same time indicate the nature of that from
which it has derived its origin. For example,


5 f(? ToaovTOv /Ata(T/Lta.

<> Cf. book iv. capp. xiv. and Ixviii.


Chap. LXXV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


607


suppose that there were some honey (placed
before one) which had not been manufactured
by bees, no one could tell from the taste or sight j
that it was not their workmanship, because the
honey which comes from bees does not make
known its origin by the senses,' but experience
alone can tell that it does not proceed from them.
In the same way, too, experience teaches that
wine comes from the vine, for taste does not ;
enable us to distinguish (the wine) which comes
from the vine. In the same manner, therefore, |
the visible ^ body does not make known the !
manner of its existence. And you will be in- I
duced to accept this view,^ by (regarding) the
heavenly bodies, whose existence and splendour
we perceive as we gaze at them ; and yet, I pre-
sume, their appearance does not suggest to us
whether they are created or uncreated ; and
accordingly different opinions have existed on
these points. And yet those who say that they
are created are not agreed as to the manner of
tlieir creation, for their appearance does not
suggest it, although the force of reason + may
have discovered that they are created, and how
their creation was effected.


CHAP. LXXIV.

After this he returns to the subject of Mar-
cion's opinions (having already spoken frequently
of them), and states some of them correctly,
while others he has misunderstood ; these, how-
ever, it is not necessary for us to answer or re-
fute. Again, after this he brings forward the
various arguments that may be urged on Mar-
cion's behalf, and also against him, enumerating
what the opinions are which exonerate him from
the charges, and what expose him to them ; and
when he desires to support the statement which
declares that Jesus has been the subject of proph-
ecy,— in order to found a charge against Marcion
and his followers, — he distinctly asks, " How
could he, who was punished in such a manner,
be shown to be God's Son, unless these things
had been predicted of him ? " He next proceeds
to jest, and, as his custom is, to pour ridicule
upon the subject, introducing "two sons of God,
one the son of the Creator,5 and the other the
son of Marcion's God ; and he portrays their
single combats, saying that the Theomachies of
the Fathers are like the battles between quails ; ^
or that the Fathers, becoming useless through
age, and falling into their dotage,'' do not med-
dle at all with one another, but leave their sons
to fight it out." The remark which he made


2 TO ai(j6r)T0i' (ru>)Lta,

3 7rpoo-a\Sij(rfj Si tw kfyofievu),
^ Kav ^LaadfJievo^ 6 Aoyos €vpn.
5 Tou &rjfjLiovpyov,

*> opTvyojv.
^ KripoivTai,


formerly we will turn against himself: "What
old woman would not be ashamed to lull a child
to sleep with such stories as he has inserted in
the work which he entitles A True Discourse ?
For when he ought seriously ^ to apply himself
to argument, he leaves serious argument aside,
and betakes himself to jesting and buffoonery,
imagining that he is writing mimes or scoffing
verses ; not observing that such a method of
procedure defeats his purpose, which is to make
us abandon Christianity and give in our adher-
ence to his opinions, which, perhaps, had they
been stated with some degree of gravity,? would
have appeared more likely to convince, whereas,
since he continues to ridicule, and scoff, and
play the buffoon, we answer that it is because he
has no argument of weight '° (for such he neither
had, nor could understand) that he has betaken
himself to such drivellinu." "


CHAP. LXXV.

To the preceding remarks he adds the follow-
ing : " Since a divine Spirit inhabited the body
(of Jesus), it must certainly have been different
from that of other beings, in respect of grandeur,
or beauty, or strength, or voice, or impressive-
ness,'^ or persuasiveness. For it is impossible
that He, to whom was imparted some divine
quality beyond other beings, should not differ
from others ; whereas this person did not differ in
any respect from another, but was, as they report,
little, and ill-favoured, and ignoble." '^ Now it is
evident by these words, that when Celsus wishes
to bring a charge against Jesus, he adduces the
sacred writings, as one who believed them to be
writings apparently fitted to afford a handle for
a charge against Him ; but wherever, in the same
writings, statements would appear to be made
opposed to those charges which are adduced, he
pretends not even to know them ! There are,
indeed, admitted to be recorded some statements
respecting the body of Jesus having been " ill-
favoured ; " not, however, " ignoble," as has
been stated, nor is there any certain evidence
that he was " little." The language of Isaiah
runs as follows, who prophesied regarding Him
that He would come and visit the multitude, not
in comeliness of form, nor in any surpassing
beauty : " Lord, who hath believed our report,
and to whom was the arm of the Lord revealed ?
He made announcement before Him, as a child,
as a root in a thirsty ground. He has no form
nor glory, and we beheld Him, and He had no
form nor beauty ; but His form was without


8 Trpay/xaTtKoi?.

9 iatp-voKoyn..

'0 (xeMi'i"*' Aoywi'.
'■ Toaa.vTr\v it>\vapii
12 (taTairA.,fic.


6o8


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


honour, and inferior to that of the sons of men." '
These passages, then, Celsus hstened to, because
he thought they were of use to him in bringing
a charge against Jesus ; but he paid no attention
to the words of the 45th Psahii, and why it is
then said, " Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O
most mighty, with Thy comeHness and beauty ;
and continue, and prosper, and reign." ^

CHAP. LXXVI.

Let it be supposed, however, that he had not
read the prophecy, or that he had read it, but
had been drawn away by those who misinter-
preted it as not being spoken of Jesus Christ.
What tias he to say of the Gospel, in the narra-
tives of which Jesus ascended up into a high
mountain, and was transfigured before the disci-
ples, and was seen in glory, when both Moses
and Elias, " being seen in glory, spake of the
decease which He was about to accomplish at
Jerusalem? "3 or when the prophet says, "We
beheld Him, and He had no form nor beauty,"
etc. ? and Celsus accepts this prophecy as refer-
ring to Jesus, being blinded in so accepting it,
and not seeing that it is a great proof that the
Jesus who appeared to be " without form " was
the Son of God, that His very appearance should
have been made the subject of prophecy many
years before His birth. But if another prophet
speak of His comeliness and beauty, he will no
longer accept the prophecy as referring to Christ !
And if it were to be clearly ascertained from the
Gospels that " He had no form nor beauty, but
that His appearance was without honour, and
inferior to that of the sons of men," it might be
said that it was not with reference to the pro-
phetic writings, but to the Gospels, that Celsws
made his remarks. But now, as neither the
Gospels nor the apostolic writings indicate that
"He had no form nor beauty," it is evident that
we must accept the declaration of the prophets
as true of Christ, and this will prevent the charge
against Jesus from being advanced.'*

CHAP. Lxxvir.

But again, how did he who said, "Since a
divine Spirit inhabited the body (of Jesus), it
must certainly have been different from that of
other beings in respect of grandeur, or voice, or
strength, or impressiveness, or persuasiveness,"
not observe the changing relation of His body
according to the capacity of the spectators (and
therefore its corresponding utility), inasmuch as
it appeared to each one of such a nature as it
was requisite for him to behold it? Moreover,


« Cf. Isa. liii. 1-3 (LXX.). [See Bishop Pearson's Exposition
0/ the Creed, Art. II., note. S.l.

2 Cf Ps. xlv. 3,4 (LXX.).

3 [Luke i.x. 31. S,]

4 Trpg^Jaiwii'.


it is not a subject of wonder that the matter,
which is by nature susceptible of being altered
and changed, and of being transformed into
anything which the Creator chooses, and is
capable of receiving all the qualities which the
Artificer desires, should at one time possess a
quality, agreeably to which it is said, " He had
no form nor beauty," and at another, one so
glorious, and majestic, and marvellous, that the
spectators of such surpassing loveliness — three
disciples who had ascended (the mount) with
Jesus — should fall upon their faces. He will
say, however, that these are inventions, and in
no respect different from myths, as are also the
other marvels related of Jesus ; which objection
we have answered at greater length in what has
gone before. But there is also something mys-
tical in this doctrine, which announces that the
varying appearances of Jesus are to be referred
to the nature of the divine Word, who does not
show Himself in the same manner to the multi-
tude as He does to those who are capable of
following Him to the high mountain which we
have mentioned ; for to those who still remain
below, and are not yet prepared to ascend, the
Word " has neither form nor beauty," because
to such persons His form is " without honour,"
and inferior to the words given forth by men,
which are figuratively termed " sons of men."
For we might say that the words of philosophers
— who are " sons of men " — appear far more
beautiful than the Word of God, who is pro-
claimed to the multitude, and who also exhibits
(what is called) the " foolishness of preaching,"
and on account of this apparent " foolishness of
preaching " those who look at this alone say,
" We saw Him, but He had no form nor beauty."
To those, indeed, who have received power to
follow Him, in order that they may attend Him
even when He ascends to the " lofty mount,"
He has a diviner appearance, which they be-
hold, if there happens to be (among them) a
Peter, who has received within himself the edi-
fice of the Church based upon the Word, and
who has gained such a habit (of goodness) that
none of the gates of Hades will prevail against
him, having been exalted by the Word from the
gates of death, that he may " publish the praises
of God in the gates of the daughter of Sion,"
and any others who have derived their birth from
impressive preaching,^ and who are not at all
inferior to " sons of thunder." But how can
Celsus and the enemies of the divine Word, and
those who have not examined the doctrines of
Christianity in the spirit of truth, know the
meaning of the different appearances of Jesus?
And I refer also to the different stages of His
life, and to any actions performed by Him be-


Ka-xovTi^ /j.eya^otj><i


Chap. LXXX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


609


fore His sufferings, and after His resurrection
from the dead.

CHAP. LXXVIir,


uprightness of Hfe, and who are themselves
termed " christs " by the holy Scriptures, in the
passage, "Touch not Mine anointed.' and do


t^-^-'-^^^a^, xwuv,u uuL .viiiie anomteu,' ar
Celsus next makes certain observations of the ! JJ°^ ^^^ prophets any harm." ^ For as we nave
following nature: "Again, if God, like Jupiter ,^"^^^^^ Antichrist cometh, and yet have
in the comedy, should, on awaking from a j '^^''"f ^ that there are many antichrists in the
lengthened slumber, desire to rescue the human | ^°^ld' ^^ the same way, knowing that Christ has
race from evil, why did He send this Spirit of I ^°'^^' '^^'^ ^^^ ^^^t, owing to Him, there are
which you speak into one corner (of the earth) ? I J^^^^J christs in the world, who, like Him, have
He ought to have breathed it alike into many ' °^'^" righteousness and hated iniciuity, and
bodies, and have sent them out into all the therefore God, the God of Christ, anointed them


— o--- -" ..i^.v, ui._ij.i.ii.„v_i iL cniiv(_ iiiLu many

bodies, and have sent them out into all the
world. Now the comic poet, to cause laughter
in the theatre, wrote that Jupiter, after awaken-
ing, despatched Mercury to the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians ; but do not you think that you
have made the Son of God more ridiculous in
sending Him to the Jews?" Observe in such
language as this the irreverent character of Cel-
sus, who, unlike a philosopher, takes the writer
of a comedy, whose business is to cause laugh-
ter, and compares our God, the Creator of all
things, to the being who, as represented in the
play, on awaking, despatches Mercury (on an
errand) ! We stated, indeed, in what precedes,
that it was not as if awakening from a lengthened
slumber that God sent Jesus to the human race,
who has now, for good reasons, fulfilled the
economy of His incarnation, but who has al-
ways conferred benefits upon the human race.
For no noble deed has ever been performed
amongst men, where the divine Word did not
■ visit the souls of those who were capable, al-
though for a little time, of admitting such opera-
tions of the divine Word. Moreover, the advent
of Jesus apparendy to one corner (of the earth)
was founded on good reasons, since it was neces-
sary that He who was the subject of prophecy
should mak#His appearance among those who
had become acquainted with the doctrine of one
God, and who perused the writings of His
prophets, and who had come to know the an-
nouncement of Christ, and that He should
come to them at a time when the Word was
al)out to be diffused from one corner over the
whole world.

CHAP. LXXIX.

And therefore there was no need that there
should everywhere exist many bodies, and many
spirits like Jesus, in order that the whole world
of men might be enlightened by the Word of
God. For the one Word was enough, having
arisen as the "Sun of righteousness," to send
forth from Judea His coming rays int® the soul
of all who were willing to receive Him. But if
any one desires to see many bodies filled with a
divine Spirit, similar to the one Christ, minister-
ing to the salvation of men everywhere, let him
take note of those who teach the Gospel of
Jesus in all lands in soundness of doctrine and


also with the " oil of gladness." But inasmuch
as He loved righteousness and hated iniquity
above those who were His partners,3 He also
obtained the first-fruits of His anointing, and, if
we must so term it, the entire unction of the 'oil
of gladness ; while they who were His partners
shared also in His unction, in proportion to their
individual capacity. Therefore, since Christ is
the Head of the Church, so that Christ and the
Church form one body, the ointment descended
from the head to the beard of Aaron, —the
symbols of the perfect man, — and this ointment
in its descent reached to the very skirt of his
garment. This is my answer to the irreverent
language of Celsus when he says, " He ought to
have breathed (His Spirit) alike into many bod-
ies, and have sent it forth into all the world."
The comic poet, indeed, to cause laughter, has
represented Jupiter asleep and awaking from
slumber, and despatching Mercury to the Greeks ;
but the Word, knowing that the nature of God
is unaffected by sleep, may teach us that God
administers in due season, and as right reason
demands, the affairs of the world. It is not,
however, a matter of surprise that, owing to the
greatness and incomprehensibility* of the divine
judgments, ignorant persons should make mis-
takes, and Celsus among them. There is there-
fore nothing ridiculous in the Son of God having
been sent to the Jews, amongst whom the proph-
ets had appeared, in order that, making a com-
mencement among them in a bodily shape. He
might arise with might and power upon a world
of souls, which no longer desired to remain
deserted by God.

CHAP. LXXX.

After this, it seemed proper to Celsus to term
the Chaldeans a most divinely-inspired nation
from the very earliest times,5 from whom the
delusive system of astrology ^ has spread abroad
among men. Nay, he ranks the Magi also in
the same category, from whom the art of magic
derived its name and has been transmitted to


' TMV )(Pl<n!oV /[iOU.

' Cf. I Chron. xvi. 22 and Ps. cv. 1$.

3 Toil? /leTOxov; avrov.

* Sva-SiriyriTovf Tiis Kptffcis.

5 (i apxfi';.

6 ycyeSMaAoyia,


6io


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VI.


other nations, to the corruption and destruction
of those who employ it. In the preceding part
of this work, (we mentioned) that, in the opin-
ion even of Celsus, the Egyptians also were
guilty of error, because they had indeed solemn
enclosures around what they considered their
temples, while within them there was nothing
save apes, or crocodiles, or goats, or asps, or
some other animal ; but on the present occasion
it pleases him to speak of the Egyptian people
too as most divinely inspired, and that, too, from
the earliest times, — perhaps because they made
war upon the Jews from an early date. The
Persians, moreover, who marry their own moth-
ers,' and have intercourse with their own daugh-
ters, are, in the opinion of Celsus, an inspired
race ; nay, even the Indians are so, some of
whom, in the preceding, he mentioned as eaters
of human flesh. To the Jews, however, espe-
cially those of ancient times, who employ none
of these practices, he did not merely refuse the
name of inspired, but declared that they would
immediately perish. And this prediction he
uttered respecting them, as being doubtless en-
dued with prophetic power, not observing that
the whole history of the Jews, and their ancient
and venerable polity, were administered by God ;
and that it is by their fall that salvation has come
to the Gentiles, and that " their fall is the riches
of the world, and the diminishing of them the


riches of the Gentiles," ^ until the fulness of the
Gentiles come, that after that the whole of Is-
rael, whom Celsus does not know, may be saved.

CHAP. LXXXI.

I do not understand, however, how he should
say of God, that although " knowing all things,
He was not aware of this, that He was sending
His Son amongst wicked men, who were both to
be guilty of sin, and to inflict punishment upon
Him." Certainly he appears, in the present in-
stance, to have forgotten that all the sufferings
which Jesus was to undergo were foreseen by
the Spirit of God, and foretold by His prophets ;
from which it does not follow that " God did
not know that He was sending His Son amongst
wicked and sinful men, who were also to inflict
punishment upon Him." He immediately adds,
however, that " our defence on this point is that
all these things were predicted." But as our
sixth book has now attained sufficient dimen-
sions, we shall stop here, and begin, God willing,
the argument of the seventh, in which we shall
I consider the reasons which he thinks furnish an
I answer to our statement, that everything regard-
ing Jesus was foretold by the prophets ; and as
! these are numerous, and require to be answered
I at length, we wished neither to cut the subject
short, in consequence of the size of the present
book, nor, in order to avoid doing so, to swell
this sixth book beyond its proper proportions.


I [On the manners of heathen nations, note this. See i Cor.


..tAuM


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.
BOOK VII.


In the six former books we have endeavoured,
reverend brother Ambrosius, according to our
abihty to meet the charges brought by Celsus
against the Christians, and have as far as possi-
ble passed over nothing without first subjecting
it to a full and close examination. And now,
while we enter upon the seventh book, we call
upon God through Jesus Christ, whom Celsus
accuses, that He who is the truth of God would
shed light into our hearts and scatter the dark-
ness of error, in accordance with that saying of
the prophet which we now offer as our prayer,
" Destroy them by Thy truth." ' For it is evi-
dently the words and reasonings opposed to the
truth that God destroys by His truth ; so that
when these are destroyed, all who are delivered
from deception may go on with the prophet to
say, "I will freely sacrifice unto Thee,"- and
may offer to the Most High a reasonable and
smokeless sacrifice.


Celsus now sets himself to combat the views
of those who say that the Jewish prophets fore-
told events which happened in the life of Christ
Jesus. At the outset let us refer to a notion he
has, that those who assume the existence of
another God besides the God of the Jews have
no ground on which to answer his objections ;
while we who recognise the same God rely for
our defence on the prophecies which were de-
livered concerning Jesus Christ. His words are :
" Let us see how they can raise a defence. To
those who admit another God, no defence is
possible ; and they who recognise the same God
will always fall back upon the same reason,
' This and that must have happened.' And why?
' Because it had been predicted long before.' "
To this we answer, that tiie arguments recently
raised by Celsus against Jesus and Christians
were so utterly feeble, that they might easily be


" Ps. liv. 5.
2 Ps. liv. 6.


overthrown even by those who are impious
enough to bring in another God. Indeed, were
it not dangerous to give to the weak any excuse
for embracing false notions, we could furnish the
answer ourselves, and show Celsus how unfounded
is his opinion, that those who admit another God
are not in a position to meet his arguments.
However, let us for the present confine ourselves
to a defence of the prophets, in continuation of
what we have said on the subject before.


Celsus goes on to say of us : " They set no
value on the oracles of the Pythian priestess, of
the priests of Dodona, of Clarus, of Branchidae,
of Jupiter Amnion, and of a multitude of others ;
although under their guidance we may say that
colonies were sent forth, and the whole world
peopled. But those sayings which were uttered
or not uttered in Judea, after the manner of that
country, as indeed they are still delivered among
the people of Phoenicia and Palestine — these
they look upon as marvellous sayings, and un-
changeably true." In regard to the oracles here
enumerated, we reply that it would be possible
for us to gather from the writings of Aristotle
and the Peripatetic school not a few things to
overthrow the authority of tlie Pythian and the
other oracles. From Epicurus also, and his
followers, we could quote passages to show that
even among the Greeks themselves there were
some who utterly discredited the oracles which
were recognised and admired throughout the
whole of Greece. But let it be granted that
the responses delivered by the Pythian and
other oracles were not the utterances of false
men who pretended to a divine inspiration ; and
let us see if, after all, we cannot convince any sin-
cere inquirers that there is no necessity to attrib-
ute these oracular responses to any divinities,
but that, on the other hand, they may be traced
to wicked demons — to spirits which are at en-
mity with the human race, and which in this
way wish to hinder the soul from rising upwards,
611


6l2


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


from following the path of virtue, and from
returning to God in sincere piety. It is said of
the Pythian priestess, whose oracle seems to
have been the most celebrated, that when she
sat down at the mouth of the Castalian cave,
the prophetic spirit of Apollo entered her private
parts ; and when she was filled with it, she gave
utterance to responses which are regarded with
awe as divine truths. Judge by this whether
that spirit does not show its profane and impure
nature, by choosing to enter the soul of the
prophetess not through the more becoming me-
dium of the bodily pores which are both open
and invisible, but by means of what no modest
man would ever see or speak of. And this
occurs not once or twice, which would be more
permissible, but as often as she was believed to
receive inspiration from Apollo. Moreover, it is
not the part of a divine spirit to drive the proph-
etess into such a state of ecstasy and madness
that she loses control of herself. For he who is
under the influence of the Divine Spirit ought
to be the first to receive the beneficial effects ;
and these ought not to be first enjoyed by the
persons who consult the oracle about the con-
cerns of natural or civil life, or for purposes of
temporal gain or interest ; and, moreover, that
should be the time of clearest perception, when
a person is in close intercourse with the Deity.


Accordingly, we can show from an examina-
tion of the sacred Scriptures, that the Jewish
prophets, who were enlightened as far as was
necessary for their prophetic work by the Spirit
of God, were the first to enjoy the benefit of the
inspiration; and by the contact — if I may so
say — of the Holy Spirit they became clearer in
mind, and their souls were filled with a brighter
light. And the body no longer served as a hin-
drance to ^ virtuous life ; for to that which we
call " the lust of the flesh " it was deadened.
For we are persuaded that the Divine Spirit
"mordfies the deeds of the body," and destroys
that enmity against God which the carnal pas-
sions serve to excite. If, then, the Pythian
priestess is beside herself when she prophesies,
what spirit must that be which fills her mind and
clouds her judgment with darkness, unless it be
of the same order with those demons which many
Christians cast out of persons possessed with
them ? And this, we may observe, they do with-
out the use of any curious arts of magic, or in-
cantations, but merely by prayer and simple
adjurations which the plainest person can use.
Because for the most part it is unlettered persons
who perform this work ; thus making manifest
the grace which is in the word of Christ, and the
despicable weakness of demons, which, in order


to be overcome and driven out of the bodies and
souls of men, do not require the power and wis-
dom of those who are mighty in argument, and
most learned in matters of faith.'


Moreover, if it is believed not only among
Christians and Jews, but also by many others
among the Greeks and Barbarians, that the hu-
man soul lives and subsists after its separation
from the body ; and if reason supports the idea
that pure souls which are not weighed down with
sin as with a weight of lead ascend on high to
the region of purer and more ethereal bodies,
leaving here below their grosser bodies along
with their impurities ; whereas souls that are
polluted and dragged down to the earth by their
sins, so that they are unable even to breathe up-
wards, wander hither and thither, at some times
about sepulchres, where they appear as the ap-
paritions of shadowy spirits, at others among
other objects on the ground ; — if this is so,
what are we to think of those spirits that are at-
tached for entire ages, as I may say, to particular
dwellings and places, whether by a sort of magi-
cal force or by their own natural wickedness?
Are we not compelled by reason to set down as
evil such spirits as employ the power of prophe-
sying — a power in itself neither good nor bad —
for the purpose of deceiving men, and thus turn
them away from God, and from the purity of
His service ? It is moreover evident that this is
their character, when we add that they delight
in the blood of victims, and in the smoke and
odour of sacrifices, and that they feed their
bodies on these, and that they take pleasure in
such haunts as these, as though they sought in
them the sustenance of their lives ; in this re-
sembling those depraved men who despise the
purity of a life apart from the senses, and who
have no inclination except for the pleasures of
the body, and for that earthly and bodily life in
which these pleasures are found. If the Delphian
Apollo were a god, as the Greeks suppose, would
he not rather have chosen as his prophet some
wise man ? or if such an one was not to be found,
then one who was endeavouring to become wise ?
How came he not to prefer a man to a woman
for the utterance of his prophesies? And if he
preferred the latter sex, as though he could only
find pleasure in the breast of a woman, why did
he not choose among women a virgin to inter-
pret his will ?

CHAP. VI.

But no ; the Pythian, so much admired among
the Greeks, judged no wise man, nay, no man at '


' [See Dr. Lee on " the immemorial doctrine of the Church of
God" as to the Divine influence upon the intellectual faculties of the
I prophets: /iisfiiraiion of Holy Scripture : lis Nature and Proof,
I pp. 78, 79. S.].


CHAr. VII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


613


all, worthy of the divine possession, as they call
it. And among women he did not choose a
virgin, or one recommended by her wisdom, or
by her attainments in philosophy ; but he selects
a common woman. Perhaps the better class
of men were too good to become the subjects of
the inspiration. Besides, if he were a god, he
should have employed his prophetic power as a
bait, so to speak, with which he might draw men
to a change of life, and to the practice of virtue.
But history nowhere makes mention of anything
of the kind. For if the oracle did call Socrates
the wisest of all men, it takes from the value of
that eulogy by what is said in regard to Euripides
and Sophocles. The words are : —

" Sophocles is wise, and Euripides is wiser,
But wiser than all men is Socrates." '

As, then, he gives the designation " wise " to the
tragic poets, it is not on account of his philoso-
phy that he holds up Socrates to veneration, or
because of his love of truth and virtue. It is
poor praise of Socrates to say that he prefers
him to men who for a paltry reward compete
upon the stage, and who by their representations
excite the spectators at one time to tears and
grief, and at another to unseemly laughter (for
such is the intention of the satyric drama) . And
perhaps it was not so much in regard to his phil-
osophy that he called Socrates the wisest of all
men, as on account of the victims which he sac-
rificed to him and the other demons. For it
seems that the demons pay more regard in dis-
tributing their favours to the sacrifices which are
offered them than to deeds of virtue. Accord-
ingly, Homer, the best of the poets, who de-
scribes what usually took place, when, wishing
to show us what most influenced the demons to
grant an answer to the wishes of their votaries,
introduces Chryses, who, for a few garlands and
the thighs of bulls and goats, obtained an answer
to his prayers for his daughter Chryseis, so that
the Greeks were driven by a pestilence to restore
her back to him. And I remember reading in
the book of a certain Pythagorean, when writing
on the hidden meanings in that poet, that the
prayer of Chryses to Apollo, and the plague
which Apollo afterwards sent upon the Greeks,
are proofs that Homer knew of certain evil
demons who delight in the smoke of sacrifices,
and who, to reward those who offer them, grant
in answer to their prayers the destruction of
others. " He," that is, Jupiter, " who rules over
wintry Dodona, where his prophets have ever
unwashed feet, and sleep upon the ground,"^
has rejected the male sex, and, as Celsus ob-
serves, employs the women of Dodona for the
prophetic office. Granting that there are oracles


■ Suidas in Soio?.

2 Homer, Iliad, xvi. 234, etc.


similar to these, as that at Clarus, another in
Branchidas, another in the temple of Jupiter
Ammon, or anywhere else ; yet how shall it be
proved that these are gods, and not demons ?


In regard to the prophets among the Jews,
some of them were wise men before they be-
came divinely inspired pj-ophets, while others
became wise by the illumination which their
minds received when divinely inspired. They
were selected by Divine Providence to receive
the Divine Spirit, and to be the depositaries of
His holy oracles, on the ground of their leading
a life of almost unapproachable excellence, in-
trepid, noble, unmoved by danger or death.
For reason teaches that such ought to be the
character of the prophets of the Most High, in
comparison with which the firmness of Antis-
thenes. Crates, and Diogenes will seem but as
child's play. It was therefore for their firm
adherence to truth, and their faithfulness in the
reproof of the wicked, that " they were stoned ;
they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the sword ; they wandered about in
sheepskins and goatskins ; being destitute, af-
flicted, tormented ; they wandered in deserts
and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the
earth, of whom the world was not worthy : " ^
for they looked always to God and to His bless-
ings, which, being invisible, and not to be per-
ceived by the senses, are eternal. We have the
history of the life of each of the prophets ; but
it will be enough at present to direct attention
to the life of Moses, whose prophecies are con-
tained in the law ; to that of Jeremiah, as it is
given in the book which bears his name ; to that
of Isaiah, who with unexampled austerity walked
naked and barefooted for the space of three
years.'* Read and consider the severe life of
those children, Daniel and his companions, how
they abstained from flesh, and lived on water
and pulse.5 Or if you will go back to more
remote times, think of the life of Noah, who
prophesied ; '^ and of Isaac, who gave his son a
prophetic blessing ; or of Jacob, who addressed
each of his twelve sons, beginning with " Come,
that I may tell you what shall befall you in the
last days." ^ These, and a multitude of others,
prophesying on behalf of God, foretold events
relating to Jesus Christ. We therefore for this
reason set at nought the oracles of the Pythian
priestess, or those delivered at Dodona, at Clarus,
at Branchid?e, at the temple of Jupiter Ammon,
or by a multitude of other so-called prophets ;


3 Heb. xi. 37, 38.
< [Isa. XX. 3. S.]

5 [Dan. i. 16. S.]

6 [Gen. ix. 25-27. S.'

7 [Gen. xlix. i. S.]


6i4


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


whilst we regard with reverent awe the Jewish
prophets : for we see that the noble, earnest, and
devout lives of these men were worthy of the
inspiration of the Divine Spirit, whose wonderful
effects were widely different from the divination
of demons.

CHAP. VIII.

I do not know what led Celsus, when saying,
" But what things were spoken or not spoken in
the land of Judea, according to the custom of
the country," to use the words "or not spoken,"
as though implying that he was incredulous, and
that he suspected that those things which were
written were never spoken. In fact, he is un-
acquainted with these times ; and he does not
know that those prophets who foretold the com-
ing of Christ, predicted a multitude of other
events many years beforehand. He adds, with
the view of casting a slight upon the ancient
prophets, that " they prophesied in the same
way as we find them still doing among the in-
habitants of Phoenicia and Palestine." But he
does not tell us whether he refers to persons who
are of different principles from those of the Jews
and Christians, or to persons whose prophecies
are of the same character as those of the Jewish
prophets. However it be, his statement is false,
taken in either way. For never have any of those
who have not embraced our faith done any thing
approaching to what was done by the ancient
prophets ; and in more recent times, since the
coming of Christ, no prophets have arisen among
the Jews, who have confessedly been abandoned
by the Holy Spirit on account of their impiety
towards God, and towards Him of whom their
prophets spoke. Moreover, the Holy Spirit gave
signs of His presence at the beginning of Christ's
ministry, and after His ascension He gave still
more ; but since that time these signs have di-
minished, although there are still traces of His
presence in a few who have had their souls puri-
fied by the Gospel, and their actions regulated
by its influence. " For the holy Spirit of disci-
pline will flee deceit, and remove from thoughts
that are without understanding." '


But as Celsus promises to give an account of
the manner in Avhich prophecies are delivered in
Phoenicia and Palestine, speaking as though it
were a matter with which he had a full and per-
sonal acquaintance, let us see what he has to say
on the subject. First he lays it down that there
are several kinds of prophecies, but he does not
specify what they are ; indeed, he could not do
so, and the statement is a piece of pure osten-
tation. However, let us see what he considers


Wisd of Sol. i. 5.


the most perfect kind of prophecy among these
nations. "There are many," he says, "who,
although of no name, with the greatest facility
and on the slightest occasion, whether within or
without temples, assume the motions and gestures
of inspired persons ; while others do it in cities
or among armies, for the purpose of attrac<-ing
attention and exciting surprise. These are accus-
tomed to say, each for himself, ' I am God ; I
am the Son of God ; or, I am the Divine Spirit ;
I have come because the world is perishing, and
you, O men, are perishing for your iniquities.
But I wish to save you, and you shall see me re-
turning again with heavenly power. Blessed is
he who now does me homage. On all the rest
I will send down eternal fire, both on cities and
on countries. And those who know not the
punishments which await them shall repent and
grieve in vain ; while those who are faithful to
me I will preserve eternally.' " Then he goes on
to say : " To these promises are added strange,
fanatical, and quite unintelligible words, of which
no rational person can find the meaning : for so
dark are they, as to have no meaning at all ; but
they give occasion to every fool or impostor to
apply them to suit his own purposes."


But if he were dealing honestly in his accusa-
tions, he ought to have given the exact terms
of the prophecies, whether those in which the
speaker is introduced as claiming to be God
Almighty, or those in which the Son of God
speaks, or finally those under the name of the
Holy Spirit. For thus he might have endeav-
oured to overthrow these assertions, and have
shown that there was no divine inspiration in
those words which urged men to forsake their
sins, which condemned the past and foretold the
future. For the prophecies were recorded and
preserved by men living at the time, that those
who came after might read and admire them as
the oracles of God, and that they might profit
not only by the warnings and admonitions, but
also by the predictions, which, being shown by
events to have proceeded from the Spirit of God,
bind men to the practice of piety as set forth in
the law and the prophets. The prophets have
therefore, as God commanded them, declared
with all plainness those things which it was de-
sirable that the hearers should understand at
once for the regulation of their conduct ; while
in regard to deeper and more mysterious sub-
jects, which lay beyond the reach of the common
understanding, they set them forth in the form
of enigmas and allegories, or of what are called
dark sayings, parables, or similitudes. And this
plan they have followed, that those who are ready
to shun no labour and spare no pains in their


Chap. XIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


615


endeavours after truth and virtue might search
into their meaning, and having found it, might
apply it as reason requires. But Celsus, ever
vigorous in his denunciations, as though he were
angry at his inabiHty to understand the language
of the prophets, scoffs at them thus : " To these
grand promises are added strange, fanatical, and
quite unintelligible words, of which no rational
person can find the meaning ; for so dark are
they as to have no meaning at all ; but they give
occasion to e\'ery fool or impostor to apply them
so as to suit his own purposes." This statement
of Celsus seems ingeniously designed to dissuade
readers from attempting any inquiry or careful
search into their meaning. And in this he is
not unlike certain persons, who said to a man
whom a prophet had visited to announce future
events, "Wherefore came this mad fellow to
thee?"'


I am convinced, indeed, that much better
argiuTients could be adduced than any I have
been able to bring forward, to show the falsehood
of these allegations of Celsus, and to set forth
the divine inspiration of the prophecies ; but we
have according to our ability, in our commen-
taries on Isaiah, Ezekiel, and some of the twelve
minor prophets, explained literally and in detail
what he calls " those fanatical and utterly un-
intelligible passages." 2 And if God give us
grace in the time that He appoints for us, to
advance in the knowledge of His word, we shall
continue our investigation into the parts which
remain, or into such at least as we are able to
make plain. And other persons of intelligence
who wish to study Scripture may also find out its
meaning for themselves ; for although there are
many places in which the meaning is not obvi-
ous, yet there are none where, as Celsus affirms,
" there is no sense at all." Neither is it true
that " any fool or impostor can explain the pas-
sages so as to make them suit his own purposes."
For it belongs only to those who are wise in the
truth of Christ (and to all them it does belong)
to unfold the connection and meaning of even
the obscure parts of prophecy, " comparing spir-
itual things with spiritual," and interpreting each
passage according to the usage of Scripture
writers. And Celsus is not to be believed when
he says that he has heard such men prophesy ;
for no prophets bearing any resemblance to the
ancient prophets have appeared in the time of
Celsus. If there had been any, those who heard
and admired them would have followed the
example of the ancients, and have recorded the
prophecies in writing. And it seems quite clear
that Celsus is speaking falsely, when he says that


2 Kings ix. 11.

[See note supra, p. 612. S.]


" those prophets whom he had heard, on being
pressed by him, confessed their true motives,
and acknowledged that the ambiguous words
they used really meant nothing." He ought to
have given the names of those whom he says he
had heard, if he had any to give, so that those
who were competent to judge might decide
whether his allegations were true or false.


He thinks, besides, that those who support
the cause of Christ by a reference to the writings
of the prophets can give no proper answer in re-
gard to statements in them which attribute to
God that which is wicked, shameful, or impure ;
and assuming that no answer can be given, he
proceeds to draw a whole train of inferences,
none of which can be allowed. But he ought to
know that those who wish to live according to the
teaching of sacred Scripture understand the say-
ing, " The knowledge of the unwise is as talk
without sense," ^ and have learnt " to be ready
always to give an answer to every one that ask-
eth us a reason for the hope that is in us." ^
x'\nd they are not satisfied with affirming that
such and such things have been predicted ; but
they endeavour to remove any apparent incon-
sistencies, and to show that, so far from there
being anything evil, shameful, or impure in these
predictions, everything is worthy of being re-
ceived by those who understand the sacred
Scriptures. But Celsus ought to have adduced
from the prophets examples of what he thought
bad, or shameful, or impure, if he saw any such
passages ; for then his argument would have had
much more force, and would have furthered his
purpose much better. He gives no instances,
however, but contents himself with loudly assert-
ing the false charge that these things are to be
found in Scripture. There is no reason, then,
for us to defend ourselves against groundless
charges, which are but empty sounds, or to take
the trouble of showing that in the writings of
the prophets there is nothing evil, shameful, im-
pure, or abominable.

CHAP. XIII.

And there is no truth in the statement of
Celsus, that " God does the most shameless
deeds, or suffers the most shameless sufferings,"
or that " He favours the commission of evil ; "
for whatever he may say, no such things have ever
been foretold. He ought to have cited from the
prophets the passages in which God is represented
as favouring evil, or as doing and enduring the
most shameless deeds, and not to have sought
without foundation to prejudice the minds of


6i6


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


his readers. The prophets, indeed, foretold what
Christ should suffer, and set forth the reason
why He should suffer. God therefore also knew
what Christ would suffer ; but where has he
learnt that those things which the Christ of God
should suffer were most base and dishonourable ?
He goes on to explain what those most shame-
ful and degrading things were which Christ suf
fered, in these words : " For what better was it
for God to eat the flesh of sheep, or to drink
vinegar and gall, than to feed on filth?" But
God, according to us, did not eat the flesh of
sheep ; and while it may seem that Jesus ate.
He did so only as possessing a body. But in
regard to the vinegar and gall mentioned in the
prophecy, " They gave me also gall for my
meat ; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to
drink," ' we have already referred ^ to this point ;
and as Celsus compels us to recur to it again, we
would only say further, that those who resist the
word of truth do ever offer to Christ the Son of
God the gall of their own wickedness, and the
vinegar of their evil inclinations ; but though He
tastes of it, yet He will not drink it.


In the next place, wishing to shake the faith
of those who believe in Jesus on the ground of
the prophecies which were delivered in regard
to Him, Celsus says : " But pray, if the prophets
foretold that the great God — not to put it more
harshly — would become a slave, or become sick,
or die ; would there be therefore any necessity
that God should die, or suffer sickness, or be-
come a slave, simply because such things had
been foretold ? Must he die in order to prove
his divinity? But the prophets never would ut-
ter predictions so wicked and impious. We need
not therefore inquire whether a thing has been
predicted or not, but whether the thing is hon-
ourable in itself, and worthy of God. In that
which is evil and base, although it seemed that
all men in the world had foretold it in a fit of
madness, we must not believe. How then can
the pious mind admit that those things which
are said to have happened to him, could have
happened to one who is God?" From this it
is plain that Celsus feels the argument from
prophecy to be very effective for convincing
those to whom Christ is preached ; but he seems
to endeavour to overthrow it by an opposite prob-
ability, namely, " that the question is not whether
the prophets uttered these predictions or not."
But if he wished to reason justly and without
evasion, he ought rather to have said, " We must
show that these things were never predicted, or
that those things which were predicted of Christ


' Ps. Ixix. 21.

2 Book ii. cap.


have never been fulfilled in him," and in that way
he would have established the position which
he holds. In that way it would have been made
plain what those prophecies are which we apply
to Jesus, and how Celsus could justify himself in
asserting that that application was false. And
we should thus have seen whether he fairly dis-
proved all that we bring from the prophets in
behalf of Jesus, or whether he himself is con-
victed of a shameless endeavour to resist the
plainest truths by violent assertions.


After assuming that some things were foretold
which are impossible in themselves, and incon-
sistent with the character of God, he says : " If
these things were predicted of the Most High
God, are we bound to believe them of God sim-
ply because they were predicted? " And thus he
thinks he proves, that although the prophets may
have foretold truly such things of the Son of God,
yet it is impossible for us to believe in those
prophecies declaring that He would do or suffer
such things. To this our answer is that the sup-
position is absurd, for it combines two lines of
reasoning which are opposed to each other, and
therefore mutually destructive. This may be
shown as follows. The one argument is : " If
any true prophets of the Most High say that God
will become a slave, or suffer sickness, or die,
these things will come to God ; for it is impossi-
ble that the prophets of the great God should
utter lies." The other is : " If even true prophets
of the Most High God say that these same things
shall come to pass, seeing that these things fore-
told are by the nature of things impossible, the
prophecies are not true, and therefore those
things which have been foretold will not happen
to God." When, then, we find two processes of
reasoning in both of which the major premiss is
the same, leading to two contradictory conclu-
sions, we use the form of argument called " the
theorem of two propositions," ^ to prove that the
major premiss is false, which in the case before
us is this, " that the prophets have foretold that
the great God should become a slave, suffer
sickness, or die." We conclude, then, that the
prophets never foretold such things ; and the
argument is formally expressed as follows : ist,
Of two things, if the first is true, the second is
true; 2d, if the first is^ true, the second is not
true, therefore the first is not true. The concrete
example which the Stoics give to illustrate this
form of argument is the following : \st, If you
know that .you are dead, you are dead ; 2d, if
you know that you are dead, you are not dead.
And the conclusion is — " you do not know that


3 8ta 6u'o TpoTTiKuiv Beuipriixa.

* We follow Bouhereau and Valesius, who expunge the negative
particle in this clause.


Chap. XVIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


617


you are dead." These proposition.s are worked
out as follows : If you know that you are dead,
that which you know is certain ; therefore you
are dead. Again, if you know that you are dead,
your death is an object of knowledge ; but as
the dead know nothing, your knowing this proves
that you are not dead. Accordingly, by joining
the two arguments together, you arrive at the
conclusion — " you do not know that you are
dead." Now the hypothesis of Celsus which we
have given above is much of the same kind.

CH.\P. XVI.

But besides, the prophecies which he intro-
duces into his argument are very different from
what the prophets actually foretold of Jesus
Christ. For the prophecies do not foretell that
God will be crucified, when they say of Him
who should suffer, " We beheld Him, and He had
no form or comeliness ; but Hi3 form was dis-
honoured and marred more than the sons of
men ; He was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief." ' Observe, then, how distinctly they
say that it was a man who should endure these
human sufferings. And Jesus Himself, who knew
perfectly that one who was to die must be a man,
said to His accusers : " But now ye seek to kill
Me, a man that hath spoken unto you the truth
which I heard of God."^ And if in that man
as He appeared among men there was something
divine, namely the only-begotten Son of God, the
first-born of all creation, one who said of Him-
self, " I am the truth," " I am the Hfe," " I am
the door," " I am the way," " I am the living
bread which came down from heaven," of this
Being and His nature we must judge and reason
in a way quite different from that in which we
judge of the man who was seen in Jesus Christ.
Accordingly, you will find no Christian, however
simple he may be, and however little versed in
critical studies, who would say that He who died
was "the truth," "the life," "the way," "the
living bread which came down from heaven,"
"the resurrection ; " for it was He who appeared
to us in the form of the man Jesus, who taught
us, saying, " I am the resurrection." There is
no one amongst us, I say, so extravagant as to
affirm " the Life died," " the Resurrection died."
I'he supposition of Celsus would have some foun-
(1 Uion if we were to say that it had been fore-
told by the prophets that death would befall
( Hjd the ^Vord, the Truth, the Life, the Resur-
1-1 tion, or any other name which is assumed by
the Son of God.

CHAP. xvii.

In one point alone is Celsus correct in his
statements on this subject. It is that in which


- John viii. 40.


he says : " The prophets would not foretell this,
because it involves that which is wicked and im-
pious,"— namely, that the great God should
become a slave or suffer death. But that which
is predicted by the prophets is worthy of God,
that He who is the brightness and express im-
age of the divine nature should come into the
world with the holy human soul which was to
animate the body of Jesus, to sow the seed of
His word, which might bring all who received
and cherished it into union with the Most High
God, and which would lead to perfect blessed-
ness all those who felt within them the power of
God the Word, who was to be in the body and
soul of a man. He was to be in it indeed, but
not in such a way as to confine therein all the
rays of His glory ; and we are not to suppose
that the light of Him who is God the Word is
shed forth in no other way than in this. If, then,
we consider Jesus in relation to the divinity that
was in Him, the things which He did in this
capacity present nothing to offend our ideas of
God, nothing but what is holy ; and if we con-
sider Him as man, distinguished beyond all
other men by an intimate communion with the
Eternal Word, with absolute Vv'isdom, He s>ff-
fered as one who was wise and perfect, whatever
it behoved Him to suffer who did all for the
good of the human race, yea, even for the good
of all intelligent beings. And there is nothing
absurd in a man having died, and in His death
being not only an example of death endured for
the sake of piety, but also the first blow in the
conflict which is to overthrow the power of that
evil spirit the devil, who had obtained dominion
over the whole world.3 For we have signs and
pledges of the destruction of his empire, in those
who through the coming of Christ are every-
where escaping from the power of demons, and
who, after their deliverance from this bondage
in which they were held, consecrate themselves
to God, and earnestly devote themselves day by
day to advancement in a life of piety.

CHAP. XVIII.

Celsus adds : " Will they not besides make
this reflection? If the prophets of the God of
the Jews foretold that he who should come into
the world would be the Son of this same God,
how could he command them through Moses to
gather wealth, to extend their dominion, to fill
the earth, to put their enemies of every age to
the sword, and to destroy them utterly, which
indeed he himself did — as Moses says — threat-
ening them, moreover, that if they did not obey
his commands, he would treat them as his avowed
enemies ; whilst, on the other hand, his Son, the
man of Nazareth, promulgated laws quite op-


3 [John xii. 31 and xvi. 11.]


6i8


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


posed to these, declaring that no one can come
to the Father who loves power, or riches, or
glory ; that men ought not to be more careful in
providing food than the ravens ; that they were
to be less concerned about their raiment than
the lilies ; that to him who has given them one
blow, they should offer to receive another ?
Whether is it Moses or Jesus who teaches false-
ly? Did the Father, when he sent Jesus, forget
the commands which he had given to Moses?
Or did he change his mind, condemn his own
laws, and send forth a messenger with counter
instructions?" Celsus, with all his boasts of
universal knowledge, has here fallen into the
most vulgar of errors, in supposing that in the
law and the prophets there is not a meaning
deeper than that afforded by a literal rendering
of the words. He does not see how manifestly
incredible it is that worldly riches should be
promised to those who lead upright lives, when
it is a matter of common observation that the
best of men have lived in extreme poverty. In-
deed, the prophets themselves, who for the purity
of their lives received the Divine Spirit, " wan-
dered about in sheepskins and goatskins ; being
destitute, afflicted, tormented : they wandered
in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and
caves of the earth." ' For, as the Psalmist says,
" many are the afflictions of the righteous." -
If Celsus had read the writings of Moses, he
would, I daresay, have supposed that when it is
said to him who kept the law, " Thou shalt lend
unto many nations, and thou thyself shalt not
borrow," ^ the promise is made to the just man,
that his temporal riches should be so abundant,
that he would be able to lend not only to the
Jews, not only to two or three nations, but " to
many nations." What, then, must have been
the wealth which the just man received accord-
ing to the law for his righteousness, if he could
lend to many nations ? And must we not sup-
pose also, in accordance with this interpretation,
that the just man would never borrow anything?
For it is written, " and thou shalt thyself borrow
nothing." Did then that nation remain for so
long a period attached to the religion which was
taught by Moses, whilst, according to the sup-
position of Celsus, they saw themselves so griev-
ously deceived by that lawgiver ? For nowhere
is it said of any one that he was so rich as to
lend to many nations. It is not to be believed
that they would have fought so zealously in
defence of a law whose promises had proved
glaringly false, if they understood them in the
sense which Celsus gives to them. And if any
one should say that the sins which are recorded
to have been committed by the people are a


1 Heb. xi. 37, 38.

2 Ps. XXiv. IQ.

3 Deut. xxviii. 12,


proof that they despised the law, doubtless from
the feeling that they had been deceived by it,
we may reply that vve have only to read the his-
tory of the times in order to find it shown that
the whole people, after having done that which
was evil in the sight of the Lord, returned after-
wards to their duty, and to the religion pre-
scribed by the law.

CHAP. XIX.

Now if these words in the law, " Thou shalt
have dominion over many nations, and no one
shall rule over thee," were simply a promise to
them of dominion, and if they contain no
deeper meaning than this, then it is certain that
the people would have had still stronger grounds
for despising the promises of the law. Celsus
brings forward another passage, although he
changes the terms of it, where it is said that the
whole earth shall be filled with the Hebrew race ;
which indeed, according to the testimony of
history, did actually happen after the coming of
Christ, although rather as a result of God's
anger, if I may so say, than of His blessing.
As to the promise made to the Jews that they
should slay their enemies, it may be answered
that any one who examines carefully into the
meaning of this passage will find himself unable
to interpret it literally. It is sufficient at present
to refer to the manner in which in the Psalms
the just man is represented as saying, among
other things, " Every morning will I destroy the
wicked of the land ; that I may cut off all
workers of iniquity from the city of Jehovah." ^
Judge, then, from the words and spirit of the
speaker, whether it is conceivable that, after
having in the preceding part of the Psalm, as
any one may read for himself, uttered the noblest
thoughts and purposes, he should in the sequel,
according to the literal rendering of his words,
say that in the morning, and at no other period
of the day, he would destroy all sinners from
the earth, and leave none of them alive, and
that he would slay every one in Jerusalem who
did iniquity. And there are many similar ex-
pressions to be found in the law, as this, for
example: "We left not anything alive." s

CHAP. XX.

Celsus adds, that it was foretold to the Jews,
that if they did not obey the law, they would be
treated in the same way as they treated their
enemies ; and then he quotes from the teach-
ing of Christ some precepts which he considers
contrary to those of the law, and uses that as an
argument against us. But before proceeding to
this point, we must speak of that which precedes.
We hold, then, that the law has a twofold sense.


4 Ps.

5 De


Chap. XXII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


619


— the one literal, the other spiritual, — as has
been shown by some before us. Of the first or
hteral sense it is said, not by us, but by God,
speaking in one of the prophets, that " the
statutes are not good, and the judgments not
good ; " ' whereas, taken in a spiritual sense, the
same prophet makes God say that " His statutes
are good, and His judgments good." Yet evi-
dently the prophet is not saying things which
are contradictory of each other. Paul in like
manner says, that " the letter killeth, and the
spirit giveth life," ^ meaning by " the letter" the
Hteral sense, and by "the spirit" the spiritual
sense of Scripture. We may therefore find in
Paul, as well as in the prophet, apparent con-
tradictions. Indeed, if Ezekiel says in one
place, " I gave them commandments which were
not good, and judgments whereby they should
not live," and in another, " I gave them good
commandments and judgments, which if a man
shall do, he shall live by them," ^ Paul in like
manner, when he wishes to disparage the law
taken literally, says, " If the ministration of
death, written and engraven in stones, was glo-
rious, so that the children of Israel could not
stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the
glory of his countenance, which glory was to be
done away ; how shall not the ministration of
the Spirit be rather glorious ?" + But when in
another place he wishes to praise and recom-
mend the law, he calls it " spiritual," and says,
" We know that the law is spiritual ; " and,
" Wherefore the law is holy, and the command-
ment holy, and just, and good." s

CHAP. XXI.

When, then, the letter of the law promises
riches to the just, Celsus may follow the letter
which killeth, and understand it of worldly
riches, which blind men ; but we say that it
refers to those riches which enlighten the eyes,
and which enrich a man " in all utterance and
in all knowledge." And in this sense we " charge
them that are rich in this world, that they be
not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches,
but in the living God, who giveth us richly all
things to enjoy ; that they do good, that they
be rich in good works, ready to distribute, will-
ing to communicate." ^ For, as Solomon says,
"riches" are the true good, which "are the
ransom of the life of a man ; " but the poverty
which is the opposite of these riches is destruc-
tive, for by it " the poor cannot bear rebuke." ?
And what has been said of riches aj^plies to


' Ezek, XX. 25.

^ 2 Cor. iii. 6.

3 [Ezek. XX. 21, 23. S.]

■♦ 2 Cor. iii. 7, 8.

5 Rom. vii. 12, 14.

* I Tim. vi. 17, 18.

' Prov. xiii. 8.


dominion, in regard to which it is said, "The
just man shall chase a thousand, and two put
ten thousand to flight." ** Now if riches are to
be taken in the sense we have just explained,
consider if it is not according to God's promise
that he who is rich in all utterance, in all knowl-
edge, in all wisdom, in all good works, may not
out of these treasures of utterance, of wisdom,
and of knowledge, lend to many nations. It
was thus that Paul lent to all the nations that
he visited, " carrying the Gospel of Christ from
Jerusalem, and round about unto lUyricum." 9
And as the divine knowledge was given to him
by revelation, and his mind was illumined by the
Divine Word, he himself therefore needed to
borrow from no one, and required not the min-
istry ot any man to teach him the word of truth.
Thus, as it had been written, " Thou shalt have
dominion over many nations, and they shall not
have dominion over thee," he ruled over the
Gentiles whom he brought under the teaching
of Jesus Christ ; and he never " gave place by
subjection to men, no, not for an hour,'° as being
himself mightier than they. And thus also he
" filled the earth."


If I must now explain how the just man "slays
his enemies," and prevails everywhere, it is to be
observed that, when he says, " Every morning
will I destroy the wicked of the land, that I may
cut off all workers of iniquity from the city of
Jehovah," by " the land " he means the flesh
whose lusts are at enmity with God ; and by " the
city of Jehovah" he designates his own soul, in
which was the temple of God, containing the true
idea and conception of God, which makes it to
be admired by all who look upon it. As soon,
then, as the rays of the Sun of righteousness
shine into his soul, feeling strengthened and in-
vigorated by their influence, he sets himself to
destroy all the lusts of the flesh, which are called
" the wicked of the land," and drives out of that
city of the Lord which is in his soul all thoughts
which work iniquity, and all suggestions which
are opposed to the truth. And in this way also
the just give up to destruction all their enemies,
which are their vices, so that they do not spare
even the children, that is, the early beginnings
and promptings of evil. In this sense also we
understand the language of the 137th Psalm:
" O daughter of Babylon, who art to be de-
stroyed ; happy shall he be that rewardeth thee
as thou hast served us : happy shall he be that
taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the
stones."" For "the little ones" of Babylon


8 Pent, xxxii. 30.

9 Rom. XV. 19.
10 Gal. ii. 5.

" Ps. cxxxvii. 8, 9.
itualizing.J


[,\n instance of Origen's characteristic spir-


620


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


(which signifies confusion) are those trouble-
some sinful thoughts which arise in the soul ;
and he who subdues them by striking, as it were,
their heads against the firm and solid strength
of reason and truth, is the man who " dasheth
the little ones against the stones;" and he is
therefore truly blessed. God may therefore
have commanded men to destroy all their vices
utterly, even at their birth, without having en-
joined anything contrary to the teaching of
Christ ; and He may Himself have destroyed
before the eyes of those who were " Jews in-
wardly " ' all the offspring of evil as His ene-
mies. And, in like manner, those who disobey
the law and word of God may well be compared
to His enemies led astray by sin ; and they may
well be said to suffer the same fate as they de-
serve who have proved traitors to the truth of
God.

CHAP. XXIII.

From what has been said, it is clear then that
Jesus, " the man of Nazareth," did not promul-
gate laws opposed to those just considered in
regard to riches, when He said, " It is hard for
the rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God ; " ^ whether we take the word " rich " in
its simplest sense, as referring to the man whose
mind is distracted by his wealth, and, as it were,
entangled with thorns, so that he brings forth no
spiritual fruit ; or whether it is the man who is
rich in the sense of abounding in false notions,
of whom it is written in the Proverbs, "Better is
the poor man who is just, than the rich man who
is false." 3 Perhaps it is the following passages
which have led Celsus to suppose that Jesus for-
bids ambition to His disciples: "Whoever of
you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all ; " •*
" The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion
over them," 5 and " they that exercise authority
upon them are called benefactors." ^ But there
is nothing here inconsistent with the promise,
"Thou shalt rule over many nations, and they
shall not rule over thee," especially after the ex-
planation which we have given of these words.
Celsus next throws in an expression in regard to
wisdom, as though he thought that, according to
the teaching of Christ, no wise man could come
to the Father. But we would ask in what sense
he speaks of a wise man. For if he means one
who is wise in " the wisdom of this world," as it
is called, " which is foolishness with God," ^ then
we would agree with him in saying that access
to the Father is denied to one who is wise in
that sense. But if by wisdom any one means


' Rom. ii. 29.

2 INIatt. xix. 23.

3 Prov. xxviii. 6.
* Mark X. 44.

5 Matt. XX. 25.

6 Luke xxii. 25.

7 I Cor. iii. 19.


Christ, who is " the power and wisdom of God,"
far from such a wise man being refused access
to the Father, we hold that he who is adorned
by the Holy Spirit with that gift which is called
" the word of wisdom," far excels all those who
have not received the same grace.


CHAP, XXIV.

The pursuit of human glory, we maintain, is
forbidden not only by the teaching of Jesus, but
also by the Old Testament. Accordingly we
find one of the prophets, when imprecating upon
himself certain punishments for the commission
of certain sins, includes among the punishments
this one of earthly glory. He says, " O Lord
my God, if I have done thi/; if there be iniquity
in my hands ; if I have rewarded evil unto him
that was at peace with me ; (yea, rather, I have
delivered him that without cause is mine enemy ;)
let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it;
yea, let him tread down my life upon the earth,
and sc^ my gloi-y up on hii^h.^' ^ And these pre-
cepts of our Lord, " Take no thought what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink. Behold the
fowls of the air, or behold the ravens : for they
sow not, neither do they reap ; yet your heavenly
Father feedeth them. How much better are ye
than they ! And why take ye thought for rai-
ment? Consider the lilies of the field ;"9 —
these precepts, and those which follow, are not
inconsistent with the promised blessings of the
law, which teaches that the just " shall eat their
bread to the full ; " '° nor with that saying of Solo-
mon, " The righteous eateth to the satisfying of
his soul, but the belly of the wicked shall want." "
For we must consider the food promised in the
law as the food of the soul, which is to satisfy
not both parts of man's nature, but the soul
only. And the words of the Gospel, although
probably containing a deeper meaning, may yet
be taken in their more simple and obvious sense,
as teaching us not to be disturbed with anxieties
about our food and clothing, but, while living in
plainness, and desiring only what is needful, to
put our trust in the providence of God.

CHAP. XXV.

Celsus then extracts from the Gospel the pre-
cept, " To him who strikes thee once, thou shalt
offer thyself to be struck again," although with-
out giving' any passage from the Old Testament
which he considers opposed to it. On the one
hand, we know that " it was said to them in old
time, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a


8 Ps. vii. 3-5. Origen follows the reading ei? x°"'' (LXX.)
instead of eis x''0"''> "make my glory abide in the dust."

9 Matt. vi. 25-28.
'° Lev. xxvi. 5.

" Prov. xiii. 25


Chap. XXVIIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


621


tooth ; " ' and on the other, we have read, " I
say unto you. Whoever shall smite thee on the
one cheek, turn to him the other also." ^ But
as there is reason to believe that Celsus produces
the objections which he has heard from those
who wish to make a difference between the God
of the Gospel and the God of the law, we must
say in reply, that this precept, " Whosoever shall
strike thee on the one cheek, turn to him the
other," is not unknown in the older Scriptures.
For thus, in the Lamentations of Jeremiah, it is
said, " It is good for a man that he bear the
yoke in his youth : he sitteth alone, and keepeth
silence, because he hath borne it upon him. He
giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him ; he is
filled full with reproach." ^ There is no dis-
crepancy, then, between the God of the Gospel
and the God of the law, even when we take
literally the precept regarding the blow on the
face. So, then, we infer that neither "Jesus
nor Moses has taught falsely." The Father in
sending Jesus did not " forget the commands
which He had given to Moses : " He did not
" change His mind, condemn His own laws, and
send by His messenger counter instructions."

CHAP. XXVI.

However, if we must refer briefly to the dif-
ference between the constitution which was given
to the Jews of old by Moses, and that which the
Christians, under the direction of Christ's teach-
ing, wish now to establish, we would observe
that it must be impossible for the legislation of
j Moses, taken literally, to harmonize with the
calling of the Gentiles, and with their subjection
to the Roman government ; and on the other
hand, it -would be impossible for the Jews to
preserve their civil economy unchanged, sup-
posing that they should embrace the Gospel.
For Christians could not slay their enemies, or
condemn to be burned or stoned, as Moses
commands, those who had broken the law, and
were therefore condemned as deserving of these
punishments ; since the Jews themselves, how-
ever desirous of carrying out their law, are not
able to inflict these punishments. But in the
case of the ancient Jews, who had a land and a
form of government of their own, to take from
them the right of making war upon their ene-
mies, of fighting for their country, of putting to
death or otherwise punishing adulterers, murder-
ers, or others who were guilty of similar crimes,
would be to subject them to sudden and utter
destruction whenever the enemy fell upon them ;
for their very laws would in that case restrain
them, and prevent them from resisting the enemy.


Ex. xxi. 24.
Matt. V. 39.
Lam. iii. 27, 28, 30.


And that same providence which of old gave
the law, and has now given the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, not wishing the Jewish state to continue
longer, has destroyed their city and their temple :
it has abolished the worship which was offered
to God in that temple by the sacrifice of victims,
and other ceremonies which He had prescribed.
And as it has destroyed these things, not wishing
that they should longer continue, in like manner
it has extended day by day the Christian religion,
so that it is now preached everywhere with bold-
ness, and that in spite of the numerous obstacles
which oppose the spread of Christ's teaching in
the world. But since it was the purpose of God
that the nations should receive the benefits of
Christ's teaching, all the devices of men against
Christians have been brought to nought ; for the
more that kings, and rulers, and peoples have
persecuted them everywhere, the more have they
increased in number and grown in strength.

CHAP, xxvii.

After this Celsus relates at length opinions
which he ascribes to us, but which we do not
hold, regarding the Divine Being, to the effect
that "he is corporeal in his nature, and possesses
a body like a man." As he undertakes to refute
opinions which are none of ours, it would be
needless to give either the opinions themselves
or their refutation. Indeed, if we did hold those
views of God which he ascribes to us, and which
he opposes, we would be bound to quote his
words, to adduce our own arguments, and to
refute his. But if he brings forward opinions
which he has either heard from no one, or if it
be assumed that he has heard them, it must have
been from those who are very simple and igno-
rant of the meaning of Scripture, then we need
not undertake so superfluous a task as that of
refuting them. For the Scriptures plainly speak
of God as of a being without body. Hence it
is said, " No man hath seen God at any time ; "'*
and the First-born of all creation is called " the
image of the invisible God,"5 which is the same
as if it were said that He is incorporeal. How-
ever, we have already said something on the
nature of God while examining into the mean-
ing of the words, "God is a Spirit, and they
who worship Him must worship Him in spirit
and in truth."

CHAP, xxviii.

After thus misrepresenting our views of the
nature of God, Celsus goes on to ask of us
" where we hope to go after death ; " and he
makes our answer to be, " to another land better
than this." On this he comments as follows :


* John i. 18,
5 Col. i. 15.


622


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


" The divine men of a former age have spoken
of a happy hfe reserved for the souls of the i
blessed. Some designated it ' the isles of the '
blest,' and others ' the Elysian plain,' so called
because they were there to be delivered from
their present evils. Thus Homer says : ' But
the gods shall send thee to the Elysian plain,
on the borders of the earth, where they lead a i
most quiet life.' ' Plato also, who believed in [
the immortality of the soul, distincdy gives the
name ' land ' to the place where it is sent. ' The ;
extent of it,' ^ says he, ' is immense, and we only
occupy a small portion of it, from the Phasis to
the Pillars of Hercules, where we dwell along
the shores of the sea, as grasshoppers and frogs
beside a marsh. But there are many other
places inhabited in like manner by other men.
For there are in different parts of the earth cavi-
ties, varying in form and in magnitude, into
which run water, and clouds, and air. But that
land which is pure lies in the pure region of
heaven.' " Celsus therefore supposes that what
we say of a land which is much better and more
excellent than this, has been borrowed from
certain ancient writers whom he styles " divine,"
and chiefly from Plato, who in his Phcedon dis-
courses on the pure land lying in a pure heaven.
But he does not see that Moses, who is much
older than the Greek literature, introduces God
as promising to those who lived according to
His law the holy land, which is " a good land
and a large, a land flowing with milk and
honey ; " ^ which promise is not to be under-
stood to refer, as some suppose, to that part of
the earth which we call Judea ; for it, however
good it may be, still forms part of the earth,
which was originally cursed for the transgression
of Adam. For these words, " Gursed shall the
ground be for what thou hast done ; with grief,
that is, with labour, shalt thou eat of the fruit
of it all the days of thy life," •♦ were spoken of
the whole earth, the fruit of which every man
who died in Adam eats with sorrow or labour all
the days of his life. And as all the earth has
been cursed, it brings forth thorns and briers all
the days of the life of those who in Adam were
driven out of paradise ; and in the sweat of his
face every man eats bread until he returns to
the ground from which he was taken. For the
full exposition of all that is contained in this
passage much might be said ; but we have con-
fined ourselves to these few words at present,
which are intended to remove the idea, that
what is said of the good land promised by
God to the righteous, refers to the land of
Judea.


' Odyss., iv. 563.

2 Phtedo, Iviii. p. 109.

3 Ex. iii. 8.

* Gen. iii. 17.


CHAP. XXIX.

If, then, the whole earth has been cursed in
the deeds of Adam and of those who died in
him, it is plain that all parts of the earth share
in the curse, and among others the land of Ju-
dea; so that the words, "a good land and a
large, a land flowing with milk and honey," can-
not apply to it, although we may say of it, that
both Judea and Jerusalem were the shadow and
figure of that pure land, goodly and large, in the
pure region of heaven, in which is the heavenly
Jerusalem. And it is in reference to this Jeru-
salem that the aposde spoke, as one who, " be-
ing risen with Ghrist, and seeking those things
which are above," had found a truth which
formed no part of the Jewish mythology. " Ve
are come," says he, "unto Mount Sion, and un-
to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jeru-
salem, and to an innumerable company of
angels." 5 And in order to be assured that our
explanation of " the good and large land " of
Moses is not contrary to the intention of the
Divine Spirit, we have only to read in all the
prophets what they say of those who, after hav-
ing left Jerusalem, and wandered astray from it,
should afterwards return and be settled in the
place which is called the habitation and city of
God, as in the words, " His dwelling is in the
holy place ; " ^ and, " Great is the Lord, and
greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in
the mountain of His holiness, beautiful for situ-
ation, the joy of the whole earth." 7 It is enough
at present to quote the words of the thirty-sev-
enth Psalm, which speaks thus of the land of
the righteous, " Those that wait upon the Lord,
they shall inherit the earth ; " and a little after,
" But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall
delight themselves in the abundance of peace ; "
and again, " Those who bless Him shall inherit
the earth ; " and, " The righteous shall inherit the
land, and dwell therein for ever." '^ And con-
sider whether it is not evident to intelligent
readers that the following words from this same
Psalm refer to the pure land in the pure heaven :
" Wait on the Lord, and keep His way ; and
He shall exalt thee to inherit the land."

CHAP. XXX.

It seems to me also that the fancy of Plato,
that those stones which we call precious stones
derive their lustre from a reflection, as it were,
of the stones in that better land, is taken from
the words of Isaiah in describing the city of
God, " I will make thy battlements of jasper,
thy stones shall be crystal, and thy borders of


5 Heb. xii 22.

6 Ps. Ixxvi. 2; English version, " In Salem is His tabernacle.
^ Ps. xlviii. I, 2

8 Ps. xxxvii. 9, II, 22, 29, 34.


Chap. XXXII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


1 precious stones ; " ' and, " I will lay thy founda-
j tions with sapphires." Those who hold in great- j
est reverence the teaching of Plato, explain this |
myth of his as an allegory. And the prophecies
i from which, as we conjecture, Plato has bor-
I rowed, will be explained by those who, leading
a godly life like that of the prophets, devote all
their time to the study of the sacred Scriptures,
to those who are qualified to learn by parity of
life, and their desire to advance in divine knowl-
edge. For our part, our purpose has been sim-
ply to say that what we affirm of that sacred
land has not been taken from Plato or any of
the Greeks, but that they rather — living as they
did not only after Moses, who was the oldest,
but even after most of the prophets — borrowed
from them, and in so doing either misunderstood
their obscure intimations on such subjects, or
else endeavoured, in their allusions to the better
land, to imitate those portions of Scripture which
had fallen into their hands. Haggai expressly
makes a distinction between the earth and the
dry land, meaning by the latter the land in which
we live. He says : " Yet once, and I will shake
the heavens, and the earth, and the dry land,
and the sea." ^

CHAP. XXXI.

Referring to the passage in the Phcedon of
Plato, Celsus says : " It is not easy for every one
to understand the meaning of Plato's words,
when he says that on account of our weakness
and slowness we are unable to reach the highest
region of the air ; but that if our nature were
capable of so sublime a contemplation, we would
then be able to understand that that is the true
heaven, and that the true light." As Celsus has
deferred to another opportunity the explanation
of Plato's idea, we also think that it does not
fall within our purpose at present to enter into
any full description of that holy and good land,
and of the city of God which is in it ; but
reserve the consideration of it for our Com-
mentary on the Prophets, having already in part,
according to our power, treated of the city of
God in our remarks on the forty-sixth and forty-
eighth Psalms. The writings of Moses and the
prophets — the most ancient of all books — teach
us that all things here on earth which are in com-
mon use among men, have other things corre-
sponding to them in name which are alone real. I
Thus, for instance, there is the true light, and
another heaven beyond the firmament, and a Sun
I of righteousness other than the sun we see. In
a word, to distinguish those things from the
I objects of sense, which have no true reality, they
1 say of God that " His works are truth ; " 3 thus


\ Hagg. ii. 6.
3 Dan. iv. 37.


making a distinction between the works of God
and the works of God's hands, which latter are
of an inferior sort. Accordingly, God in Isaiah
complains of men, that "they regard not the
works of the Lord, nor consider the operation
of His hands." ^ But enough on this point.

CHAP. XXXII.

Celsus next assails the doctrine of the resur-
rection, which is a high and difficult doctrine,
and one which more than others requires a high
and advanced degree of wisdom to set forth how
worthy it is of God ; and how sublime a truth it is
which teaches us that there is a seminal principle
lodged in that which Scripture speaks of as the
" tabernacle " of the soul, in which the righteous
" do groan, being burdened, not for that they
would be unclothed, but clothed upon." s Celsus
ridicules this doctrine because he does not under-
stand it, and because he has learnt it from igno-
rant persons, who were unable to support it on
any reasonable grounds. It will be profitable,
therefore, that in addition to what we have said
above, we should make this one remark. Our
teaching on the subject of the resurrection is not,
as Celsus imagines, derived from anything that we
have heard on the doctrine of metempsychosis ;
but we know that the soul, which is immaterial
and invisible in its nature, exists in no material
place, without having a body suited to the nature
of that place. Accordingly, it at one time puts
off one body which was necessary before, but
which is no longer adequate in its changed state,
and it exchanges it for a second ; and at another
time it assumes another in addition to the former,
which IS needed as a better covering, suited to
the purer ethereal regions of heaven. When it
comes into the world at birth, it casts off the
integuments which it needed in the womb ; and
before doing this, it puts on another body suited
for its life upon earth. Then, again, as there is
" a tabernacle " and " an earthly house " which
is in some sort necessary for this tabernacle,
Scripture teaches us that " the earthly house of
this tabernacle shall be dissolved," but that the
tabernacle shall " be clothed upon with a house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." ^
The men of God say also that " the corruptible
shall put on incorruption," ^ which is a different
thing from " the incorruptible ; " and " the mor-
tal shall put on immortality," which is different
from " the immortal." Indeed, what " wisdom "
is to "the wise," and "justice " to " the just,"
and " peace " to " the peaceable," the same rela-
tion does " incorruption " hold to " the incor-
ruptible," and " immortality " to "the immortal."


* Isa. V. 12.

5 2 Cor. V. 1,4.

6 2 Cor. V I.

' I Cor. XV. 53.


624


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


Behold, then, to what a prospect Scripture en-
courages us to look, when it speaks to us of be-
ing clothed with incorruption and immortality,
which are, as it were, vestments which will not
suffer those who are covered with them to come
to corruption or death. Thus far I have taken
the liberty of referring to this subject, in answer
to one who assails the doctrine of the resurrec-
tion without understanding it, and who, simply
because he knew nothing about it, made it the
object of contempt and ridicule.

CHAP. XXXIII.

.As Celsus supposes that we uphold the doc-
trine of the resurrection in order that we may
see and know God, he thus follows out his no-
tions on the subject : " After they have been
utterly refuted and vanquished, they still, as if
regardless of all objecdons, come back again to
the same question, ' How then shall we see and
know God? how shall we go to Him?' " Let
any, however, who are disposed to hear us ob-
serve, that if we have need of a body for other
purposes, as for occupying a material locality to
which this body must be adapted, and if on that
account the " tabernacle " is clothed in the way
we have shown, we have no need of a body in
order to know God. For that which sees God
is not the eye of the body ; it is the mind which
is made in the image of the Creator,' and which
God has in His providence rendered capable of
that knowledge. To see God belongs to the
pure heart, out of which no longer proceed " evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts,
false witness, blasphemies, the evil eye," - or any
other evil thing. Wherefore it is said, " Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." ^
But as the strength of our will is not sufficient to
procure the perfectly pure heart, and as we need
that God should create it, he therefore who prays
as he ought, offers this petition to God, "Create
in me a clean heart, O God." ^

CHAP, xxxiv.

And we do not ask the question, " How shall
we go to God? " as though we thought that God
existed in some place. God is of too excellent
a nature for any place : He holds all things in
His power, and is Himself not confined by any-
thing whatever. The precept, therefore, " Thou
shalt walk after the Lord thy God," s does not
command a bodily approach to God ; neither
does the prophet refer to physical nearness to
God, when he says in his prayer, " My soul fol-


' Bouhereau follows the reading, "the mind which sees what is
made in the image of the Creator."

2 Matt. XV. iQ and vi. 23.

3 Matt. V. 8.
* Ps. li. 10.

5 Deut. xiii. 4.


loweth hard after Thee." ^ Celsus therefore mis-
represents us, when he says that we expect to
see God with our bodily eyes, to hear Him with
our ears, and to touch Him sensibly with our
hands. We know that the holy Scriptures make
mention of eyes, of ears, and of hands, which
have nothing but the name in common with the
bodily organs ; and what is more wonderful, they
speak of a diviner sense, which is very different
from the senses as commonly spoken of. For
when the prophet says, " Open Thou mine eyes,
that I may behold wondrous things out of Thy
law," 7 or, " The commandment of the Lord is
pure, enlightening the eyes," ^ or, " Lighten
mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death," 9
no one is so foolish as to suppose that tiie eyes
of the body behold the wonders of the divine
law, or that the law of the Lord gives light to
the bodily eyes, or that the sleep of death falls
on the eyes of the body. When our Saviour
says, " He that hath ears to hear, let him hear," '°
any one will understand that the ears spoken of
are of a diviner kind. When it is said that the
word of the Lord was "in the hand" of Jere-
miah or of some other prophet ; or when the
expression is used, " the law by the hand of
Moses," or, " I sought the Lord with my hands,
and was not deceived," " — no one is so foolish
as not to see that the word " hands " is taken
figuratively, as when John says, " Our hands have
handled the Word of life." '^ And if you wish
further to learn from the sacred writings that
there is a diviner sense than the senses of the
body, you have only to hear what Solomon says,
"Thou shalt find a divine sense." '^

CHAP. xxxv.

Seeking God, then, in this way, we have no
need to visit the oracles of Trophonius, of Am-
phiaraus, and of Mopsus, to which Celsus would
send us, assuring us that we would there " see
the gods in human form, appearing to us with
all distinctness, and without illusion." For we
know that these are demons, feeding on the
blood, and smoke, and odour of victims, and shut
up by their base desires in prisons, which the
Greeks call temples of the gods, but which we
know are only the dwellings of deceitful demons.
To this Celsus maliciously adds, in regard to
these gods which, according to him, are in human
form, "' they do not show themselves for once,
or at intervals, like him who has deceived men,
but they are ever open to intercourse with those


6 Ps. Ixiii. 8.

7 Ps. cxix. i8.

8 Ps. xix. 8.

9 Ps. xiii. 3.

1° Matt. xiii. 9.

" Ps. Ixxvii. 2, according to the LXX.
12 I John i. I.

» Prov. ii. 5. Eng. Vers, and LXX., " Thou shalt find the knowl-
edge of God."


Chap. XXXVII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


625


who desire it." From this remark, it would seem
that Celsus supposes that the appearance of
Christ to His disciples after His resurrection was
like that of a spectre flitting before their eyes ;
whereas these gods, as he calls them, in human
shape always present themselves to those who
desire it. But how is it possible that a phan-
tom which, as he describes it, flew past to de-
ceive the beholders, could produce such effects
after it had passed away, and could so turn the
hearts of men as to lead them to regulate their
actions according to the will of God, as in view
of being hereafter judged by Him? And how
could a phantom drive away demons, and show
other indisputable evidences of power, and that
not in any one place, like these so-called gods
in human form, but making its divine power felt
through the whole world, in drawing and congre-
gating together all who are found disposed to
lead a good and noble life ?

CHAP. XXXVI.

After these remarks of Celsus, which we have
endeavoured to answer as we could, he goes on
to say, speaking of us : " Again they will ask,
' How can we know God, unless by the per-
ception of the senses? for how otherwise than
through the senses are we able to gain any
knowledge?'" To this he replies: "This is
not the language of a man ; it comes not from
the soul, but from the flesh. Let them hearken
to us, if such a spiritless and carnal race are able
to do so : if, instead of exercising the senses, you
look upwards with the soul ; if, turning away the
eye of the body, you open the eye of the mind,
thus and thus only will you be able to see God.
And if you seek one to be your guide along this
way, you must shun all deceivers and jugglers,
who will introduce you to phantoms. Otherwise
you will be acting the most ridiculous part, if,
whilst you pronounce imprecations upon those
others that are recognised as gods, treating them
as idols, you yet do homage to a more wretched
idol than any of these, which indeed is not even
an idol or a phantom, but a dead man, and you
seek a father like to him." The first remark which
we have to make on this passage is in regard to
his use of personification, by which he makes us
defend in this way the doctrine of the resurrec-
tion. This figure of speech is properly employed
when the character and sentiments of the person
introduced are faithfully preserved ; but it is an
abuse of the figure when these do not agree with
the character and opinions of the speaker. Thus
we should justly condemn a man who put into
the mouths of barbarians, slaves, or uneducated
people the language of philosophy ; because we
know that the philosophy belonged to the author,
and not to such persons, who could not know


anything of philosophy. And in like manner we
should condemn a man for introducing persons
who are represented as wise and well versed in
divine knowledge, and should make them give
expression to language which could only come
out of the mouths of those who are ignorant or
under the influence of vulgar passions. Hence
Homer is admired, among other things, for pre-
serving a consistency of character in his heroes,
as in Nestor, Ulysses, Diomede, Agamemnon,
Telemachus, Penelope, and the rest. Euripides,
on the contrary, was assailed in the comedies of
Aristophanes as a frivolous talker, often putting
into the mouth of a barbarian woman, a wretched
slave, the wise maxims which he had learned from
Anaxagoras or some other philosophers.

CHAP, xxxvii.

Now if this is a true account of what consti-
tutes the right and the wrong use of personifica-
tion, have we not grounds for holding Celsus up
to ridicule for thus ascribing to Christians words
which they never uttered ? For if those whom
he represents as speaking are the unlearned, how
[ is it possible that such persons could distinguish
I between " sense " and " reason," between " ob-
jects of sense" and "objects of the reason?"
To argue in this way, they would require to have
studied under the Stoics, who deny all inteUectual
! existences, and maintain that all that we appre-
hend is apprehended through the senses, and
that all knowledge comes through the senses.
But if, on the other hand, he puts these words
into the mouth of philosophers who search care-
fully into the meaning of Christian doctrines, the
statements in question do not agree with their
character and principles. For no one who has
learnt that God is invisible, and that certain of His
works are invisible, that is to say, apprehended
by the reason,' can say, as if to justify his faith
in a resurrection, " How can they know God,
except by the perception of the senses?" or,
" How otherwise than through the senses can
they gain any knowledge ? " For it is not in any
secret writings, perused only by a few wise men,
but in such as are most widely diffused and most
commonly known among the people, that these
words are written : " The invisible things of God
from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made."^
From whence it is to be inferred, that though
men who live upon the earth have to begin with
the use of the senses upon sensible objects, in
order to go on from them to a knowledge of the
nature of things intellectual, yet their knowledge
must not stop short with the objects of sense.


voTjTo, falling under the province of vov<;, tl
ence, we translate it elsewhere " intellectual


the reason. For con-


626


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


And thus, while Christians would not say that it
is impossible to have a knowledge of intellectual
objects without the senses, but rather that the
senses supply the first means of obtaining knowl-
edge, they might well ask the question, " Who
can gain any knowledge without the senses?"
without deserving the abuse of Celsus, when he
adds, " This is not the language of a man ; it
comes not from the soul, but from the flesh,"

CHAP. XXXVIII.

Since we hold that the great God is in essence
simple, invisible, and incorporeal. Himself pure
intelligence, or something transcending intelli-
gence and existence, we can never say that God
is apprehended by any other means than through
the intelligence which is formed in His image,
though now, in the words of Paul, " we see in a
glass obscurely, but then face to face." ' And
if we use the expression " face to face," let no
one pervert its meaning ; but let it be explained
by this passage, " Beholding with open face the
glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same I
image, from glory to glory," which shows that 1
we do not use the word in this connection to j
mean the visible face, but take it figuratively, in
the same way as we have shown that the eyes,
the ears, and the other parts of the body are
employed. And it is certain that a man — I
mean a soul using a body, otherwise called " the
inner man," or simply "the soul" — would an-
swer, not as Celsus makes us answer, but as the
man of God himself teaches. It is certain also
that a Christian will not make use of " the lan-
guage of the flesh," having learnt as he has " to
mortify the deeds of the body " ^ by the spirit, !
and "to bear about in his body the dying ofi
Jesus ; " 3 and " mortify your members which are j
on the earth," "♦ and with a true knowledge ofi
these words, " My spirit shall not always strive
with man, for that he also is flesh," 5 and again,
" They that are in the flesh cannot please God," ^
he strives in every way to live no longer accord-
ing to the flesh, but only according to the Spirit.

CHAP. XXXIX.

Now let us hear what it is that he invites us
to learn, that we may ascertain from him how we
are to know God, although he thinks that his
words are beyond the capacity of all Christians.
" Let them hear," says he, " if they are able to
do so." We have then to consider what the
philosopher wishes us to hear from him. But
instead of instructing us as he ought, he abuses


' I Cor. xiii. 12.

* Rom. viii. 13.
3 2 Cor. iv. 10.

* Col. iii. 5.

5 Gen. vi. 3.

6 Rom. viii. 8.


US ; and while he should have shown his goodwill
to those whom he addresses at the outset of his
discourse, he stigmatizes as "a cowardly race"
men who would rather die than abjure Christi-
anity even by a word, and who are ready to suf-
fer every form of torture, or any kind of death.
He also applies to us that epithet " carnal " or
" flesh-indulging," " although," as we are wont
to say, " we have known Christ after the flesh,
yet now henceforth we know Him no more," i
and although we are so ready to lay down our
lives for the cause of religion, that no philoso-
pher could lay aside his robes more readily. He
then addresses to us these words : " If, instead
of exercising your senses, you look upwards with
the soul ; if, turning away the eye of the body,
you open the eye of the mind, thus and thus
only you will be able to see God." He is not
aware that this reference to the two eyes, the eye
of the body and the eye of the mind, which he
has borrowed from the Greeks, was in use among
our own writers ; for Moses, in his account of
the creation of the world, introduces man before
his transgression as both seeing and not seeing :
seeing, when it is said of the woman, " The wo-
man saw that the tree was good for food, and
that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be
desired to make one wise ; " ^ and again not
seeing, as when he introduces the serpent saying
to the woman, as if she and her husband had
been blind, " God knows that on the day that ye
eat thereof your eyes shall be opened;" 9 and
also when it is said, " They did eat, and the eyes
of both of them were opened." '° The eyes of
sense were then opened, which they had done
well to keep shut, that they might not be dis-
tracted, and hindered from seeing with the eyes
of the mind ; and it was those eyes of the mind
which in consequence of sin, as I imagine, were
then closed, with which they had up to that time
enjoyed the delight of beholding God and His
paradise. This twofold kind of vision in us
was familiar to our Saviour, who says, " For judg-
ment I am come into this world, that they which
see not, might see, and that they which see might
be made blind," " — meaning, by the eyes that
see not ; the eyes of the mind, which are en-
lightened by His teaching ; and the eyes which
see are the eyes of sense, which His words do
render blind, in order that the soul may look
without distraction upon proper objects. All
true Christians therefore have the eye of the
mind sharpened, and the eye of sense closed ;
so that each one, according to the degree in
which his better eye is quickened, and the eye
of sense darkened, sees and knows the Supreme


7 2 Cor. V. i6.

8 Gen. iii. 6.

9 Gen. iii. 5.
»o Gen. iii. 7.
" John ix. 39.


Chap. XLIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


627


God, and His Son, who is the Word, Wisdom,
and so forth.

CHAP. XL.

Next to the remarks of Celsus on which we
have already commented, come others which he
addresses to all Christians, but which, if appli-
cable to any, ought to be addressed to persons
whose doctrines differ entirely from those taught
by Jesus. For it is the Ophians who, as we
have before shown,' have utterly renounced Je-
sus, and perhaps some others of similar opinions
who are " the impostors and jugglers, leading
men away to idols and phantoms ; " and it is
they who with miserable pains learn off the
names of the heavenly doorkeepers. These
words are therefore quite inappropriate as ad-
dressed to Christians : " If you seek one to be
your guide along this way, you must shun all
deceivers and jugglers, who will introduce you
to phantoms." And, as though quite unaware
that these impostors entirely agree with him, and
are not behind him in speaking ill of Jesus and
His religion, he thus continues, confounding us
with them : " otherwise you will be acting the
most ridiculous part, if, whilst you pronounce
imprecations upon tho^e other recognised gods,
treating them as idols, you yet do homage to a
more wretched idol than any of these, which
indeed is not even an idol or a phantom, but a
dead man, and you seek a father like to himself."
That he is ignorant of the wide difference be-
tween our opinions and those of the inventors
of these fables, and that he imagines the charges
which he makes against them applicable to us, is
evident from the following passage : " For the
sake of such a monstrous delusion, and in sup-
port of those wonderful advisers, and those won-
derful words which you address to the lion, to
the amphibious creature, to the creature in the
form of an ass, and to others, for the sake of
those divine doorkeepers whose names you com-
I mit to memory with such pains, in such a cause
j as this you suffer cruel tortures, and perish at the
stake." Surely, then, he is unaware that none
of those who regard beings in the form of an
ass, a lion, or an amphibious animal, as the door-
keepers or guides on the way to heaven, ever
expose themselves to death in defence of that
which they think the truth. That excess of zeal,
if it may be so called, which leads us for the
sake of religion to submit to every kind of death,
and to perish at the stake, is ascribed by Celsus
to those who endure no such sufferings ; and he
reproaches us who suffer crucifixion for our faith,
with believing in fabulous creatures — in the
lion, the amphibious animal, and other such
I monsters. If we reject all these fables, it is not
I out of deference to Celsus, for we have never at


See book vi. cap. xxx., etc.


any time held any such fancies ; but it is in
accordance with the teaching of Jesus that we
oppose all such notions, and will not allow to
Michael, or to any others that have been referred
to, a form and figure of that sort.

CHAP. XLI.

But let us consider who those persons are
whose guidance Celsus would have us to follow,
so that we may not be in want of guides who are
recommended both by their antiquity and sanc-
tity. He refers us to divinely inspired poets, as
he calls them, to wise men and philosophers,
without mentioning their names ; so that, after
promising to point out those who should guide
us, he simply hands us over in a general way to
divinely inspired poets, wise men, and philoso-
phers. If he had specified their names in par-
ticular, we should have felt ourselves bound to
show him that he wished to give us as guides
men who were blinded to the truth, and who
must therefore lead us into error ; or that if not
wholly blinded, yet they are in error in many
matters of belief. But whether Orpheus, Par-
menides, Empedocles, or even Homer himself,
and Hesiod, are the persons whom he means by
i " inspired poets," let any one show how those
who follow their guidance walk in a better way,
or lead a more excellent life, than those who,
being taught in the school of Jesus Christ, have
rejected all images and statues, and even all
Jewish superstition, that they may look upward
through the Word of God to the one God, who
is the Father of the Word. Who, then, are
those wise men and philosophers from whom
Celsus would have us to learn so many divine
truths, and for whom we are to give up Moses
the servant of God, the prophets of the Creator
of the world, who have spoken so many things
by a truly divine inspiration, and even Him who
has given light and taught the way of piety to
the whole human race, so that no one can re-
proach Him if he remains without a share in the
knowledge of His mysteries? Such, indeed,
was the abounding love which He had for men,
that He gave to the more learned a theology
capable of raising the soul far above all earthly
things ; while with no less consideration He
comes down to the weaker capacities of ignorant
men, of simple women, of slaves, and, in short,
of all those who from Jesus alone could have
received that help for the better regulation of
their lives which is supplied by his instructions
in regard to the Divine Being, adapted to their
wants and capacities.


Celsus next refers us to Plato as to a more
effective teacher of theological truth, and quotes


628


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


the following passage from the Timceus : " It is
a hard matter to find out the Maker and Father
of this universe ; and after having found Him,
it is impossible to make Him known to all."
To which he himself adds this remark : " You
perceive, then, how divine men seek after the
way of truth, and how well Plato knew that it
was impossible for all men to walk in it. But as
wise men have found it for the express purpose
of being able to convey to us some notion of
Him who is the first, the unspeakable Being, —
a notion, namely, which may represent Him to
us through the medium of other objects, — they
endeavour either by synthesis, which is the com-
bining of various qualities, or by analysis, which
is the separation and setting aside of some qual-
ities, or finally by analogy ; — in these ways, I
say, they endeavour to set before us that which
it is impossible to express in words. I should
therefore be surprised if you could follow in that
course, since you are so completely wedded to
the flesh as to be incapable of seeing ought but
what is impure." These words of Plato are
noble and admirable ; but see if Scripture does
not give us an example of a regard for mankind
still greater in God the Word, who was " in the
beginning with God," and " who was made
flesh," in order that He might reveal to all men
truths which, according to Plato, it would be
impossible to make known to all men, even after
he had found them himself. Plato may say that
" it is a hard thing to find out the Creator and
Father of this universe ; " by which language he
implies that it is not wholly beyond the power
of human nature to attain to such a knowledge
as is either worthy of God, or if not, is far be-
yond that which is commonly attained (although
if it were true that Plato or any other of the
Greeks had found God, they would never have
given homage and worship, or ascribed the name
of God, to any other than to Him : they would
have abandoned all others, and would not have
associated with this great God objects which
can have nothing in common with Him). ' For
ourselves, we maintain that human nature is in
no way able to seek after God, or to attain a
clear knowledge of Him without the help of
Him whom it seeks. He makes Himself known
to those who, after doing all that their powers
win allow, confess that they need help from Him,
who discovers Himself to those whom He ap-
proves, in so far as it is possible for man and the
soul still dwelling in the body to know God.

CHAP. XLIII.

Observe that when Plato says, that "after hav-
ing found out the Creator and Father of the
universe, it is impossible to make Him known to

' [See note supra, p 573. S.]


all men," he does not speak of Him as unspeak-
able, and as incapable of being expressed in
words. On the contrary, he implies that He
may be spoken of, and that there are a few to
whom He may be made known. But Celsus, as
if forgetting the language which he had just
quoted from Plato, immediately gives God the
name of " the unspeakable." He says : " since
the wise men have found out this way, in order
to be able to give us some idea of the First of
Beings, who is unspeakable." For ourselves, we
hold that not God alone is unspeakable, but
other things also which are inferior to Him.
Such are the things which Paul labours to express
when he says, " I heard unspeakable words, which
it is not lawful for a man to utter," ^ where the
word " heard " is used in the sense of " under-
stood ; " as in the passage, " He who hath ears
to hear, let him hear." We also hold that it is
a hard matter to see the Creator and Father of
the universe ; but it is possible to see Him in
the way thus referred to, " Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God ; " ^ and not only
so, but also in the sense of the words of Hira
" who is the image of the invisible God ; " " He
who hath seen Me hath seen the Father who
sent Me." + No sensible person could suppose
that these last words were spoken in reference to
His bodily presence, which was open to the view
of all ; otherwise all those who said, " Crucify
him, crucify him," and Pilate, who had power
over the humanity of Jesus, were among those
who saw God the Father, which is absurd. More-
over, that these words, " He that hath seen Me,
hath seen the Father who sent Me," are not to
be taken in their grosser sense, is plain from the
answer which He gave to Philip, " Have I been
so long time with you, and yet dost thou not
know Me, Philip ?" after Philip had asked, " Show
us the Father, and it sufticeth us." He, then,
who perceives how these words, " The Word was
made flesh," are to be understood of the only-
begotten Son of God, the first-born of all crea-
tion, will also understand how, in seeing the image
of the invisible God, we see " the Creator and
Father of the universe."


CHAP. XLIV,

Celsus supposes that we may arrive at a knowl- 1 j
edge of God either by combining or separating | j
certain things after the methods which mathe- ji j
maticians call synthesis and analysis, or again by
analogy, which is employed by them also, and
that in this way we may as it were gain admission
to the chief good. But when the Word of God
says, " No man knoweth the Father but the Son,


^ 2 Cor. xii. 4.
3 Matt. y. 8.
^ John xiv. 9.


Chap. XLV.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


629


and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him," '
He declares that no one can know God but by
j the help of divine grace coming from above,
' with a certain divine inspiration. Indeed, it is
reasonable to suppose that the knowledge of
God is beyond the reach of human nature, and
hence the many errors into which men have
fallen in their views of God. It is, then, through
the goodness and love of God to mankind, and
by a marvellous exercise of divine grace to those
whom He saw in His foreknowledge, and knew
that they would walk worthy of Him who had
made Himself known to them, and that they
would never swerve from a faithful attachment
to His service, although they were condemned to
death or held up to ridicule by those who, in
ignorance of what true religion is, give that name
to what deserv^es to be called anything rather

' than religion. God doubtless saw the pride and
arrogance of those who, with contem])t for all
others, boast of their knowledge of God, and of
their profound acquaintance with divine things
obtained from philosophy, but who still, not less
even than the most ignorant, run after their
images, and temples, and famous mysteries ; and
seeing this, He " has chosen the foolish things

! of this world " ^ — the simplest of Christians, who
lead, however, a life of greater moderation and
purity than many philosophers — "to confound

,' 'the wise," who are not ashamed to address inani-
mate things as gods or images of the gods. For
what reasonable man can refrain from smiling
when he sees that one who has learned from
philosophy such profound and noble sentiments

, about God or the gods, turns straightway to
images and offers to them his prayers, or im-
agines that by gazing upon these material things
he can ascend from the visible symbol to that
which is spiritual and immaterial.^ But a Chris-
tian, even of the common people, is assured that
every place forms part of the universe, and that
the whole universe is God's temple. In whatever
part of the world he is, he prays ; but he rises
above the universe, " shutting the eyes of sense,
and raising upwards the eyes of the soul." And
he stops not at the vault of heaven ; but passing
in thought beyond the heavens, under the guid-
ance of the Spirit of God, and having thus as it
were gone beyond the visible universe, he offers
prayers to God. But he prays for no trivial
blessings, for he has learnt from Jesus to seek for
nothing small or mean, that is, sensible objects,
but to ask only for what is great and truly divine ;
and these things God grants to us, to lead us to
that blessedness which is found only with Him
through His Son, the Word, who is God.


' Matt. xi. 27.
^ I Cor. i. 27.
3 [Vol. ii. p. 186, this series.]


But let us see further what the things are
which he proposes to teach us, if indeed we can
comprehend them, since he speaks of us as being
" utterly wedded to the flesh ; " although if we
live well, and in accordance with the teaching of
Jesus, we hear this said of us : " Ye are not in
the flesh, but in the Spirit, if the Spirit of Cod
dwelleth in you." •♦ He says also that we look
upon nothing that is pure, although our endeav-
our is to keep even our thoughts free from all
defilement of sin, and although in prayer we say,
" Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew
a right spirit within me," s so that we may be-
hold Him with that "pure heart" to which alone
is granted the privilege of seeing Him. This,
then, is what he proposes for our instruction :
"Things are either i7itclligible, which we call
substance — being ; or visible, which we call be-
coming : ^ with the former is truth ; from the
latter arises error. Truth is the object of knowl-
edge ; truth and error form opinion. Intelligible
objects are known by the reason, visible objects
by the eyes ; the action of the reason is called
intelligent perception, that of the eyes vision.
As, then, among visible things the sun is neither
the eye nor vision, but that which enables
eye to see, and renders vision possible, and in
consequence of it visible things are seen, all
sensible things exist, and itself is rendered visi-
ble ; so among things intelligible, that which is
neither reason, nor intelligent perception, nor
knowledge, is yet the cause which enables the
reason to know, which renders intelligent per-
ception possible ; and in consequence of it
knowledge arises, all things intelligible, truth
itself and substance have their existence ; and
itself, which is above all these things, becomes
in some ineffable way intelligible. These things
are offered to the consideration of the intelli-
gent ; and if even you can understand any of
them, it is well. And if you think that a Divine
Spirit has descended from God to announce
divine things to men, it is doubtless this same
Spirit that reveals these truths, and it was under
the same influence that men of old made known
many important truths. But if you cannot com-
prehend these things, then keep silence ; do not
expose your own ignorance, and do not accuse
of blindness those who see, or of lameness those
who run, while you yourselves are utterly lamed
and mutilated in mind, and lead a merely animal
life — the life of the body, which is the dead part
of our nature."


■♦ Rom. viii. 9.
S Ps. li. 10.

«> ytrfcri'j. For the distinction between ovo-i'a and yei'to-i?, see
Plato's Spphista, p. 246.


6;o


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


CHAP. XLVI.

We are careful not to oppose fair arguments
even if they proceed from those who are not of
our faith ; we strive not to be captious, or to
seek to overthrow any sound reasonings. But
here we have to reply to those who slander the
character of persons wishing to do their best in
the service of God, who accepts the faith which
the meanest place in Him, as well as the more
refined and intelligent piety of the learned ; see-
ing that both alike address to the Creator of the
world their prayers and thanksgivings through
the High Priest who has set before men the
nature of pure religion. We say, then, that
those who are stigmatized as " lamed and muti-
lated in spirit," as "living only for the sake of
the body which is dead," are persons whose en-
deavour it is to say with sincerity : " For though
we live ' in the flesh, we do not war according
to the flesh ; for the weapons of our warfare are
not fleshly, but mighty through God." It is for
those who throw out such vile accusations against
men who desire to be God's servants, to beware
lest, by the calumnies which they cast upon
others who strive to live well, they " lame " their
own souls, and " mutilate " the inner man, by
severing from it that justice and moderation of
mind which the Creator has planted in the nature
of all His rational creatures. As for those, how-
ever, who, along with other lessons given by the
Divine Word, have learned and practised this,
" when reviled to bless, when persecuted to
endure, when defamed to entreat," ^ they may
be said to be walking in spirit in the ways of
uprightness, to be purifying and setting in order
the whole soul. They distinguish — and to them
the distinction is not one of words merely — be-
tween "substance," or that which is, and that
which is " becoming ; " between things appre-
hended by reason, and things apprehended by
sense ; and they connect truth with the one, and
avoid the errors arising out of the other ; look-
ing, as they have been taught, not at the things
" becoming " or phenomenal, which are seen,
and therefore temporary, but at better things
than these, whether we call them " substance,"
or " spiritual " things, as being apprehended by
reason, or "invisible," because they lie out of
the reach of the senses. The disciples of Jesus
regard these phenomenal things only that they
may use them as steps to ascend to the knowl-
edge of the things of reason. For " the invisible
things of God," that is, the objects of the reason,
" from the creation of the world are clearly
seen " by the reason, " being understood by the
things that are made." And when they have
risen from the created things of this world to


Cor. X. 3,
Cor. iv. I


The received text has '
13-


walk " instead of" live."


the invisible things of God, they do not stay
there ; but after they have sufficiently exercised
their minds upon these, and have understood
their nature, they ascend to " the eternal power
of God," in a word, to His divinity. For they
know that God, in His love to men, has " mani-
fested " His truth, and " that which is known of
Him," not only to those who devote themselves
to His service, but also to some who are far
removed from the purity of worship and service
which He requires ; and that some of those who
by the providence of God had attained a knowl-
edge of these truths, were yet doing things un-
worthy of that knowledge, and " holding the
truth in unrighteousness," and who are unable to
find any excuse before God after the knowledge
of such great truths which He has given them.

CHAP. XLVII.

For Scripture testifies, in regard to those who
have a knowledge of those things of which Cel-
sus speaks, and who profess a philosophy founded
on these principles, that they, " when they knew
God, glorified Him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their imagina-
tions ; " and notwithstanding the bright light
of knowledge with which God had enlightened
them, "their foolish heart" was carried away,
and became " darkened." ^ Thus we may see
how those who accounted themselves wise gave
proofs of great folly, when, after such grand
arguments delivered in the schools on God and
on things apprehended by the reason, they
" changed the glory of the incorruptible God
into an image made like to corruptible man, and
to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things." 4 As, then, they lived in a way un-
worthy of the knowledge which they had re-
ceived from God, His providence leaving them
to themselves, they were given " up to unclean-
ness, through the lusts of their own hearts to
dishonour their own bodies," s in shamelessness
and licentiousness, because they " changed the
truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and
served the creature more than the Creator."

CHAP. XLVIII.

But those who are despised for their ignorance,
and set down as fools and abject slaves, no sooner
commit themselves to God's guidance by ac-
cepting the teaching of Jesus, than, so far from
defiling themselves by licentious indulgence or
the gratification of shameless passion, they in
many cases, like perfect priests, for whom such
pleasures have no charm, keep themselves in act
and in thought in a state of virgin purity. The
Athenians have one hierophant, who, not having


Rom.
Rom.
Rom.


Chap. LI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


631


confidence in his power to restrain his passions
within the Hmits he prescribed for himself, de-
termined to check them at their seat by the
apphcation of hemlock ; and thus he was ac-
counted pure, and fit for the celebration of
religious worship among the Athenians. But
among Christians may be found men who have
no need of hemlock to fit them for the pure
service of God, and for whom the Word in place
ot hemlock is able to drive all evil desires from
their thoughts, so that they may present their
prayers to the Divine Being. And attached to
the other so-called gods are a select number of
virgins, who are guarded by men, or it may be
not guarded (for that is not the point in ques-
tion at present), and who are supposed to live
in purity for the honour of the god they serve.
But among Christians, those who maintain a
perpetual virginity do so for no human honours,
for no fee or reward, from no motive of vain-
glory ; ^ but " as they choose to retain God in
their knowledge," ^ they are preserved by God
in a spirit well-pleasing to Him, and in the
discharge of every duty, being filled with all
righteousness and goodness.

CHAP. XLIX.

What I have now said, then, is offered not for
the purpose of cavilling with any right opinions
or sound doctrines held even by Greeks, but
with the desire of showing that the same things,
and indeed much better and diviner things than
these, have been said by those divine men, the
prophets of God and the apostles of Jesus.
These truths are fully investigated by all who
wish to attain a perfect knowledge of Christianity,
and who know that " the mouth of the righteous
speaketh wisdom, and his tongue talketh of
judgment ; the law of his God is in his heart." 3
]But even in regard to those who, either from
deficiency or knowledge or want of inclination,
or from not having Jesus to lead them to a ra-
tional view of religion, have not gone into these
deep questions, we find that they beheve in the
Most High God, and in His Only-begotten Son,
the Word and God, and that they often exhibit
in their character a high degree of gravity, of
purity, and integrity ; while those who call them-
selves wise have despised these virtues, and have
wallowed in the filth of sodomy, in lawless lust,
" men with men working that which is un-
seemly." +

CHAP. L.

Celsus has not explained how error accom-
panies the " becoming," or product of genera-
tion ; nor has he expressed himself with suffi-


' [See Robertson's History of the Church, vol. i. p. 145. S.]

2 Rom. i. 28.

3 Ps. xxxvii. 30, 31.
* Rom. i. 27.


cient clearness to enable us to compare his ideas
with ours, and to pass judgment on them. But
the prophets, who have given some wise sug-
gestions on the subject of things produced by
generation, tell us that a sacrifice for sin was
offered even for new-born infants, as not being
free from sin.s They say, " I was shapen in in-
iquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me ; " ^
also, "They are estranged from the womb;"
which is followed by the singular expression,
" They go astray as soon as they are born, speak-
ing lies." 7 Besides, our wise men have such
a contempt for all sensible objects, that some-
times they speak of all material things as vanity :
thus, " For the creature was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him that
subjected the same in hope ; " ^ at other times
as vanity of vanities, " Vanity of vanities, saith
the Preacher, all is vanity." 9 Who has given so
severe an estimate of the life of the human soul
here on earth, as he who says : " Verily every
man at his best estate is altogether vanity? " '°
He does not hesitate at all as to the difference
between the present life of the soul and that
which it is to lead hereafter. He does not say,
" Who knows if to die is not to live, and if to
live is not death?"" But he boldly proclaims
the truth, and says, " Our soul is bowed down
to the dust;"'^ and, "Thou hast brought me
into the dust of death ; " '3 and similarly, " Who
will deliver me from the body of this death?" '•♦
also, " Who will change the body of our humilia-
tion."'s It is a prophet also who says, "Thou
hast brought us down in a place of affliction ; " '^
meaning by the " place of affliction " this earthly
region, to which Adam, that is to say, man,
came after he was driven out of paradise for sin.
Observe also how well the different life of the
soul here and hereafter has been recognised by
him who says, " Now we see in a glass, obscurely,
but then face to face ; " '^ and, " Whilst we are
in our home in the body, we are away from our
home in the Lord ; " wherefore " we are well
content to go from our home in the body, and
to come to our home with the Lord." '**


But what need is there to quote any more
passages against Celsus, in order to prove that


5 [The noteworthy testimony of the Alexandrian school to the
doctrine of birth-sin.]

6 Ps. H. 5.

7 Ps. Iviii. 3.

8 Rom. viii. 20.

9 Eccles. i. 2.

" Euripides. [See De la Rue's note ad he. in his edition of
Origen's Works. S.]
i-^ Ps. xliv. 25.
13 Ps. xxii. 15.
'* Rom. vii. 24.
•5 Phil. iii. 21.
»<> Ps. xliii 20 (LXX.).
" I Cor. xiii. 12.
" 2 Cor. V. 6, 8.


632


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


his words contain nothing which was not said
long before among themselves, since that has
been sufficiently established by what we have
said ? It seems that what follows has some ref-
erence to this : " If you think that a Divine
Spirit has descended from God to announce
divine things to men, it is doubtless this same
Spirit that reveals these truths ; and it was under
the same influence that men of old made known
many important truths." But he does not know
how great is the difference between those things
and the clear and certain teaching of those who
say to us, " Thine incorruptible spirit is in all
things, wherefore God chasteneth them by little
and little that offend ; " ' and of those who,
among their other instructions, teach us that the
words, " Receive ye the Holy Ghost," ^ refer to
a degree of spiritual influence higher than that
in the passage, " Ye shall be baptized with the
Holy Ghost not many days hence." ^ But it is
a difficult matter, even after much careful con-
sideration, to perceive the difference between
those who have received a knowledge of the
truth and a notion of God at different intervals
and for short periods of time, and those who are
more fully inspired by God, who have constant
communion with Him, and are always led by
His Spirit. Had Celsus set himself to under-
stand this, he would not have reproached us
with ignorance, or forbidden us to characterize
as "blind" those who believe that religion shows
itself in such products of man's mechanical art
as images. For every one who sees with the
eyes of his soul serves the Divine Being in no
other way than in that which leads him ever to
have regard to the Creator of all, to address his
prayers to Him alone, and to do all things as in
the sight of God, who sees us altogether, even
to our thoughts. Our earnest desire then is
both to see for ourselves, and to be leaders of
the blind, to bring them to the Word of God,
that He may take away from their minds the
blindness of ignorance. And if our actions are
worthy of Him who taught His disciples, " Ye
are the light of the world," ■♦ and of the Word,
who says, "The light shineth in darkness," s then
we shall be light to those who are in darkness ;
we shall give wisdom to those who are without
it, and we shall instruct the ignorant.

CHAP. LII.

And let not Celsus be angry if we describe as
lame and mutilated in soul those who run to the
temples as to places having a real sacredness,
and who cannot see that no mere mechanical


1 Wisd. xii. I,

2 John XX. 22.

3 Acts i. 5.

4 Matt. V. 14.

5 John i. 5.


work of man can be truly sacred. Those whose
piety is grounded on the teaching of Jesus also
run until they come to the end of their course,
when they can say in all truth and confidence :
" I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith ; henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness."^
And each of us runs " not as uncertain," and he
so fights with evil " not as one beating the air," 7
but as against those who are subject to " the
prince of the power of the air, the spirit that
now worketh in the children of disobedience," ^
Celsus may indeed say of us that we " live with
the body which is a dead thing ; " but we have
learnt, " If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die ;
but if ye by the Spirit do mortify the deeds of
the body, ye shall live ; "9 and, " If we live in
the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit." '°
Would that we might convince him by our ac-
tions that he did us wrong, when he said that we
" live with the body which is dead ! "


After these remarks of Celsus, which we have
done our best to refute, he goes on to address
us thus : " Seeing you are so eager for some
novelty, how much better it would have been if
you had chosen as the object of your zealous
homage some one of those who died a glorious
death, and whose divinity might have received
the support of some myth to perpetuate his
memory ! Why, if you were not satisfied with
Hercules or JEsculapius, and other heroes of
antiquity, you had Orpheus, who was confessedly
a divinely inspired man, who died a violent death.
But perhaps some others have taken him up be-
fore you. You may then take Anaxarchus, who,
when cast into a mortar, and beaten most bar-
barously, showed a noble contempt for his suffer-
ing, and said, ' Beat, beat the shell of Anaxarchus,
for himself you do not beat,' — a speech surely
of a spirit truly divine. But others were before
you in following his interpretation of the laws of
nature. Might you not, then, take Epictetus,
who, when his master was twisting his leg, said,
smiling and unmoved, ' You will break my leg ; '
and when it was broken, he added, ' Did I not
tell you that you would break it ? ' What saying
equal to these did your god utter under suffer-
ing? If you had said even of the Sibyl, whose
authority some of you acknowledge, that she was
a child of God, you would have said something
more reasonable. But you have had the pre-
sumption to include in her writings many im-
pious things," and set up as a god one who ended


2 Tim. iv. 7.
I Cor. ix. 26.
Eph. ii 2.
Rom. viii. 13.


1° Gal. V. 25.

: vol. i. p. 169, note 9, and cap. Ivi. I'n/ra.]


[Se


Chap. LVL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


633


a most infamous life by a most miserable death.
How much more suitable than he would have
been Jonah in the whale's belly, or Daniel deliv-
ered from the wild beasts, or any of a still more
portentous kind ! "

CH-AP. LIV.

But since he sends us to Hercules, let him
repeat to us any of his sayings, and let him jus-
tify his shameful subjection to Omphale. Let
him show that divine honours should be paid to
one who, like a highway robber, carries off a
farmer's ox by force, and afterwards devours it,
amusing himself meanwile with the curses of the
owner ; in memory of which even to this day
sacrifices offered to the demon of Hercules are
accompanied with curses. Again he proposes
^sculapius to us, as if to oblige us to repeat
what we have said already ; but we forbear. In
regard to Orpheus, what does he admire in him
to make him assert that, by common consent,
he was regarded as a divinely inspired man, and
lived a noble life ? I am greatly deceived if it
is not the desire whjch Celsus has to oppose us
and put down Jesus that leads him to sound forth
the praises of Orpheus ; and whether, when he
made himself acquainted with his impious fables
about the gods, he did not cast them aside as
deserving, even more than the poems of Homer,
to be excluded from a well-ordered state. For,
indeed, Orpheus says much worse things than
Homer of those whom they call gods. Noble,
indeed, it was in Anaxarchus to say to Aristoc-
reon, tyrant of Cyprus, " Beat on, beat the shell
of Anaxarchus," but it is the one admirable in-
cident in the life of Anaxarchus known to the
Greeks ; and although, on the strength of that,
some like Celsus might deservedly honour the
man for his courage, yet to look up to Anax-
archus as a god is not consistent with reason.
He also directs us to Epictetus, whose firmness
is justly admired, although his saying when his
leg was broken by his master is not to be com-
pared with the marvellous acts and words of
Jesus which Celsus refuses to believe ; and these
words were accompanied by such a divine power,
that even to this day they convert not only some
of the more ignorant and simple, but many also
of the most enlightened of men.


When, to his enumeration of those to whom
he would send us, he adds, " What saying equal
to these did your god utter under sufferings?"
we would reply, that the silence of Jesus under
scourgings, and amidst all His sufferings, spoke
more for His firmness and submission than all
that was said by the Greeks when beset by
calamity. Perhaps Celsus may believe what was
recorded with all sincerity by trustworthy men,


who, while giving a truthful account of all the
wonders performed by Jesus, specify among these
the silence which He preserved when subjected
to scourgings ; showing the same singular meek-
ness under the insults which were heaped upon
Him, when they put upon Him the purple robe,
and set the crown of thorns upon His head, and
when they put in His hand a reed in place of a
sceptre : no unworthy or angry word escaped Him
against those who subjected Him to such out-
rages. Since, then. He received the scourgings
with silent firmness, and bore with meekness all
the insults of those who outraged Him, it can-
not be said, as is said by some, that it was in
cowardly weakness that He uttered the words :
" Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from
Me : nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou
wilt." ' The prayer which seems to be contained
in these words for the removal of what He calls
" the cup " bears a sense which we have else-
where examined and set forth at large. But
taking it in its more obvious sense, consider if it
be not a prayer offered to God with all piety.
For no man naturally regards an}thing which
may befall him as necessary and inevitable ;
though he may submit to what is not inevita-
ble, if occasion requires. Besides, these words,
" nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt,"
are not the language of one who yielded to neces-
sity, but of one who was contented with what was
befalling Him, and who submitted with reverence
to the arrangements of Providence.


Celsus then adds, for what reason I know not,
that instead of calling Jesus the Son of God, we
had better have given that honour to the Sibyl,
in whose books he maintains we have interpo-
lated many impious statements, though he does
not mention what those interpolations are.^ He
might have proved his assertion by producing
some older copies which are free from the inter-
polations which he attributes to us ; but he does
not do so even to justify his statement that these
passages are of an impious character. More-
over, he again speaks of the life of Jesus as " a
most infamous life," as he has done before, not
once or twice, but many times, although he does
not stay to specify any of the actions of His life
which he thinks most infamous. He seems to
think that he may in this way make assertions
without proving them, and rail against one of
whom he knows nothing. Had he set himself
to show what sort of infamy he found in the
actions of Jesus, we should have repelled the
several charges brought against Him. Jesus did
indeed meet with a most sad death ; but the


1 Matt. xxvi. 39. ^ J <: 1

2 [Vol. i. pp. 280, 288, 2S9; vol. u. pp. 192, 194. 346, and 622j.


634


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


same might be said of Socrates, and of Anaxar-
chus, whom he had just mentioned, and a mul-
titude of others. If the death of Jesus was a
miserable one, was not that of the others so too ?
And if their death was not miserable, can it be
said that the death of Jesus was ? You see from
this, then, that the object of Celsus is to vilify
the character of Jesus ; and I can only suppose
that he is driven to it by some spirit akin to those
whose power has been broken and vanquished
by Jesus, and which now finds itself deprived of
the smoke and blood on which it lived, whilst
deceiving those who sought for God here upon
earth in images, instead of looking up to the true
God, the Governor of all things.


After this, as though his object was to swell
the size of his book, he advises us " to choose
Jonah rather than Jesus as our God ; " thus set-
ting Jonah, who preached repentance to the
single city of Nineveh, before Jesus, who has
preached repentance to the whole world, and
with much greater results. He would have us
to regard as God a man who, by a strange mira-
cle, passed three days and three nights in the
whale's belly ; and he is unwilling that He who
submitted to death for the sake of men. He to
whom God bore testimony through the prophets,
and who has done great things in heaven and
earth, should receive on that ground honour sec-
ond only to that which is given to the Most High
God. Moreover, Jonah was swallowed by the
whale for refusing to preach as God had com-
manded him ; while Jesus suffered death for
men after He had given the instructions which
God wished Him to give. Still further, he adds
that Daniel rescued from the lions is more worthy
of our adoration than Jesus, who subdued the
fierceness of every opposing power, and gave to
us " authority to tread on serpents and scorpions,
and over all the power of the enemy." ' Finally,
having no other names to offer us, he adds, " and
others of a still more monstrous kind," thus
casting a slight upon both Jonah and Daniel ;
for the spirit which is in Celsus cannot speak
well of the righteous.

CHAP. LVIII.

Let us now consider what follows. "They
have also," says he, "a precept to this effect,
that we ought not to avenge ourselves on one
who injures us, or, as he expresses it, ' Whoso-
ever shall strike thee on the one cheek, turn to
him the other also.' This is an ancient saying,
which had been admirably expressed long be-
fore, and which they have only reported in a


' Luke X. 19.


coarser way. For Plato introduces Socrates con-
versing with Crito as follows : ' Must we never
do injustice to any?' 'Certainly not.' 'And
since we must never do injustice, must we not
return injustice for an injustice that has been
done to us, as most people think ? ' 'It seems
to me that we should not.' ' But tell me, Crito,
may we do evil to any one or not? ' ' Certainly
not, O Socrates.' ' Well, is it just, as is com-
monly said, for one who has suffered wrong to
do wrong in return, or is it unjust? ' ' It is un-
just. Yes ; for to do harm to a man is the same
as to do him injustice.' 'You speak truly. We
must then not do injustice in return for injustice,
nor must we do evil to any one, whatever evil
we may have suffered from him.' Thus Plato
speaks ; and he adds, ' Consider, then, whether
you are at one with me, and whether, starting
from this principle, we may not come to the
conclusion that it is never right to do injustice,
even in return for an injustice which has been
received ; or whether, on the other hand, you
differ from me, and do not admit the principle
from which we started. That has always been
my opinion, and is so still.' ^ Such are the sen-
timents of Plato, and indeed they were held by
divine men before his time. But let this suffice
as one example of the way in which this and
other truths have been borrowed and corrupted.
Any one who wishes can easily by searching find
more of them."

CHAP. LIX.

When Celsus here or elsewhere finds himself
unable to dispute the truth of what we say, but
avers that the same things were said by the
Greeks, our answer is, that if the doctrine be
sound, and the effect of it good, whether it was
made known to the Greeks by Plato or any of
the wise men of Greece, or whether it was de-
livered to the Jews by Moses or any of the
prophets, or whether it was given to the Chris-
tians in the recorded teaching of Jesus Christ,
or in the instructions of His apostles, that does
not affect the value of the truth communicated.
It is no objection to the principles of Jews or
Christians, that the same things were also said
by the Greeks, especially if it be proved that the
writings of the Jews are older than those of the
Greeks. And further, we are not to imagine that
a truth adorned with the graces of Grecian speech
is necessarily better than the same when ex-
pressed in the more humble and unpretending
language used by Jews and Christians, although
indeed the language of the Jews, in which the
prophets wrote the books which have come down
to us, has a grace of expression peculiar to the
genius of the Hebrew tongue. And even if we


2 Plato's Crito, p. 49.


Chap. LXL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


635


were required to show that the same doctrines
have been better expressed among the Jewish
prophets or in Christian writings, however para-
doxical it may seem, we are prepared to prove
this by an illustration taken from different kinds
of food, and from the different modes of pre-
paring them. Suppose that a kind of food which
is wholesome and nutritious has been prepared
and seasoned in such a way as to be fit, not for
the simple tastes of peasants and poor labourers,
but for those only who are rich and dainty in
their tastes. Suppose, again, that that same food
is prepared not to suit the tastes of the more
delicate, but for the peasants, the poor labourers,
and the common people generally, in short, so
that myriads of persons might eat of it. Now
if, according to the supposition, the food pre-
pared in the one way promotes the health of
those only who are styled the better classes,
while none of the others could taste it, whereas
when prepared in the other way it promoted
the health of great multitudes of men, which
shall we esteem as most contributing to the
public welfare, — those who prepare food for
persons of mark, or those who prepare it for the
multitudes? — taking for granted that in both
cases the food is equally wholesome and nour-
ishing ; while it is evident that the welfare of
mankind and the common good are promoted
better by that physician who attends to the
health of the many, than by one who confines
his attention ro a few.


Now, after understanding this illustration, we
have to apply it to the qualities of spiritual food
with which the rational part of man is nourished.
See, then, if Plato and the wise men among the
Greeks, in the beautiful things they say, are not
like those physicians who confine their attentions
to what are called the better classes of society,
and despise the multitude ; whereas the prophets
among the Jews, and the disciples of Jesus, who
despise mere elegances of style, and what is
called in Scripture " the wisdom of men," " the
wisdom according to the flesh," which delights
in what is obscure, resemble those who study to
provide the most wholesome food for the largest
number of persons. For this purpose they adapt
their language and style to the capacities of the
common people, and avoid whatever would seem
foreign to them, lest by the introduction of
strange forms of expression they should produce
a distaste for their teaching. Indeed, if the true
use of spiritual food, to keep up the figure, is to
produce in him who partakes of it the virtues of
patience and gentleness, must that discourse not
be better prepared when it produces patience
and gentleness in multitudes, or makes them
grow in these virtues, than that which confines


its effects to a select few, supposing that it does
really make them gentle and patient? If a
Greek wished by wholesome instruction to bene-
fit people who understood only Egyptian or
Syriac, the first thing that he would do would be
to learn their language ; and he would rather
pass for a Barbarian among the Greeks, by speak-
ing as the Egyptians or Syrians, in order to be
useful to them, than always remain Greek, and
be without the means of helping them. In the
same way the divine nature, having the purpose
of instructing not only those who are reputed to
be learned in the literature of Greece, but also
the rest of mankind, accommodated itself to the
capacities of the simple multitudes whom it ad-
dressed. It seeks to win the attention of the
more ignorant by the use of language which is
familiar to them, so that they may easily be
induced, after their first introduction, to strive
after an acquaintance with the deeper truths
which lie hidden in Scripture. For even the
ordinary reader of Scripture may see that it con-
tains many things which are too deep to be ap-
prehended at first ; but these are understood by
such as devote themselves to a careful study of
the divine word, and they become plain to them
in proportion to the pains and zeal which they
expend upon its investigation.


From these remarks it is evident, that when
Jesus said "coarsely," as Celsus terms it, "To
him who shall strike thee on the one cheek, turn
the other also ; and if any man be minded to
sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also," ' He expressed Him-
self in such a way as to make the precept have
more practical effect than the words of Plato in
the Crito ; for the latter is so far from being
intelligible to ordinary persons, that even those
have a difficulty in understanding him, who have
been brought up in the schools of learning, and
have been initiated into the famous philosophy
of Greece. It may also be observed, that tiie
precept enjoining patience under injuries is in
no way corrupted or degraded by the plain and
simple language which our Lord employs, but
that in this, as in other cases, it is a mere cal-
umny against our religion which he utters when
he says : " But let this suffice as one example of
the way in which this and other truths have been
borrowed and corrupted. Any one who wishes
can easily by searching find more of them."


Let us now see what follows. " Let us pass
on," says he, " to another point. They cannot


I Matt. V. 39, 40.


6^6


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


tolerate temples, altars, or images.' In this they
are like the Scythians, the nomadic tribes of
Libya, the Seres who worship no god, and some
other of the most barbarous and impious nations
in the world. That the Persians hold the same
notions is shown by Herodotus in these words :
* I know that among the Persians it is considered
unlawful to erect images, altars, or temples ; but
they charge those with folly who do so, because,
as I conjecture, they do not, like the Greeks,
suppose the gods to be of the nature of men.' ^
Heraclitus also says in one place : ' Persons who
address prayers to these images act like those
who speak to the walls, without knowing who
the gods or the heroes are.' And what wiser
lesson have they to teach us than Heraclitus?
He certainly plainly enough implies that it is a
foolish thing for a man to offer prayers to images,
whilst he knows not who the gods and heroes
are. This is the opinion of Heraclitus ; but as
for them, they go further, and despise without
exception all images. If they merely mean that
the stone, wood, brass, or gold which has been
wrought by this or that workman cannot be a
god, they are ridiculous with their wisdom. For
who, unless he be utterly childish in his simpli-
city, can take these for gods, and not for offerings
consecrated to the service of the gods, or images
representing them? But if we are not to regard
these as representing the Divine Being, seeing
that God has a different form, as the Persians
concur with them in saying, then let them take
care that they do not contradict themselves ; for
they say that God made man His own image,
and that He gave him a form like to Himself.
However, they will admit that these images,
whether they are like or not, are made and
dedicated to the honour of certain beings. But
they will hold that the beings to whom they are
dedicated are not gods, but demons, and that a
worshipper of God ought not to worship demons."

CHAP, LXIII.

To this our answer is, that if the Scythians,
the nomadic tribes of Libya, the Seres, who ac-
cording to Celsus have no god, if those other
most barbarous and impious nations in the
world, and if the Persians even cannot bear the
sight of temples, altars, and images, it does not
follow because we cannot suffer them any more
than they, that the grounds on which we object
to them are the same as theirs. We must in-
quire into the principles on which the objection
to temples and images is founded, in order that
we may approve of those who object on sound
principles, and condemn those whose principles
are false. For one and the same thing may be


I TThe temples here meant are such as enshrined images.
^ Herod., i. 131.


done for different reasons. For example, the
philosophers who follow Zeno of Citium abstain
from committing adultery, the followers of Epi-
curus do so too, as well as others again who do so
on no philosophical principles ; but observe what
different reasons determine the conduct of these
different classes. The first consider the inter-
ests of society, and hold it to be forbidden by
nature that a man who is a reasonable being
should corrupt a woman whom the laws have
already given to another, and should thus break
up the household of another man. The Epicu-
reans do not reason in this way ; but if they ab-
stain from adultery, it is because, regarding
pleasure as the chief end of man, they perceive
that one who gives himself up to adultery, en-
counters for the sake of this one pleasure a
multitude of obstacles to pleasure, such as im-
prisonment, exile, and death itself. They often,
indeed, run considerable risk at the outset, while
watching for the departure from the house of
the master and those in his interest. So that,
supposing it possible for a man to commit adul-
tery, and escape the knowledge of the husband,
of his servants, and of others whose esteem he
would forfeit, then the Epicurean would yield to
the commission of the crime for the sake of
pleasure. The man of no philosophical system,
again, who abstains from adultery when the op-
portunity comes to him, does so generally from
dread of the law and its penalties, and not
for the sake of enjoying a greater number of
other pleasures. You see, then, that an act
which passes for being one and the same —
namely, abstinence from adultery — is not the
same, but differs in different men according to
the motives which actuate it : one man refrain-
ing for sound reasons, another for such bad and
impious ones as those of the Epicurean, and the
common person of whom we have spoken.

CHAP. Lxrv.

As, then, this act of self-restraint, which in
appearance is one and the same, is found in
fact to be different in different persons, ac-
cording to the principles and motives which
lead to it ; so in the same way with those
who cannot allow in the worship of the Divine
Being altars, or temples, or images. The Scyth-
ians, the Nomadic Libyans, the godless Seres,
and the Persians, agree in this with the Chris-
tians and Jews, but they are actuated by very
different principles. For none of these former
abhor altars and images on the ground that they
are afraid of degrading the worship of God, and
reducing it to the worship of material things
wrought by the hands of men.^ Neither do i


[Note this wholesome fear of early Christians.


Chap. LXVIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


^2>7


they object to them from a behef that the de-
mons choose certain forms and places, whether
because they are detained there by virtue of cer-
tain charms, or because for some other possible
reason they have selected these haunts, where
they may pursue their criminal pleasures, in par-
taking of the smoke of sacrificial victims. But
Christians and Jews have regard to this com-
mand, " Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and
serve Him alone ; " ' and this other, " Thou shalt
have no other gods before Me : thou shalt not
make unto thee any graven image, or any like-
ness of anything that is in heaven above, or that
is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water
under the earth : thou shalt not bow down thy-
self to them, nor serve them ; "^ and again,
"Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and
Him only shalt thou serve." ^ It is in consider-
ation of these and many other such commands,
that they not only avoid temples, altars, and im-
ages, but are ready to suffer death when it is
necessary, rather than debase by any such impi-
ety the conception which they have of the Most
High God.

CHAP. LXV,

In regard to the Persians, we have already
said that though they do not build temples, yet
they worship the sun and the other works of
God. This is forbidden to us, for we have been
taught not to worship the creature instead of the
Creator, but to know that " the creation shall
be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the liberty of the glory of the children of
God ; " and " the earnest expectation of the
creation is waiting for the revelation of the sons
of God ; " and " the creation was made subject
to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him
who made it subject, in hope." t We believe,
therefore, that things " under the bondage of
corruption," and " subject to vanity," which re-
main in this condition " in hope " of a better
state, ought not in our worship to hold the place
of God, the all-sufficient, and of His Son, the
First-born of all creation. Let this suffice, in
addition to what we have already said of the
Persians, who abhor altars and images, but who
serve the creature instead of the Creator. As
to the passage quoted by Celsus from Hera-
clitus, the purport of which he represents as
being, " that it is childish folly for one to offer
prayers to images, whilst he knows not who the
gods and heroes are," we may reply that it is
easy to know that God and the Only-begotten
Son of God, and those whom God has hon-
oured with the title of God, and who partake
of His divine nature, are very different from all


13-


1 Deut.

2 Ex. XX. 3, 4.

3 Matt. iv. lo.

* Rom. viii. 19-21,


the gods of the nations which are demons ; but
it is not possible at the same time to know God
and to address prayers to images. 5


CHAP. LXVI.

And the charge of folly applies not only to
those who offer i)rayers to images, but also to
such as pretend to do so in compliance with the
example of the multitude : and to this class
belong the Peripatetic philosophers and the fol-
lowers of Epicurus and Democritus. For there
is no falsehood or pretence in the soul which is
possessed with true piety towards God. Another
reason also why we abstain from doing honour to
images, is that we may give no support to the
notion that the images are gods. It is on this
ground that we condemn Celsus, and all others
who, while admitting that they are not gods, yet,
with the reputation of being wise men, render to
them what passes for homage. In this way they
lead into sin the multitude who follow their ex-
ample, and who worship these images not simply
out of deference to custom, but from a belief into
which they have fallen that they are true gods,
and that those are not to be listened to who
hold that the objects of their worship are not
true gods. Celsus, indeed, says that " they do
not take them for gods, but only as offerings
dedicated to the gods." But he does not prove
that they are not rather dedicated to men than,
as he says, to the honour of the gods themselves ;
for it is clear that they are the offerings of men
who were in error in their views of the Divine
Being. Moreover, we do not imagine that these
images are representations of God, for they can-
not represent a being who is invisible and in-
corporeal.^ But as Celsus supposes that we fall
into a contradiction, whilst on the one hand we
say that God has not a human form, and on the
other we profess to believe that God made man
the image of Himself, and created man the
image of God ; our answer is the same as has
been given already, that we hold the resemblance
to God to be preserved in • the reasonable soul,
which is formed to virtue, although Celsus, who
does not see the difference between " being the
image of God," and " being created after the
image of God," pretends that we said, " God
made man His own image, and gave him a form
like to His own." But this also has been ex-
amined before.

CH.AP. Lxvir.

His next remark upon the Christians is :
"They will admit that these images, whether
they are like or not, are made and dedicated to
the honour of certain beings ; but they will hold


5 [Let this be noted; and .sec book viii. 20, in/ra.

6 [Vol. ii. p. 186, note i.]


638


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VII.


that the beings to whom they are dedicated are
not gods, but demons, and that a worshipper of
God ought not to worship demons." If he had
been acquainted with the nature of demons, and
with their several operations, whether led on to
them by the conjurations of those who are skilled
in the art, or urged on by their own inclination
to act according to their power and inclination ;
if, I say, he had thoroughly understood this sub-
ject, which is both wide in extent and difficult
for human comprehension, he would not have
condemned us for saying that those who worship
the Supreme Being should not serve demons.
For ourselves, so far are we from wishing to serve
demons, that by the use of prayers and other
means which we learn from Scripture, we drive
them out of the souls of men, out of places
where they have established themselves, and
even sometimes from the bodies of animals ; for
even these creatures often suffer from injuries in-
flicted upon them by demons.

CHAP. LXVIII.

After all that we have already said concerning
Jesus, it would be a useless repetition for us to
answer these words of Celsus : " It is easy to
convict them of worshipping not a god, not even
demons, but a dead person." Leaving, then,
this objection for the reason assigned, let us pass
on to what follows : " In the first, place, I would
ask why we are not to serve demons ? Is it not
true that all things are ordered according to
God's will, and that His providence governs all
things? Is not everything which happens in the
universe, whether it be the work of God, of
angels, of other demons, or of heroes, regulated
by the law of the Most High God ? Have these
not had assigned them various departments of
which they were severally deemed worthy ? Is
it not just, therefore, that he who worships God
should serve those also to whom God has as-
signed such power? Yet it is impossible, he
says, for a man to serve many masters." Observe
here again how he settles at once a number of
questions which require considerable research,
and a profound acquaintance with what is most
mysterious in the government of the universe.
For we must inquire into the meaning of the
statement, that " all things are ordered accord-
ing to God's will," and ascertain whether sins
are or are not included among the things which
God orders. For if God's government extends
to sins not only in men, but also in demons and
in any other spiritual beings who are capable of
sin, it is for those who speak in this manner to
see how inconvenient is the expression that " all
things are ordered by the will of God." For it
follows from it that all sins and all their conse-
quences are ordered by the will of God, which
is a different thing from saying that they come to


pass with God's permission. For if we take the
word " ordered " in its proper signification, and
say that " all the results of sin were ordered,"
then it is evident that all things are ordered ac-
cording to God's will, and that all, therefore,
who do evil do not offend against His govern-
ment. And the same distinction holds in regard
to " providence." When we say that " the provi-
dence of God regulates all things," we utter a
great truth if we attribute to that providence
nothing but what is just and right. But if we
ascribe to the providence of God all things what-
soever, however unjust they may be, then it is
no longer true that the providence of God regu-
lates all things, unless we refer directly to God's
providence things which flow as results from His
arrangements. Celsus maintains also, that "what-
ever happens in the universe, whether it be the
work of God, of angels, of other demons, or of
heroes, is regulated by the law of the Most High
God." But this also is incorrect ; for we cannot
say that transgressors follow the law of God when
they transgress ; and Scripture declares that it is
not only wicked men who are transgressors, but
also wicked demons and wicked angels.

CHAP. LXIX.

And it is not we alone who speak of wicked
demons, but almost all who acknowledge the ex-
istence of demons. Thus, then, it is not true
that all observe the law of the Most High ; for
all who fall away from the divine law, whether
through heedlessness, or through depravity and
vice, or through ignorance of what is right, all
such do not keep the law of God, but, to use a
new phrase which we find in Scripture, " the law
of sin. I say, then, that in the opinion of most
of those who believe in the existence of de-
mons, some of them are wicked ; and these, in-
stead of keeping the law of God, offend against
it. But, according to our belief, it is true of all
demons, that they were not demons originally,
but they became so in departing from the true
way ; so that the name " demons " is given to
those beings who have fallen away from God.
Accordingly, those who worship God must not
serve demons. We may also learn the true na-
ture of demons if we consider the practice of
those who call upon them by charms to prevent
certain things, or for many other purposes. For
this is the method they adopt, in order by means
of incantations and ntagical arts to invoke the
demons, and induce them to further their wishes.
Wherefore, the worship of all demons would be
inconsistent in us who worship the Supreme God ;
and the service of demons is the service of so-
called gods, for " all the gods of the heathen are
demons." • The same thing also appears from


Ps. xcv. s (LXX.) ; xcvi. 5 (Heb.)


Chap. LXX.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


639


the fact that the dedication of the most famous
of the so-called sacred places, whether temples
or statues, was accompanied by curious magical
incantations, which were performed by those
who zealously served the demons with magical
arts. Hence we are determined to avoid the
worship of demons even as we would avoid
death ; and we hold that the worship, which is
supposed among the Greeks to be rendered to
gods at the altars, and images, and temples, is
in reality offered to demons.

CHAP. LXX.

His next remark was, " Have not these infe-
rior powers had assigned to them by God differ-
ent departments, according as each was deemed
worthy? " But this is a question which requires
a very profound knowledge. For we must de-
termine whether the Word of God, who governs
all things, has appointed wicked demons for cer-
tain employments, in the same way as in states
executioners are appointed, and other officers
with cruel but needful duties to discharge ; or
whether as among robbers, who infest desert
places, it is customary for them to choose out of
their number one who may be their leader, —
so the demons, who are scattered as it were in
troops in different parts of the earth, have chosen
for themselves a chief under whose command
they may plunder and pillage the souls of men.
To explain this fully, and to justify the conduct
of the Christians in refusing homage to any ob-


ject except the Most High God, and the First-
born of all creation, who is His Word and God,
we must quote this from Scripture, " All that
ever came before Me are thieves and robbers :
but the sheep did not hear them ; " and again,
" The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to
kill, and to destroy ; " ' and other similar pas-
sages, as, " Behold, I have given you authority
to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all
the power of the enemy : and nothing shall by
any means hurt you ; " ^ and again, " Thou shalt
tread upon the lion and adder : the young lion
and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet." 3
But of these things Celsus knew nothing, or he
would not have made use of language like this :
" Is not everything which happens in the uni-
verse, whether it be the work of God, of angels,
of other demons, or of heroes, regulated by the
law of the Most High God? Have these not
had assigned to them various departments of
which they were severally deemed worthy ? Is
it not just, therefore, that he who serves God
should serve those also to whom God has as-
signed such power?" To which he adds, " It
is impossible, they say, for a man to serve many
masters." This last point we must postpone to
the next book ; for this, which is the seventh
book which we have written in answer to the
treatise of Celsus, is already of sufficient length.


' John X. 8-10.

2 Luke X. 19.

3 Ps. xci. 13.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.
BOOK VIII.


CHAP. I.

Having completed seven books, I now pro-
pose to begin the eighth. And may God and
His Only-begotten Son the Word be with us, to
enable us effectively to refute the falsehoods
which Celsus has published under the delusive
title of A True Discourse, and at the same time
to unfold the truths of Christianity with such
fulness as our purpose requires. And as Paul
said, " We are ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you -by us,"' so would we in
the same spirit and language earnestly desire to
be ambassadors for Christ to men, even as the
Word of God beseeches them to the love of
Himself, seekmg to win over to righteousness,
truth, and the other virtues, those who, until
they receive the doctrines of Jesus Christ, live in
darkness about God and in ignorance of their
Creator. Again, then, I would say, may God
bestow upon us His pure and true Word, even
"the Lord strong and mighty in battle " ^ against
sin. We must now proceed to state the next
objection of Celsus, and afterwards to answer it.


In a passage previously quoted Celsus asks us
why we do not worship demons, and to his re-
marks on demons we gave such an answer as
seemed to us in accordance with the divine
word. After having put this question for the
purpose of leading us to the worship of demons,
he represents us as answering that it is impossi-
ble to serve many masters. "This," he goes on
to say, " is the language of sedition, and is only
used by those who separate themselves and stand
aloof from all human society. Those who speak
in this way ascribe," as he supposes, " their own
feelings and passions to God. It does hold true
among men, that he who is in the service of
one master cannot well serve another, because
the service which he renders to the one inter-


' 2 Cor.

2 Ps. XX


feres with that which he owes to the other ; and
no one, therefore, who has already engaged him-
self to the service of one, must accept that of
another. And, in like manner, it is impossible
to serve at the same time heroes or demons of
different natures. But in regard to God, who
is subject to no suffering or loss, it is," he
thinks, " absurd to be on our guard against
serving more gods, as though we had to do
with demi-gods, or other spirits of that sort."
He says also, " He who serves many gods does
that which is pleasing to the Most High, because
he honours that which belongs to Him." And
he adds, "It is indeed wrong to give honour
to any to whom God has not given honour."
"Wherefore," he says, "in honouring and wor-
shipping all belonging to God, we will not dis-
please Him to whom they all belong."


Before proceeding to the next point, it may
be well for us to see whether we do not accept
with approval the saying, "No man can serve
two masters," with the addition, " for either he
will hate the one, and love the other ; or else
he will hold to the one, and despise the other,"
and further, " Ye cannot serve God and mam-
mon." 3 The defence of this passage will lead
us to a deeper and more searching inquiry into
the meaning and application of the words "gods"
and " lords." Divine Scripture teaches us that
there is "a great Lord above all gods." ■♦ And
by this name "gods " we are not to understand
the objects of heathen worship (for we know
that "all the gods of the heathen are demons "5),
but the gods mentioned by the prophets as form-
ing an assembly, whom God "judges," and to
each of whom He assigns his proper work. For
" God standeth in the assembly of the gods : He
judgeth among the gods." ^ For " God is Lord


640


3 Matt. vi. 24.
^ Ps. xcvii. 9.
s Ps. xcvi. 5.
* Ps, Ixxxii. t.


Chap. VI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


641


of gods," who by His Son " hath called the earth
from the rising of the sun unto the going down
thereof."' We are also commanded to "give
thanks to the God of gods."^ Moreover, we
are taught that " God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living." ^ Nor are these the
only passages to this effect ; but there are very
many others.


The sacred Scriptures teach us to think, in
like manner, of the Lord of lords. For they say
in one place, " Give thanks to the God of gods,
for His mercy endureth for ever. Give thanks
to the Lord of lords, for His mercy endureth for
ever ; " and in another, " God is King of kings,
and Lord of lords." For Scripture distinguishes
between those gods which are such only in name
and those which are truly gods, whether they
are called by that name or not ; and the same is
true in regard to the use of the word " lords."
To this effect Paul says, " For though there be
that are called gods, whether in heaven or in
earth, as there are gods many, and lords many." ^
But as the God of gods calls whom He pleases
through Jesus to his inheritance, " from the east
and from the west," and the Christ of God thus
shows His superiority to all rulers by entering
into their several provinces, and summoning men
out of them to be subject to Himself, Paul there-
fore, with this in view, goes on to say, " But to
us there is but one God, the Father, of whom
are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things, and we by Him ; " adding,
as if with a deep sense of the marvellous and
j mysterious nature of the doctrine, " Howbeit,
{ there is not in every man that knowledge."
When he says, "To us there is but one God,
the Father, of whom are all things ; and one
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things," by
" us " he means himself and all those who have
risen up to the supreme God of gods and to the
supreme Lord of lords. Now he has risen to
the supreme God who gives Him an entire and
undivided worship through His Son — the word
and wisdom of God made manifest in Jesus.
For it is the Son alone who leads to God those
who are striving, by the purity of their thoughts,
words, and deeds, to come near to God the
Creator of the universe. I think, therefore, that
the prince of this world, who " transforms him-
self into an angel of light," 5 was referring to
this and such like statements in the words,
" Him follows a host of gods and demons, ar-
ranged in eleven bands." ^ Speaking of him-


' Ps. 1. I.
= Ps. cxxxvi. 2.
3 Matt. xxii. 32.
* I Cor. viii. 5, etc.

- 2 Cor xi. 14.

- Plato, I'ha-drus, p. 246.


self and the philosophers, he says, " We are of
the party of Jupiter; others belong to other
demons."

CHAP. V.

Whilst there are thus many gods and lords,
whereof some are such in reality, and others are
such only in name, we strive to rise not only
above those whom the nations of the earth wor-
ship as gods, but also beyond those spoken of as
gods in Scripture, of whom they are wholly ig-
norant who are strangers to the covenants of
God given by Moses and by our Saviour Jesus,
and who have no part in the promises which He
has made to us through them. That man rises
above all demon-worship who does nothing that
is pleasing to demons ; and he rises to a blessed-
ness beyond that of those whom Paul calls
" gods," if he is enabled, like them, or in any
way he may, " to look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are unseen."
And he who considers that " the earnest expecta-
tion of the creature waiteth for the manifestation
of the sons of God, not willingly, but by reason
of him who subjected the same in hope," whilst
he praises the creature, and sees how " it shall
be freed altogether from the bondage of corrup-
tion, and restored to the glorious liberty of the
children of God," 7 — such a one cannot be
induced to combine with the service of God the
service of any other, or to serve two masters.
There is therefore nothing seditious or factious,
in the language of those who hold these views,
and who refuse to serve more masters than one.
To them Jesus Christ is an all-sufficient Lord),
who Himself instructs them, in order that when
fully instructed He may form them into a king-
dom worthy of God, and present them to God
the Father. But indeed they do in a sense sep-
arate themselves and stand aloof from those who
are aliens from the commonwealth of God and
strangers to His covenants, in order that they
may live as citizens of heaven, " coming to the
living God, and to the city of God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
angels, to the general assembly and Church of the
first-born, which are written in heaven." ^


But when we refuse to serve any other than
God through His word and wjsdom, we do so,
not as though we would thereby be doing any
harm or injury to God, in the same way as injury
would be done to a man by his ser\'ant entering
into the ser\'ice of another, but we fear that we
ourselves should suffer harm by depriving our-
selves of our portion in God, through which we
live in the participation of the divine blessedness,


7 Rom. viii. 19, 20.

8 Hcb. xii. 22, 23.


642


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


and are imbued with that excellent spirit of
adoption which in the sons of the heavenly
Father cries, not with words, but with deep effect
in the inmost heart, " Abba, Father." The La-
cedaemonian ambassadors, when brought before
the king of Persia, refused to prostrate them-
selves before him, when the attendants endeav-
oured to compel them to do so, out of respect
for that which alone had authority and lordship
over them, namely, the law of Lycurgus.' Bat
they who have a much greater and diviner em-
bassy in " being ambassadors for Christ " should
not worship any ruler among Persians, or Greeks,
or Egyptians, or of any nation whatever, even
although their officers and ministers, demons and
angels of the devil, should seek to compel them
to do so, and should urge them to set at nought
a law which is mightier than all the laws upon
earth. For the Lord of those who are " ambas-
sadors for Christ " is Christ Himself, whose am-
bassadors they are, and who is " the Word, who
was in the beginning, was with God, and was
God." ^

CHAP. VII.

But when Celsus speaks of heroes and de-
mons, he starts a deeper question than he is
aware of. For after the statement which he
made in regard to service among men, that " the
first master is injured when any of his servants
wishes at the same time to serve another," he
adds, that " the same holds true of heroes, and
other demons of that kind." Now we must in-
quire of him what nature he thinks those heroes
and demons possess of whom he affirms that he
who serves one hero may not serve another, and
he who serves one demon may not serve another,
as though the former hero or demon would be
injured in the same way as men are injured when
they who serve them first afterwards give them-
selves to the service of others. Let him also
state what loss he supposes those heroes or de-
mons will suffer. For he will be driven either
to plunge into endless absurdities, and first re-
peat, then retract his previous statements ; or
else to abandon his frivolous conjectures, and
confess that he understands nothing of the nature
of heroes and demons. And in regard to his
statement, that men suffer injury when the servant
of one man enters the service of a second mas-
ter, the question arises : " What is the nature of
the injury which is done to the former master by
a servant who, while serving him, wishes at the
same dme to serve another? "

CHAP. VIII.

For if he answers, as one who is unlearned
and ignorant of philosophy, that the injury sus-


Herod,, vii. 136.
John i. I.


tained is one which regards things that are out-
side of us, it will be plainly manifest that he
knows nothing of that famous saying of Socrates,
"Anytus and Melitus may kill me, but they can-
not injure me ; for it is impossible that the better
should ever be injured by the worse." But if by
injury he means a wicked impulse or an evil
habit, it is plain that no injury of this kind would
befall the wise, by one man serving two wise
men in different places. If this sense does not
suit his purpose, it is evident that his endeavours
are vain to weaken the authority of the passage,
" No man can serve two masters ; " for these
words can be perfectly true only when they refer
to the service which we render to the Most High
through His Son, who leadeth us to God. And
we will not serve God as though He stood in
need of our service, or as though He would be
made unhappy if we ceased to serve Him ; but
we do it because we are ourselves benefited by
the service of God, and because we are freed
from griefs and troubles by serving the Most
High God through His only-begotten Son, the
Word and \Msdom.

CHAP. IX.

And observe the recklessness of that expres-
sion, " For if thou worship any other of the
things in the universe," as though he would
have us believe that we are led by our service
of God to the worship of any other things which
belong to God, without any injury to ourselves.
But, as if feeling his error, he corrects the words,
" If thou worship any other of the things in the
universe," by adding, " We may honour none,
however, except those to whom that right has
been given by God." And we would put to
Celsus this question in regard to those who are
honoured as gods, as demons, or as heroes :
" Now, sir, can you prove that the right to be
honoured has been given to these by God, and
that it has not arisen from the ignorance and
folly of men who in their wanderings have fallen
away from Him to whom alone worship and ser-
vice are properly due ? You said a little ago, O
Celsus, that Antinous, the favourite of Adrian, is
honoured ; but surely you will not say that the
right to be worshipped as a god was given to
him by the God of the universe ? And so of the
others, we ask proof that the right to be wor-
shipped was given to them by the Most High
God." But if the same question is put to us in
regard to the worship of Jesus, we will show that
the right to be honoured was given to Him by
God, " that all may honour the Son, even as they
honour the Father." 3 For all the prophecies
which preceded His birth were preparations
for His worship. And the wonders which He
wought — through no magical art, as Celsus


John V. 23.


Chap. XII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


64:


supposes, but by a divine power, which was
foretold by the prophets — have served as a
testimony from God in behalf of the worship
of Christ. He who honours the Son, who is the
Word and Reason, acts in nowise contrary to
reason, and gains for himself great good ; he
who honours Him, who is the Truth, becomes
better by honouring truth : and this we may say
of honouring wisdom, righteousness, and all the
other names by which the sacred Scriptures are
wont to designate the Son of God.


But that the honour which we pay to the Son
of God, as well as that which we render to God
the Father, consists of an upright course of life,
is plainly taught us by the passage, " Thou that
makest thy boast of the law, through breaking
the law dishonourest thou God?"' and also,
" Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye,
shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden
under foot the Son of God, and hath counted
the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done de-
spite uoto the Spirit of grace? "^ For if he
who transgresses the law dishonours God by his
transgression, and he who treads under foot the
word treads under foot the Son of God, it is evi-
dent that he who keeps the law honours God,
and that the worshipper of God is he whose life
is regulated by the principles and precepts of
the divine word. Had Celsus known who they
are who are God's people, and that they alone
are wise, — and who they are who are strangers
to God, and that these are all the wicked who
have no desire to give themselves to virtue, —
he would have considered before he gave ex-
pression to the words, " How can he who hon-
ours any of those whom God acknowledges as
His own be displeasing to God, to whom they
all belong.'' "

CHAP. XI.

He adds, " And indeed he who, when speak-
ing of God, asserts that there is only one who
may be called Lord, speaks impiously, for he
divides the kingdom of God, and raises a sedi-
tion therein, implying that there are separate
factions in the divine kingdom, and that there
exists one who is His enemy." He might speak
after this fashion, if he could prove by conclu-
sive arguments that those who are worshipped
as gods by the heathens are truly gods, and not
merely evil spirits, which are supposed to haunt
statues and temples and altars. But we desire
not only to understand the nature of that divine
kingdom of which we are continually speaking
and writing, but also ourselves to be of those


' Rom. ii. 23.
2 Heb. X, 29.


who are under the rule of God alone, so that
the kingdom of God may be ours. Celsus, how-
ever, who teaches us to worship many gods,
ought in consistency not to speak of " the king-
dom of God," but of " the kingdom of the
gods." There are therefore no factions in the
kingdom of God, nor is there any god who is
an adversary to Him, although there are some
who, like the Giants and Titans, in their wicked-
ness wish to contend with God in company with
Celsus, and those who declare war against Him
who has by innumerable proofs established the
claims of Jesus, and against Him who, as the
Word, did, for the salvation of our race, show
Himself before all the world in such a form as
each was able to receive Him.


In what follows, some may imagine that he
says something plausible against us. " If," says
he, " these people worshipped one God alone,
and no other, they would perhaps have some
valid argument against the worship of others.
But they pay excessive reverence to one who
has but lately appeared among men, and they
think it no offence against God if they worship
also His servant." To this we reply, that if
Celsus had known that saying, " I and My Father
are one," ^ and the words used in prayer by the
Son of God, "As Thou and I are one," + he
would aot have supposed that we worship any
other besides Him who is the Supreme God.
" For," says He, " My Father is in Me, and I in
Him." 5 And if any should from these words be
afraid of our going over to the side of those who
deny that the Father and the Son are two per-
sons, let him weigh that passage, " And the
multitude of them that believed were of one
heart and of one soul," '^ that he may understand
the meaning of the saying, " I and My Father
are one." We worship one God, the Father and
the Son, therefore, as we have explained ; and
our argument against the worship of other gods
still continues valid. And vve do not " reverence
beyond measure one who has but lately ap-
peared," as though He did not exist before ; ?
I for we believe Himself when He says, " Before
I Abraham was, I am." '^ Again He says, "I am
the truth ; " ^ and surely none of us is so simple
I as to suppose that truth did not exist before the
i time when Christ appeared. '° We worship, there-
fore, the Father of truth, and the Son, who is
the truth ; and these, while they are two, con-

3 John X. ^o.
* John xvii. 22.

5 John xiv. II, and xvii. 21.

6 Acts iv. 32.

7 [See note iitfra, cap. xxvi. S.]

8 John viii. 58.

9 John xiv. 6.

■o \t\ Ti)? aAT)«€ia? oviia: see Neander's History of the Church,
vol. ii. pp. 282, 283, also note supra, book vi. cap. Ixiv. p. 603. S.]


644


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


sidered as persons or subsistences, are one in
unity of thought, in harmony and in identity of
will. So entirely are they one, that he who has
seen the Son, " who is the brightness of God's
glory, and the express image of His person,"'
has seen in Him who is the image of God, God
Himself.


He further supposes, that "because we join
along with the worship of God the worship of
His Son, it follows that, in our view, not only
God, but also the servants of God, are to be
worshipped." If he had meant this to apply to
those who are truly the servants of God,
after His only-begotten Son, — to Gabriel and
Michael, and the other angels and archangels, —
and if he had said of these that they ought to
be worshipped, — if also he had clearly defined
the meaning of the word "worship," and the
duties of the worshippers, — we might perhaps
have brought forward such thoughts as have
occurred to us on so important a subject. But
as he reckons among the servants of God the
demons which are worshipped by the heathen,
he cannot induce us, on the plea of consistency,
to worship such as are declared by the word to
be servants of the evil one, the prince of this
world, who leads astray from God as many as
he can. We decline, therefore, altogether to
worship and serve those whom other men wor-
ship, for the reason that they are not servants of
God. For if we had been taught to regard
them as servants of the Most High, we would
not have called them demons. Accordingly,
we worship with all our power the one God, and
His only Son, the Word and the Image of God,
by prayers and supplications ; and we offer our
petitions to the God of the universe through
His only-begotten Son. To the Son we first
present them, and beseech Him, as " the pro-
pitiation for our sins," ^ and our High Priest, to
offer our desires, and sacrifices, and prayers, to
the Most High. Our faith, therefore, is directed
to God through His Son, who strengthens it in
us ; and Celsus can never show that the Son
of God is the cause of any sedition or disloyalty
in the kingdom of God. We honour the Father
when we admire His Son, the Word, and Wis-
dom, and Truth, and Righteousness, and all
that He who is the Son of so great a Father is
said in Scripture to be. So much on this point.


ought to be truly worshipped, they would not
consent to discontinue their worship of him who
is their leader in the sedition. And they call
him Son of God, not out of any extreme rever-
ence for God, but from an extreme desire to
extol Jesus Christ." We, however, have learned
who the Son of God is, and know that He is
"the brightness of His glory, and the express
image of His person," and " the breath of the
power of God, and a pure influence flowing
from the glory of the Almighty ; " moreover,
" the brightness of the everlasting light, the
unspotted mirror of the power of God, and the
image of His goodness." ^ We know, there-
fore, that He is the Son of God, and that God
is His father. And there is nothing extravagant
or unbecoming the character of God in the doc-
trine that He should have begotten such an
only Son ; and no one will persuade us that
such a one is not a Son of the unbegotten God
and Father. If Celsus has heard something of
certain persons holding that the Son of God is
not the Son of the Creator of the universe, that
is a matter which lies between him and the sup-
porters of such an opinion. Jesus is, then, not
the leader of any seditious movement, but the
promoter of peace. For He said to His dis-
ciples, " Peace I leave with you. My peace I
give unto you ; " and as He knew that it would
be men of the world, and not men of God, who
would wage war against us, he added, " Not as
thfe world giveth peace, do I give peace unto
you." 4 And even although we are oppressed
in the world, we have confidence in Him who
said, " In the world ye shall have tribulation ; but
be of good cheer, I have overcome the world."
And it is He whom we call Son of God — Son
of that God, namely, whom, to quote the words
of Celsus, " we most highly reverence ; " and
He is the Son who has been most highly exalted
by the Father. Grant that there may be some
individuals among the multitudes of believers
who are not in entire agreement with us, and
who incautiously assert that the Saviour is the
Most High God ; however, we do not hold with
them, but rather believe Him when He says,
"The Father who sent Me is greater than I."s
We would not therefore make Him whom we
call Father inferior — as Celsus accuses us of
doing — to the Son of God.


Celsus goes on to say : " That I may give a

true representation of their faith, I will use their

Agam Celsus proceeds : " If you should tell i ^^^ ^^^^^^^ ^^ ^-^.^^ -^ ^^^^^ -^ ^^Ue^^ j Heavenly

them that Jesus is not the Son of God, but that j^i^logue : ' If the Son is mightier than God,

God is the Father of all, and that He alone


1 Heb. i. 3.

2 I John ii.


3 Wisd. vii. 25, 26.
* John xiv. 27.
5 John xiv. 28.


Chap. XVII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


645


and the Son of man is Lord over Him, who else
than the Son can be Lord over that God who is
the ruler over all things ? How comes it, that
while so many go about the well, no one goes 1
down into it ? Why art thou afraid when thou j
hast gone so far on the way ? Answer : Thou art j
mistaken, for I lack neither courage nor weap-
ons.' Is It not evident, then, that their views :
are precisely such as I have described them to
be? They suppose that another God, who is
above the heavens, is the Father of him whom
with one accord they honour, that they may !
honour this Son of man alone, whom they exalt j
under the form and name of the great God, and
whom they assert to be stronger than God, who
rules the world, and that he rules over Him.
And hence that maxim of theirs, ' It is impossi- I
ble to serve two masters,' is maintained for the
purpose of keeping up the party who are on
the sitle of this Lord." Here, again, Celsus
quotes opinions from some most obscure sect
of heretics, and ascribes them to all Christians.
I call it " a most obscure sect ; " for although
we have often contended with heretics, yet we
are unable to discover from what set of opinions
he has taken this passage, if indeed he has quoted
it from any author, and has not rather concoct-
ed it himself, or added it as an inference of his
own. For we who say that the visible world is
under the government of Him who created all
things, do thereby declare that the Son is not
mightier than the Father, but inferior to Him.
And this belief we ground on the saying of Jesus
Himself, "The Father who sent Me is greater
than I." And none of us is so insane as to
affirm that the Son of man is Lord over God.
But when we regard the Saviour as God the
Word, and Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Truth, we certainly do say that He has dominion
over all things which have been subjected to
Him in this capacity, but not that His dominion
extends over the God and Father who is Ruler
over all." Besides, as the Word rules over none
against their will, there are still wicked beings —
not only men, but also angels, and all demons
— over whom we say that in a sense He does
not rule, since they do not yield Him a willing
obedience ; but, in another sense of the word.
He rules even over them, in the same way as we
say that man rules over the irrational animals, —
not by persuasion, but as one who tames and
subdues lions and beasts of burden. Neverthe-
less, he leaves no means untried to persuade
even those who are still disobedient to submit
to His authority. So far as we are concerned,
therefore, we deny the truth of that which Celsus
(luotes as one of our sayings, " Who else than
He can be Lord over Him who is God over all?"


The remaining part of the extract given by
Celsus seems to have been taken from some
other form of heresy, and the whole jumbled
together in strange confusion : " How is it, that
while so many go about the well, no one goes
down into it? W'hy dost thou shrink with fear
when thou hast gone so far on the way? An-
swer : Thou art mistaken, for I lack neither
courage nor weapons." We who belong to the
Church which takes its name from Christ, assert
that none of these statements are true. For he
seems to have made them simply that they might
harmonize with what he had said before ; but
they have no reference to us. For it is a princi-
ple with us, not to worship any god whom we
merely " suppose " to exist, but Him alone who
is the Creator of this universe, and of all things
besides which are unseen by the eye of sense.
These remarks of Celsus may apply to those
who go on another road and tread other paths
from us, — men who deny the Creator, and make
to themselves another god under a new form,
having nothing but the name of God, whom
they esteem higher thari the Creator ; and with
these may be joined any that there may be who
say that the Son is greater than the God who rules
all things. In reference to the precept that we
i ought not to serve two masters, we have already
j shown what appears to us the principle con-
tained in it, when we proved that no sedition or
disloyalty could be charged against the followers
of Jesus their Lord, who confess that they reject
i every other lord, and serve Him alone who is
the Son and Word of God.

CHAP. xvii.
Celsus then proceeds to say that " we shrink
from raising altars, statues, and temples ; and
this," he thinks, " has been agreed upon among
us as the badge or distinctive mark of a secret
and forbidden society." He does not perceive
that we regard the spirit of every good man as
^n altar from which arises an incense which is
truly and spiritually sweet-smelling, namely, the
prayers ascending from a pure conscience.
Therefore it is said by John in the Revelation,
" The odours are the prayers of saints ; " ' and
by the Psalmist, " Let my prayer come up be-
fore Thee as incense."^ And the statues and
gifts which are fit offerings to God are the work
of no common mechanics, but are wrought and
fashioned in us by the Word of God, to wit, the
virtues in which we imitate " the First-born of
all creation," who has set us an example of jus-
tice, of temperance, of courage, of wisdom, of
piety, and of the other virtues. In all those,


[See


. cap. ix. p. 433. S.]


2 Rev. V. 8.

3 Ps. cxli. 2.


646


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


then, who plant and cultivate within their souls,
according to the divine word, temperance, jus-
tice, wisdom, piety, and other virtues, these ex-
cellences are their statues they raise, in which
we are persuaded that it is becoming for us to
honour the model and prototype of all statues :
" the image of the invisible God," God the Only-
begotten. And again, they who " put off the old
man with his deeds, and put on the new man,
which is renewed in knowledge after the image
of Him that hath created him," in taking upon
them the image of Him who hath created them,
do raise within themselves a statue like to what
the Most High God Himself desires. And as
among statuaries there are some who are mar-
vellously perfect in their art, as for example
Pheidias and Polycleitus, and among painters,
Zeuxis and Apelles, whilst others make inferior
statues, and others, again, are inferior to the sec-
ond-rate artists, — so that, taking all together,
there is a wide difference in the execution of
statues and pictures, — in the same way there
are some who form images of the Most High in
a better manner and with a more perfect skill ;
so that there is no comparison even between the
Olympian Jupiter of Pheidias and the man who
has been fashioned according to the image of
God the Creator. But by far the most excellent
of all these throughout the whole creation is that
image in our Saviour who said, " My Father is
in Me."

CHAP. XVIII.

And every one who imitates Him according
to his ability, does by this very endeavour raise
a statue according to the image of the Creator,
for in the contemplation of God with a pure
heart they become imitators of Him. And, in
general, we see that all Christians strive to raise
altars and statues as we have described them,
and these not of a lifeless and senseless kind,
and not to receive greedy spirits intent upon
lifeless things, but to be filled with the Spirit of
God who dwells in the images of virtue of which
we have spoken, and takes His abode in the
soul which is conformed to the image of the
Creator. Thus the Spirit of Christ dwells in
those who bear, so to say, a resemblance in
form and feature to Himself. And the Word of
God, wishing to set this clearly before us, rep-
resents God as promising to the righteous, " I
will dwell in them, and walk among them ; and
I will be their God, and they shall be My peo-
ple." ■ And the Saviour says, " If any man hear
My words, and do them, I and My Father will
come to him, and make Our abode with him." ^
Let any one, therefore, who chooses compare the
altars which I have described with those spoken


2 Cor.
Johnx


of by Celsus, and the images in the souls of
those who worship the Most High God with the
statues of Pheidias, Polycleitus, and such like,
and he will clearly perceive, that while the latter
are lifeless things, and subject to the ravages of
time, the former abide in the immortal spirit as
long as the reasonable soul wishes to preserve
them.

CHAP. XIX.

And if, further, temples are to be compared
with temples, that we may prove to those who
accept the opinions of Celsus that we do not
object to the erection of temples suited to the
images and altars of wliich we have spoken, but
that we do refuse to build lifeless temples to the
Giver of all life, let any one who chooses learn
how we are taught, that our bodies are the tem-
ple of God, and that if any one by lust or sin
defiles the temple of God, he will himself be de-
stroyed, as acting impiously towards the true tem-
ple. Of all the temples spoken of in this sense,
the best and most excellent was the pure and
holy body of our Saviour Jesus Christ. When He
knew that wicked men might aim at 'the destruc-
tion of the temple of God in Him, but that their
purposes of destruction would not prevail against
the divine power which had built that temple,
He says to them, " Destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it again. . . . This He
said of the temple of His body." ^ And in other
parts of holy Scripture where it speaks of the
mystery of the resurrection to those whose ears
are divinely opened, it says that the temple
which has been destroyed shall be built up again
of living and most precious stones, thereby giv-
ing us to understand that each of those who are
led by the word of God to strive together in
the duties of piety, will be a precious stone in the
one great temple of God. Accordingly, Peter
says, " Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a
spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ ; " ■* and Paul also says, " Being built upon
the foundation of the apostles and prophets,
Jesus Christ our Lord being the chief corner-
stone." 5 And there is a similar hidden allusion
in this passage in Isaiah, which is addressed to
Jerusalem : " Behold, I will lay thy stones with
carbuncles, and lay thy foundations with sap-
phires. And I will make thy battlements of
jasper, and thy gates of crystal, and all thy bor-
ders of pleasant stones. And all thy children
shall be taught of the Lord ; and great shall be
the peace of thy children. In righteousness
shalt thou be established."^


3 John ii. 19, 21.
■< I Pet. ii. 5.
5 Eph. ii. 20.
f" Isa. liv. 11-14.


Chap. XXII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


647


CHAP. XX,

There are, then, among the righteous some
who are carbuncles, others sapphires, others jas- I
pers, and others crystals, and thus there is among [
the righteous every kind of choice and precious |
stone. As to the spiritual meaning of the differ- i
ent stones, — what is their nature, and to what
kind of soul the name of each precious stone !
especially applies, — we cannot at present stay
to examine. We have only felt it necessary to
show thus briefly what we understand by temples,
and what the one Temple of God built of pre-
cious stones truly means. For as if in some
cities a dispute should arise as to which had the
finest temples, those who thought their own were
the best would do their utmost to show the ex-
cellence of their own temples and the inferiority
of the others, — in like manner, when they re-
proach us for not deeming it necessary to wor-
ship the Divine Being by raising lifeless temples,
we set before them our temples, and show to
such at least as are not blind and senseless, like
their senseless gods, that there is no compari-
son between our statues and the statues of the
heathen, nor between our altars, with what we
may call the incense ascending from them, and
the heathen altars, with the fat and blood of the
victims ; nor, finally, between the temples of
senseless gods, admired by senseless men, who
have no divine faculty for perceiving God, and
the temples, statues, and altars which are worthy
of God. It is not therefore true that we object
to building altars, statues, and temples, because
we have agreed to make this the badge of a
secret and forbidden society ; but we do so, be-
cause we have learnt from Jesus Christ the true
way of serving God, and we shrink from what-
ever, under a pretence of piety, leads to utter
impiety those who abandon the way marked out
for us by Jesus Christ. For it is He who alone
is the way of piety, as He truly said, " I am the
way, the truth, the life."

CHAP. XXI,

Let us see what Celsus further says of God,
and how he urges us to the use of those things
which are properly called idol offerings, or, still
better, offerings to demons, although, in his igno-
rance of what true sanctity is, and what sacrifices
are well-pleasing to God, he call them " holy
sacrifices." His words are, " God is the God
of all alike ; He is good. He stands in need of
nothing, and He is- without jealousy. What,
then, is there to hinder those who are most de-
voted to His service from taking part in public
feasts?" I cannot see the connection which he
fancies between God's being good, and inde-
I pendent, and free from jealousy, and His de-

i voted servants taking part in public feasts. I


confess, indeed, that from the fact that God is
good, and without want of anything, and free
from jealousy, it would follow as a consequence
that we might take part in public feasts, if it were
proved that the public feasts had nothing wrong
in them, and were grounded upon true views of
the character of God, so that they resulted natu-
rally from a devout service of God. If, however,
the so-called public festivals can in no way be
shown to accord with the service of God, but
may on the contrary be proved to have been
devised by men when occasion offered to com-
memorate some human events, or to set forth
certain qualities of water or earth, or the fruits
of the earth, — in that case, it is clear that those
who wish to offer an enlightened worship to the
Divine Being will act according to sound reason,
and not take part in the public feasts. For " to
keep a feast," as one of the wise men of Greece
has well said, " is nothing else than to do one's
duty ; " ' and that man truly celebrates a feast
who does his duty and prays always, offering up
continually bloodless sacrifices in prayer to God,
That therefore seems to me a most noble saying
of Paul, " Ye observe days, and months, and
times, and years. I am afraid of you, lest I
have bestowed upon you labour in vain," ^

CHAP. XXII.

If it be objected to us on this subject that we
ourselves are accustomed to observe certain days,
as for example the Lord's day, the Preparation,
the Passover, or Pentecost, I have to answer,
that to the perfect Christian, who is ever in his
thoughts, words, and deeds serving his natural
Lord, God the Word, all his days are the Lord's,
and he is always keeping the Lord's day. He
also who is unceasingly preparing himself for the
true Hfe, and abstaining from the pleasures of
this life which lead astray so many, — who is not
indulging the lust of the flesh, but " keeping
under his body, and bringing it into subjection,"
— such a one is always keeping Preparation-day.
Again, he who considers that " Christ our Pass-
over was sacrificed for us," and that it is his
duty to keep the feast by eating of the flesh of
the Word, never ceases to keep the paschal
feast ; for the pascha means a " passover," and
he is ever striving in all his thoughts, words, and
deeds, to pass over from the things of this life
to God, and is hastening towards the city of
God. And, finally, he who can truly say, " We
are risen with Christ," and " He hath exalted
us, and made us to sit with Him in heavenly
places in Christ," is always living in the season
of Pentecost ; and most of all, when going up
to the upper chamber, like the apostles of Jesus,


' Thiicyd., book i. sect. Ixx.
2 Gal. IV. 10, II.


648


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


he gives himself to supplication and prayer, that
he may become worthy of receiving " the mighty
wind rushing from heaven," which is powerful to
destroy sin and its fruits among men, and worthy
of having some share of the tongue of fire which
God sends.

CHAP. XXIII.

But the majority of those who are accounted
believers are not of this advanced class ; but
from being either unable or unwilling to keep
every day in this manner, they require some
sensible memorials to prevent spiritual things
from passing altogether away from their minds.
It is to this practice of setting apart some days
distinct from others, that Paul seems to me to
refer in the expression, " part of the feast ; " '
and by these words he indicates that a life in
accordance with the divine word consists not " in
a part of the feast," but in one entire and never-
ceasing festival.2 Again, compare the festivals,
observed among us as these have been described
above, with the public feasts of Celsus and the
heathen, and say if the former are not much
more sacred observances than those feasts in
which the lust of the flesh runs riot, and leads to
drunkenness and debauchery. It would be too
long for us at present to show why we are re-
quired by the law of God to keep its festivals by
eating "the bread of affliction,"^ or "unleavened
with bitter herbs," •♦ or why it says, "Humble
your souls," 5 and such Uke. For it is impossible
for man, who is a compound being, in which
" the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh," ^ to keep the feast with
his whole nature ; for either he keeps the feast
with his spirit and afflicts the body, which through
the lust of the flesh is unfit to keep it along with
the spirit, or else he keeps it with the body,
and the spirit is unable to share in it. But we
have for the present said enough on the subject
of feasts.

CHAP. XXIV.

Let us now see on what grounds Celsus urges
us to make use of the idol offerings and the
public sacrifices in the public feasts. His words
are, " If these idols are nothing, what harm will
there be in taking part in the feast ? On the other
hand, if they are demons, it is certain that they
too are God's creatures, and that we must believe
in them, sacrifice to them according to the laws,
and pray to them that they may be propitious."


' Col. ii. 16. The whole passage in the English version is, " Let
no man judge you in meat, or in drink, or I'u respect of an holyday "
(ev nepei eopTij?). Origen's interpretation is not followed by any
modern expositors. It is adopted by Chrysostom and Theodoret.

2 [Dr. Hessey notes this as " a curious comment" of Origen's on
St. Paul's language: Bampton Lectures, On Sunday: its Origin,
History, and Present Obligation, pp. 48, 286-289, 4th ed. S.]

3 Dent. .\vi. 3.
'■ Ex. xii. 8.

s Lev. xvi. 20.
6 Gal. v. 17.


In reference to this statement, it would be profit-
able for us to take up and clearly explain the
whole passage of the first Epistle to the Cor-
inthians, in which Paul treats of offerings to
idols.7 The apostle draws from the fact that
" an idol is nothing in the world," the conse-
quence that it is injurious to use things offered
to idols ; and he shows to those who have ears
j to hear on such subjects, that he who partakes
of things offered to idols is worse than a mur-
derer, for he destroys his own brethren, for whom
Christ died. And further, he maintains that the
sacrifices are made to demons ; and from that
he proceeds to show that those who join the table
of demons become associated with the demons ;
and he concludes that a man cannot both be a
partaker of the table of the Lord and of the
table of demons. But since it would require a
whole treatise to set forth fully all that is con-
tained on this subject in the Epistle to the Cor-
inthians, we shall content ourselves with this brief
statement of the argument ; for it will be evident
to any one who carefully considers what has been
said, that even if idols are nothing, nevertheless
it is an awful thing to join in idol festivals. And
even supposing that there are such beings as
demons to whom the sacrifices are offered, it
it has been clearly shown that we are forbidden
to take part in these festivals, when we know the
difference between the table of the Lord and
the table of demons. And knowing this, we
endeavour as much as we can to be always par-
takers of the Lord's table, and beware to the
utmost of joining at any time the table of de-
mons.

CHAP. XXV.

Celsus says that " the demons belong to God,
and are therefore to be believed, to be sacrificed
to according to laws, and to be prayed to that
they may be propitious." Those who are dis-
posed to learn, must know that the word of God
nowhere says of evil things that they belong to
God, for it judges them unworthy of such a
Lord. Accordingly, it is not all men who bear
the name of " men of God," but only those who
are worthy of God, — such as Moses and Elias,
and any others who are so called, or such as re-
semble those who are so called in Scripture. In
the same way, all angels are not said to be angels
of God, but only those that are blessed •: those
that have fallen away into sin are called " angels
of the devil," just as bad men are called " men
of sin," "sons of perdition," or "sons of iniquity."
Since, then, among men some are good and oth-
ers bad, and the former are said to be God's
and the latter the devil's, so among angels some
are angels of God, and others angels of the
devil. But among demons there is no such dis-


Chap. XXVIIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


649


tinction, for all are said to be wicked. We do
not therefore hesitate to say that Celsus is false
when he says, '" If they are demons, it is evident
that they must also belong to God." He must
either show that this distinction of good and bad
among angels and men has no foundation, or
else that a similar distinction may be shown to
hold among demons. If that is impossible, it is
plain that demons do not belong to God ; for
their prince is not God, but, as holy Scripture
says, " Beelzebub."

CHAP. XXVI.

And we are not to believe in demons, although
Celsus urges us to do so ; but if we are to obey
God, we must die, or endure anything, sooner
than obey demons. In the same way, we are
not to propitiate demons ; for it is impossible to
propitiate beings that are wicked and that seek
the injury of men. Besides, what are the laws
in accordance with which Celsus would have us
propitiate the demons? For if he means laws
enacted in states, he must show that they are in
agreement with the divine laws. But if that
cannot be done, as the laws of many states are
quite inconsistent with each other, these laws,
therefore, must of necessity either be no laws at
all in the proper sense of the word, or else the
enactments of wicked men ; and these we must
not obey, for " we must obey God rather than
men." Away, then, with this counsel, which
Celsus gives us, to offer prayer to demons : it is
not to be listened to for a moment ; for our
duty is to pray to the Most High God alone,
and to the Only-begotten, the First-born of the
whole creation, and to ask Him as our High
Priest to present the prayers which ascend to
Him from us, to His God and our God, to His
Father and the Father of those who direct their
lives according to His word.' And as we would
have no desire to enjoy the favour of those men
who wish us to follow their wicked lives, and who
give us their favour only on condition that we
choose nothing opposed to their wishes, because
their favour would make us enemies of God, who
cannot be pleased with those who have such
men for their friends, — in the same way those
who are acquainted with the nature, the pur-
poses, and the wickedness of demons, can never
wish to obtain their favour.


CHAP, xxvii.

And Christians have nothing to fear, even if
demons should not be well-disposed to them ;


for they are protected by the Supreme God, who
is well pleased with their piety, and who sets His
divine angels to watch over those who are wor-
thy of such guardianship, so that they can suffer
nothing from demons. He who by his piety
possesses the favour of the Most High, who has
accepted the guidance of Jesus, the " Angel of
the great counsel,"^ being well contented with
the favour of God through Christ Jesus, may say
with confidence that he has nothing to suffer
from the whole host of demons. " The Lord is
my light and my salvation ; whom shall I fear ?
The Lord is the strength of my life ; of whom
shall 1 be afraid? Though an host should en-
camp against me, my heart shall not fear." ^ So
much, then, in reply to those statements of Cel-
sus : " If they are demons, they too evidently
belong to God, and they are to be believed, to
be sacrificed to according to the laws, and
prayers are to be offered to them that they may
he propitious."

CHAP. XXVIII.

We shall now proceed to the next statement
of Celsus, and examine it with care : " If in obe-
dience to the traditions of their fathers they
abstain from such victims, they must also abstain
from all animal food, in accordance with the
opinions of Pythagoras, who thus showed his
respect for the soul and its bodily organs. But
if, as they say, they abstain that they may not
eat along with demons, I admire their wisdom,
in having at length discovered, that whenever
they eat they eat with demons, although they
only refuse to do so when they are looking upon
a slain victim ; for when they eat bread, or drink
wine, or taste fruits, do they not receive these
things, as well as the water they drink and the
air they breathe, from certain demons, to whom
have been assigned these different provinces of
nature?" Here I would observe that I cannot
see how those whom he speaks of as abstaining
from certain victims, in accordance with the tra-
ditions of their fathers, are consequently bound
to abstain from the flesh of all animals. ^Ve do
1 not indeed deny that the divine word does seem
to command something similar to this, when to
raise us to a higher and purer life it says, " It is
good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor
anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is
offended, or is made weak ; " •» and again, " De-
stroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ
died ; " 5 and again, " If meat make my brother
to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world
standeth, lest I make my brother to offend." ^


' [See Liddon's Bampton Lectures on T/ie Divinity of our Lord
mil Saviour Jesus Christ, p. 383, where it is pointed out that
' I >rigen often insists upon the worship of Christ as being a Christian

huy." S.]


2 Isa. ix. 6 (LXX.).

3 Ps. xxvii. I, 3.

4 Rom. xiv. 21.

5 Rom. xiv. 15.
*> I Cor. viij. 13.


650


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[EooK VIII.


CHAP. XXIX.

But it is to be observed that the Jews, who
claim for themselves a correct understanding of
the law of Moses, carefully restrict their food to
such things as are accounted clean, and abstain
from those that are unclean. They also do not
use in their food the blood of an animal nor the
flesh of an animal torn by wild beasts, and some
other things which it would take too long for us
at present to detail. But Jesus, wishing to lead
all men by His teaching to the pure worship and
service of God, and anxious not to throw any
hindrance in the way of many who might be
benefited by Christianity, through the imposition
of a burdensome code of rules in regard to food,
has laid it down, that " not that which goeth into
the mouth defileth a man, but tha^ which cometh
out of the mouth ; for whatsoever entereth in at
the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out
into the draught. But those things which pro-
ceed out of the mouth are evil thoughts when
spoken, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts,
false witness, blasphemies." ' Paul also says,
" Meat commendeth us not to God : for neither,
if we eat, are we the better ; neither, if we eat
not, are we the worse." ^ Wherefore, as there is
some obscurity about this matter, without some
explanation is given, it seemed good to the apos-
tles of Jesus and the elders assembled together
at Antioch,3 and also, as they themselves say, to
the Holy Spirit, to write a letter to the Gentile
behevers, forbidding them to partake of those
things from which alone they say it is necessary
to abstain, namely, " things offered to idols,
things strangled, and blood." ^

CHAP. XXX.

For that which is offered to idols is sacrificed
to demons, and a man of God must not join the
table of demons. As to things strangled, we
are forbidden by Scripture to partake of them,
because the blood is still in them ; and blood,
especially the odour arising from blood, is said
to be the food of demons. Perhaps, then, if we
were to eat of strangled animals, we might have
such spirits feeding along with us. And the rea-
son which forbids the use of strangled animals
for food is also applicable to the use of blood.
And it may not be amiss, as bearing on this
point, to recall a beautiful saying in the writings
of Sextus,'* which is known to most Christians :
" The eating of animals," says he, " is a matter
of indifference ; but to abstain from them is
more agreeable to reason." It is not, therefore,
simply on account of some traditions of our


' Matt. XV. 11,17-19.

2 I Cor. viii. 8

3 Acts XV. 28, 29. It was at Jerusalem.

* [Sextus, or Xystus. See note of Spencer in Migne.


S.]


fathers that we refrain from eating victims offered
to those called gods or heroes or demons, but for
other reasons, some of which I have here men-
tioned. It is not to be supposed, however, that
we are to abstain from the flesh of animals in
the same way as we are bound to abstain from
all vice and wickedness : we are indeed to ab-
stain not only from the flesh of animals, but
from all other kinds of food, if we cannot par-
take of them without incurring evil, and the
consequences of evil. For we are to avoid eat-
ing for gluttony, or for the mere gratification of
the appetite, without regard to the health and
sustenance of the body. We do not believe that
souls pass from one body to another, and that
they may descend so low as to enter the bodies
of the brutes. If we abstain at times from eat-
ing the flesh of animals, it is evidently, there-
fore, not for the same reason as Pythagoras ; for
it is the reasonable soul alone that we honour,
and we commit its bodily organs with due hon-
ours to the grave. For it is not right that the
dweUing-place of the rational soul should be cast
aside anywhere without honour, like the carcases
of brute beasts ; and so much the more when
we believe that the respect paid to the body re-
dounds to the honour of the person who received
from God a soul which has nobly employed the
organs of the body in which it resided. In re-
gard to the question, " How are the dead raised
up, and with what body do they come?" 5 we
have already answered it briefly, as our purpose
required.

CHAP. XXXI.

Celsus afterwards states what is adduced by
Jews and Christians alike in defence of absti-
nence from idol sacrifices, namely, that it is
wrong for those who have dedicated themselves
to the Most High God to eat with demons.
What he brings forward against this view, we
have already seen. In our opinion, a man can
only be said to eat and drink with demons when
he eats the flesh of what are called sacred vic-
tims, and when he drinks the wine poured out
to the honour of the demons. But Celsus thinks
that we cannot eat bread or drink wine in any
way whatever, or taste fruits, or even take a
draught of water, without eating and drinking
with demons. He adds also, that the air which
we breathe is received from demons, and that
not an animal can breathe without recei\ing the
air from the demons who are set over the air.
If any one wishes to defend this statement of
Celsus, let him show that it is not the divine
angels of god, but demons, the whole race of
whom are bad, that have been appointed to
communicate all those blessings which have been
mentioned. We indeed also maintain with re-


5 [i Cor. x\


S.]


Chap. XXXIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


6s I


gard not only to the fruits of the earth, but to
every flowing stream and every breath of air,
that the ground brings forth those things which
are said to grow up naturally, — that the water
springs in fountains, and refreshes the earth with
running streams, — that the air is kept pure, and
supports the life of those who breathe it, only in
consequence of the agency and control of cer-
tain beings whom we may call invisible husband-
men and guardians ; but we deny that those
invisible agents are demons. And if we might
speak boldly, we would say that if demons have
any share at all in these things, to them belong
famine, blasting of the vine and fruit trees, pes-
tilence among men and beasts : all these are
the proper occupations of demons, who in the
capacity of public executioners receive power at
certain times to carry out the divine judgments,
for the restoration of those who have plunged
headlong into wickedness, or for the trial and
discipline of the souls of the wise. For those
who through all their afflictions preserve their
piety pure and unimpaired, show their true char-
acter to all spectators, whether visible or invisi-
ble, who behold them ; while those who are
otherwise minded, yet conceal their wickedness,
when they have their true character exposed by
misfortunes, become manifest to themselves as
well as to those whom we may also call spec-
tators.

CHAP. XXXII.

The Psalmist bears witness that divine jus-
tice employs certain evil angels to inflict calam-
ities upon men : " He cast upon them the
fierceness of His anger, wrath, and indignation,
and trouble, sent by evil angels." ' Whether
demons ever go beyond this when they are suf-
fered to do what they are ever ready, though
through the restraint put upon them they are not
always able to do, is a question to be solved by
that man who can conceive, in so far as human
nature will allow, how it accords with the divine
justice, that such multitudes of human souls are
separated from the body while walking in the
l)aths which lead to certain death. " For the
judgments of God are so great," that a soul
which is still clothed with a mortal body cannot
comprehend them ; " and they cannot be ex-
pressed : therefore by unnurtured souls " ^ they
are not in any measure to be understood. And
hence, too, rash spirits, by their ignorance in
these matters, and by recklessly setting them-
selves against the Divine Being, multiply impious
ot>jections against providence. It is not from
demons, then, that men receive any of those
things which meet the necessities of life, and
least of all ourselves, who have been taught to


make a proper use of these things. And they
who partake of corn and wine, and the fruits of
trees, of water and of air, do not feed with de-
mons, but rather do they feast with divine angels,
who are appointed for this purpose, and who are
as it were invited to the table of the pious man,
who hearkens to the precept of the word, which
says, " Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye
do, do all to the glory of God." ^ And again, in
another place it is written, " Do all things in the
name of God."-* When, therefore, we eat and
drink and breathe to the glory of God, and act
in all things according to what is right, we feast
with no demons, but with divine angels : " For
every creature is good, and nothing to be refused,
if it be received with thanksgiving : for it is sanc-
tified by the word of God and prayer." = But it
could not be good, and it could not be sanctified,
if these things were, as Celsus supposes, entrusted
to the charge of demons.

CHAP. XXXIII.

From this it is evident that we have already
met the next statement of Celsus, which is as
follows : " We must either not live, and indeed
not come into this life at all, or we must do so
on condition that we give thanks and first-fruits
and prayers to demons, who have been set over
the things of this world : and that we must do
as long as we live, that they may prove good and
kind." We must surely live, and we must live
according to the word of God, as far as we are
enabled to do so. And we are thus enabled to
live, when, " whether we eat or drink, we do all
to the glory of God ; " and we are not to refuse
to enjoy those things which have been created
for our use, but must receive them with thanks-
giving to the Creator. And it is under these
conditions, and not such as have been imagined
by Celsus, that we have been brought into life
by God ; and we are not placed under demons,
but we are under the government of the Most
High God, through Him who hath brought us to
God — Jesus Christ. It is not according to the
law of God that any demon has had a share in
worldly affairs, but it was by their own lawless-
ness that they perhaps sought out for themselves
places destitute of the knowledge of God and
of the divine life, or places where there are many
enemies of God. Perhaps also, as being fit to
rule over and punish them, they have been set
by the Word, who governs all things, to rule over
those who subjected themselves to evil and not
to God. For this reason, then, let Celsus, as one
who knows not God, give thank-offerings to de-
mons. But we give thanks to the Creator of all,


' Ps. Ixxviii. 49.
- Wisdom of Sol.


I Cor. X. 31.
Col. iii. 17.
I Tim. iv. 4, 5.


652


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


and, along with thanksgiving and prayer for the
blessings we have received, we also eat the bread
presented to us ; and this bread becomes by
prayer a sacred body, which sanctifies those who
sincerely partake of it.

CHAP. XXXIV.

Celsus would also have us to offer first-fruits to
demons. But we would offer them to Him who
said, " Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb
yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit
after his kind, whose seed is in itself upon the
earth." ' And to Him to whom we offer first-
fruits we also send up our prayers, " having a
great high priest, that is passed into the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God," and "we hold fast this
profession " ^ as long as we live ; for we find God
and His only-begotten Son, manifested to us in
Jesus, to be gracious and kind to us. And if we
would wish to have besides' a great number of
beings who shall ever prove friendly to us, we
are taught that " thousand thousands stood be-
fore Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
ministered unto Him."^ And these, regarding
all as their relations and friends who imitate their
piety towards God, and in prayer call upon Him
with sincerity, work along with them for their
salvation, appear unto them, deem it their office
and duty to attend to them, and as if by com-
mon agreement they visit with all manner of
kindness and deliverance those who pray to God,
to whom they themselves also pray : " For they
are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister
for those who shall be heirs of salvation." '• Let
the learned Greeks say that the human soul at
its birth is placed under the charge of demons :
Jesus has taught us not to despise even the little
ones in His Church, saying, " Their angels do
always behold the face of My Father which is in
heaven." 5 And the prophet says, "The angel
of the Lord encampeth round about them that
fear Him, and delivereth them." ^ We do not,
then, deny that there are many demons upon
earth, but we maintain that they exist and exer-
cise power among the wicked, as a punishment
of their wickedness. But they have no power
over those who " have put on the whole armour
of God," who have received strength to " with-
stand the wiles of the devil," 7 and who are ever
engaged in contests with them, knowing that "we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places." '^


» Gen. i. II.

2 Heb. iv^ 14.

3 Dan. vii. lo.

4 Heb i. 14

5 Matt, xviii. i

6 Ps. xxxiv. 7.

7 Eph. vi. II.

8 Eph. VI. 12.


CHAP. XXXV.

Now let us consider another saying of Celsus,
which is as follows : " The satrap of a Persian or
Roman monarch, or ruler or general or governor,
yea, even those who fill lower offices of trust or
service in the state, would be able to do great
injury to those who despised them ; and will the
satraps and ministers of earth and air be insulted
with impunity?" Observe now how he intro-
duces servants of the Most High — rulers, gen-
erals, governors, and those filling lower offices
of trust and service — as, after the manner of
men, inflicting injury upon those who insult them.
For he does not consider that a wise man would
not wish to do harm to any, but would strive to
the utmost of his power to change and amend
them ; unless, indeed, it be that those whom
Celsus makes servants and rulers appointed by
the Most High are behind Lycurgus, the law-
giver of the Lacedaemonians, or Zeno of Citium.
For when Lycurgus had had his eye put out by
a man, he got the offender into his power ; but
instead of taking revenge upon him, he ceased
not to use all his arts of persuasion until he in-
duced him to become a philosopher. And Zeno,
on the occasion of some one saying, " Let me
perish rather than not have my revenge on thee,"
answered him, " But rather let me perish if I do
not make a friend of thee." And I am not yet
speaking of those whose characters ha\e been
formed by the teaching of Jesus, and who have
heard the words, " Love your enemies, and pray
for them which despitefuUy use you, that ye may
be the children of your Father which is in heav-
en ; for He maketh His sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just
and on the unjust." ^ And in the prophetical writ-
ings the righteous man says, " O Lord my God,
if I have done this ; if there be iniquity in my
hands ; if I have returned evil to those who have
done evil to me, let me fall helpless under mine
enemies : let my enemy persecute my soul, and
take it ; yea, let him tread down my life upon
the earth." '°

CHAP. XXXVI.

But the angels, who are the true rulers and
generals and ministers of God, do not, as Celsus
supposes, " injure those who offend them ; "
and if certain demons, whom Celsus had in
mind, do inflict evils, they show that they are
wicked, and that they have received no office of
the kind from God. And they even do injury
to those who are under them, and who have
acknowledged them as their masters ; and ac-
cordingly, as it would seem that those who break
through the regulations which prevail in any
country in regard to matters of food, suffer for


9 Matt. V. 44, 45.
1° Ps. vii. 3-5.


Chap. XXXIX.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


653


it if they are under the demons of that place,
while those who are not under them, and have
not submitted to their power, are free from all
harm, and bid defiance to such spirits ; although
if, in ignorance of certain things, they have
come under the power of other demons, they
may suffer punishment from them. But the
Christian — the true Christian, I mean — who
has submitted to God alone and His Word, will
suffer nothing from demons, for He is mightier
than demons. And the Christian will suffer
nothing, for " the angel of the Lord will encamp
about them that fear Him, and will deliver
them," ' and his " angel," who " always beholds
the face of his Father in heaven," - offers up his
prayers through the one High Priest to the God
of all, and also joins his own prayers with those
of the man who is committed to his keeping.
Let not, then, Celsus try to scare us with threats
of mischief from demons, for we despise them.
And the demons, when despised, can do no
harm to those who are under the protection
of Him who can alone help all who deserve His
aid ; and He does no less than set His own
angels over His devout servants, so that none
of the hostile angels, nor even he who is called
" the prince of this world," ^ can effect anything
against those who have given themselves to God.

CHAP. XXXVII.

In the next place, Celsus forgets that he is
addressing Christians, who pray to God alone '
through Jesus ; and mixing up other notions \
with theirs, he absurdly attributes them all to

I Christians. " If," says he, " they who are ad-
dressed are called upon by barbarous names,
they will have power, but no longer will they
have any if they are addressed in Greek or
Latin." Let him, then, state plainly whom we
call upon for help by barbarous names. Any
one will be convinced that this is a false charge
which Celsus brings against us, when he con-
siders that Christians in prayer do nor even use
the precise names which divine Scripture applies
to God ; but the Greeks use Greek names, the
Romans Latin names, and every one prays and
sings praises to God as he best can, in his mother
tongue. For the Lord of all the languages of
the earth hears those who pray to Him in each
different tongue, hearing, if I may so say, but

j one voice, expressing itself in different dialects.'*
For the Most High is not as one of those who
select one language. Barbarian or Greek, know-


' Ps. xxxiv. 7.

2 Matt, xviii. 10.

3 John xiv. 30.

* [A vei^ express testimony in favour " of speaking in the con-
gregation in such a tongue as the people understandeth " (Art. XXIV.
of Church of England). See Rev. H. Gary's Testimonies of the
Fathers of the First Four Centuries, etc., p. 287, Oxford, 1835.
S.]


ing nothing of any other, and caring nothing
for those who speak in other tongues.

CHAP. XXXVIII.

He next represents Christians as saying what
he never heard from any Christian ; or if he did,
it must have been from one of the most ignorant
and lawless of the people. " Behold," they are
made to say, " I go up to a statue of Jupiter or
Apollo, or some other god : I revile it, and beat
it, yet it takes no vengeance on me." He is not
aware that among the prohibitions of the divine
law is this, " Thou shalt not revile the gods," s
and this is intended to prevent the formation of
the habit of reviling any one whatever ; for we
have been taught, " Bless, and curse not," ^ and
it is said that "revilers shall not inherit the king-
dom of God." 7 And who amongst us is so fool-
ish as to speak in the way Celsus describes, and
to fail to see that such contemptuous language
can be of no avail for removing prevailing notions
about the gods ? For it is matter of observation
that there are men who utterly deny the existence
of a God or of an overruling providence, and
who by their impious and destructive teaching
have founded sects among those who are called
philosophers, and yet neither they themselves,
nor those who have embraced their opinions,
have suffered any of those things which mankind
generally account evils : they are both strong in
body and rich in possessions. And yet if we ask
what loss they have sustained, we shall find that
they have suffered the most certain injury. For
what greater injury can befall a man than that
he should be unable amidst the order of the
world to see Him who has made it ? and what
sorer affliction can come to any one than that
blindness of mind which prevents him from seeing
the Creator and Father of every soul ?

CHAP. XXXIX.

After putting such words into our mouth, and
maliciously charging Christians with sentiments
which they never held, he then proceeds to give
to this supposed expression of Christian feeling
an answer, which is indeed more a mockery than
an answer, when he says, " Do you not see, good
sir, that even your own demon is not only reviled,
but banished from every land and sea, and you
yourself, who are as it were an image dedicated
to him, are bound and led to punishment, and
fastened to the stake, whilst youi* demon — or,
as you call him, ' the Son of God ' — takes no
vengeance on the evil-doer?" This answer
would be admissible if we employed such lan-
guage as he ascribes to us ; although even then


5 Ex. xxii. 28 [deoiit ov icaKoAoY»i(7-«i!, Sept. S.]

6 Rom xii. 14.

7 I Cor. vi. 10.


654


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


he would have no right to call the Son of God a
demon. For as we hold that all demons are
evil, He who turns so many men to God is in
our view no demon, but God the Word, and the
Son of God. And I know not how Celsus has
so far forgotten himself as to call Jesus Christ a
demon, when he nowhere alludes to the existence
of any evil demons. And finally, as to the pun-
ishments threatened against the ungodly, these
will come upon them after they have refused all
remedies, and have been, as we may say, visited
with an incurable malady of sinfulness.


Such is our doctrine of punishment ; and the
inculcation of this doctrine turns many from
their sins. But let us see, on the other hand,
what is the response given on this subject by
the priest of Jupiter or Apollo of whom Celsus
speaks. It is this : " The mills of the gods
grind slowly." ' Another describes punishment
as reaching "to children's children, and to those
who came after them."^ How much better are
those words of Scripture : "The fathers shall not
be put to death for the children, nor the children
for the fathers. Every man shall be put to death
for his own sin." 3 And again, " Every man that
eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on
edge." 4 And, "The son shall not bear the in-
iquity of the father, neither shall the father bear
the iniquity of the son : the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness
of the wicked shall be upon him." s If any shall
say that the response, " To children's children,
and to those who come after them," corresponds
with that passage, " Who visits the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate Me," ^ let
him learn from Ezekiel that this language is not
to be taken literally ; for he reproves those who
say, " Our fathers have eaten sour grapes, and
the children's teeth are set on edge," ^ and then
he adds, " As I live, saith the Lord, every one
shall die for his own sin." As to the proper
meaning of the figurative language about sins
being visited unto the third and fourth genera-
tion, we cannot at present stay to explain.


He then goes on to rail against us after the
manner of old wives. " You," says he, " mock
and revile the statues of our gods ; but if you
had reviled Bacchus or Hercules in person, you


1 " The mills of the gods grind slowly, but they grind to powder"
(Plutarch): \De Sera Nuiniiiis Vindicta, sect. iii. S.].

2 Horn., //., XX. 308.

3 Deut. xxiv. 16.
^ Jer. xxxi. 30.

5 Ezek xviii. 20.

* Ex. XX. 5.

' Ezek. xviii. 2-4.


would not perhaps have done so with impunity.
But those who crucified your God when present
among men, suffered nothing for it, either at the
time or during the whole of their lives. And
what new thing has there happened since then
to make us believe that he was not an impostor,
but the Son of God? And forsooth, he who
sent his Son with certain instructions for man-
kind, allowed him to be thus cruelly treated, and
his instructions to perish with him, without ever j
during all this long time showing the slightest j
concern. What father was ever so inhuman? i
Perhaps, indeed, you may say that he suffered so !
much, because it was his wish to bear what came
to him. But it is open to those whom you '
maliciously revile, to adopt the same language,
and say that they wish to be reviled, and there-
fore they bear it with patience ; for it is best to
deal equally with both sides, — although these
(gods) severely punish the scorner, so that he
must either flee and hide himself, or be taken
and perish." Now to these statements I would
answer that we revile no one, for we believe that
" revilers will not inherit the kingdom of God.'"* I
And we read, "Bless them that curse you ; bless,
and curse not ;" also, " Being reviled, we bless."
And even although the abuse which we pour upon
another may seem to have some excuse in the
wrong which we have received from him, yet such
abuse is not allowed by the word of God. And
how much more ought we to abstain from revil- j
ing others, when we consider what a great folly ;
it is ! And it is equally foolish to apply abusive
language to stone or gold or silver, turned into
what is supposed to be the form of God by those
who have no knowledge of God. Accordingly,
we throw ridicule not upon lifeless images, but
upon those only who worship them. Moreover, I
if certain demons reside in certain images, and
one of them passes for Bacchus, another for
Hercules, we do not vilify them : for, on the one
hand, it would be useless ; and, on the other, it
does not become one who is meek, and peaceful, |
and gentle in spirit, and who has learnt that no
one among men or demons is to be reviled, how-
ever wicked he may be.


There is an inconsistency into which, strangely
enough, Celsus has fallen unawares. Those de-
mons or gods whom he extolled a little before,
he now shows to be in fact the vilest of creatures,
punishing more for their own revenge than for
the improvement of those who revile them. His
words are, " If you had reviled Bacchus or Her-
cules when present in person, you would not
have escaped with impunity." How any one
can hear without being present in person, I leave


Chap. XLIV]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


655


any one who will to explain ; as also those other self taught us this when He said, " Except a
questions, " Why he is sometimes present, and j grain of wheat fall into the ground and die, it
sometimes absent?" and, "What is the business abideth by itself alone : but if it die, it bringeth
which takes demons away from place to place ? " forth much fruit." ^ Jesus, then, who is this
Again, when he says, "Those who crucified your grain of wheat, died, and brought forth much
God himself, suffered no harm for doing so," he fruit. And the Father is ever looking forward
supposes that it is the body of Jesus extended on for the results of the death of the grain of wheat,
the cross and slain, and not His divine nature, both those which are arising now, and those
that we call God ; and that it was as God that '. which shall arise hereafter. The Father of Jesus
Jesus was crucified and slain. As we have 1 is therefore a tender and loving Father, though
"already dwelt at length on the sufferings which j " He spared not His own Son, but delivered
Jesus suffered as a man, we shall purposely say \ Him up " as His lamb " for us all," ■* that so
no more here, that we may not repeat what we ! " the Lamb of God," by dying for all men,
have said already. But when he goes on to say ' might " take away the sin of the world." It was
that " those who inflicted death upon Jesus suf- not by compulsion, therefore, but willingly, that
fered nothing afterwards through so long a time," He bore the reproaches of those who reviled


we must inform him, as well as all who are dis-
posed to learn the truth, that the city in which
the Jewish people called for the crucifixion of


Him. Then Celsus, returning to those who ap-
ply abusive language to images, says : "Of those
whom you load with insults, you may in like


Jesus with shouts of " Crucify him, crucify him," ■ ' manner say that they voluntarily submit to such
preferring to have the robber set free, who had , treatment, and therefore they bear insults with
been cast into prison for sedition and murder, ' patience ; for it is best to deal equally with both
and Jesus, who had been delivered through envy, : sides. Yet these severely punish the scorner, so
to be crucified, — that this city not long after- that he must either flee and hide himself, or be
wards was attacked, and, after a long siege, was | taken and perish." It is not, then, because
utterly overthrown and laid waste ; for God Christians cast insults upon demons that they
judged the inhabitants of that place unworthy incur their revenge, but because they drive them
of living together the life of citizens. And yet, • away out of the images, and from the bodies and
though it may seem an incredible thing to say, ; souls of men. And here, although Celsus per-
God spared this people in delivering them to ! ceives it not, he has on this subject spoken some-
their enemies ; for He saw that they were in- j thing like the truth ; for it is true that the souls
curably averse to any amendment, and were j of those who condemn Christians, and betray
daily sinking deeper and deeper into evil. And , them, and rejoice in persecuting them, are filled
all this befell them, because the blood of Jesus with wicked demons.


was shed at their instigation and on their land ;
and the land was no longer able to bear those
who were guilty of so fearful a crime against
Jesus.

CHAP. XLIII.


CHAP. XLIV.

But when the souls of those who die for the
Christian faith depart from the body with great
glory, they destroy the power of the demons, and
Some new thing, then, has come to pass since frustrate their designs against men. Wherefore I
the time that Jesus suffered, — that, I mean, ' imagine, that as the demons have learnt from ex-
which has happened to the city, to the whole perience that they are defeated and overpowered
nation, and in the sudden and general rise of a ! by the martyrs for the truth, they are afraid to have
Christian community. And that, too, is a new recourse again to violence. And thus, until they
thing, that those who were strangers to the cove- I forget the defeats they have sustained, it is prob-
nants of God, with no part in His promises, and [ able that the world will be at peace with the
far from the truth, have by a divine power been j Christians. But when they recover their power,
enabled to embrace the truth. These things and, with eyes blinded by sin, wish again to take
were not the work of an impostor, but were the | their revenge on Christians, and persecute thenn,
work of God, who sent His Word, Jesus Christ, ; then again they will be defeated, and then again
to make known His purposes.' The sufferings the souls of the godly, who lay down their lives
and death which Jesus endured with such forti- for the cause of godliness, shall utterly destroy
tude and meekness, show the cruelty and injus- the army of the wicked one. And as the demons
tice of those who inflicted them, but they did \ perceive that those who meet death victoriously
not destroy the announcement of the purposes 1 for the sake of religion destroy their authority,
of God ; indeed, if we may so say, they served i while those who give way under their sufferings,
rather to make them known. For Jesus Him- and deny the faith, come under their power, I


' Luke xxiii. 21, 25.

* ayyf^ixdTuiv. Spencer reads ayaA/adruji' in this and the follow-
ing sentences.


3 John xii. 24.
* Kom. viii. 32.


G56


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Rook VIII.


imagine that at times they feel a deep interest
in Christians when on their trial, and keenly
strive to gain them over to their side, feeling as
they do that their confession is torture to them,
and their denial is a relief and encouragement to
them. And traces of the same feeling may be
seen in the demeanour of the judges ; for they
are greatly distressed at seeing those who bear
outrage and torture with patience, but are greatly
elated when a Christian gives way under it. Yet
it is from no feeling of humanity that this arises.
They see well, that, while " the tongues " of
those who are overpowered by the tortures " may
take the oath, the mind has not sworn." ' And
this may serve as an answer to the remark of
Celsus : " But they severely punish one who re-
viles them, so that he must either flee and hide
himself, or be taken and perish." If a Chris-
tian ever flees away, it is not from fear, but in
obedience to the command of his Master, that
so he may preserve himself, and employ his
strength for the benefit of others.


Let us see what Celsus next goes on to say.
It is as follows : " What need is there to collect
all the oracular responses, which have been de-
livered with a divine voice by priests and priest-
esses, as well as by others, whether men or
women, who were under a divine influence ? —
all the wonderful things that have been heard
issuing from the inner sanctuary ? — all the
revelations that have been made to those who
consulted the sacrificial victims? — and all the
knowledge that has been conveyed to men by
other signs and prodigies? To some the gods
have appeared in visible forms. The world is
full of such instances. How many cities have
^been built in obedience to commands received
from oracles ; how often, in the same way, de-
livered from disease and famine ! Or again,
how many cities, from disregard or forgetful-
ness of these oracles, have perished miserably !
How many colonies have been established and
made to flourish by following their orders ! How
many princes and private persons have, from
this cause, had prosperity or adversity ! How
many who mourned over their childlessness,
have obtained the blessing they asked for !
How many have turned away from themselves
the anger of demons ! How many who were
maimed in their limbs, have had them restored !
And again, how many have met with summary
punishment for showing want of reverence to
the temples — some being instantly seized with
madness, others openly confessing their crimes,
others having put an end to their lives, and
others having become the victims of incurable


• Euripides, Hippolytics, 612.


maladies ! Yea, some have been slain by a
terrible voice issuing from the inner sanctuary."
I know not how it comes that Celsus brings
forward these as undoubted facts, whilst at the
same time he treats as mere fables the wonders
which are recorded and handed down to us as
having happened among the Jews, or as having
been performed by Jesus and His disciples.
For why may not our accounts be true, and
those of Celsus fables and fictions? At least,
these latter were not believed by the followers
of Democritus, Epicurus, and Aristotle, although
perhaps these Grecian sects would have been
convinced by the evidence in support of our
miracles, if Moses or any of the prophets who
wrought these wonders, or Jesus Christ Himself,
had come in their way.

CHAP. XLVI.

It is related of the priestess of Apollo, that
she at times allowed herself to be influenced in
her answers by bribes ; but our prophets were
admired for their plain truthfulness, not only by
their contemporaries, but also by those who lived
in later times. For through the commands pro-
nounced by the prophets cities were founded,
men were cured, and plagues were stayed. In-
deed, the whole Jewish race went out as a colony
from Egypt to Palestine, in accordance with the
divine oracles. They also, when they followed
the commands of God, were prosperous ; when
they departed from them, they suffered reverses.
What need is there to quote all the princes and
private persons in Scripture history who fared
well or ill according as they obeyed or despised
the words of the prophets ? If we refer to those
who were unhappy because they were childless,
but who, after offering prayers to the Creator of
all, became fathers and mothers, let any one
read the accounts of Abraham and Sarah, to
whom at an advanced age was born Isaac, the
father of the whole Jewish nation : and there
are other instances of the same thing. Let him
also read the account of Hezekiah, who not only
recovered from his sickness, according to the
prediction of Isaiah, but was also bold enough
to say, " Afterwards I shall beget children, who
shall declare Thy righteousness." ^ And in the
fourth book of Kings we read that the prophet
Elisha made known to a woman who had re-
ceived him hospitably, that by the grace of God
she should have a son ; and through the prayers
of Elisha she became a mother.^ The maimed
were cured by Jesus in great numbers. And the
books of the Maccabees relate what punishments
were inflicted upon those who dared to profane
the Jewish service in the temple at Jerusalem.


2 Isa. xxx-vili. 19 (according to the LXX.).

3 [2 Kings iv. 17. 4 Kings, Sept. and Vulg. S.]


Chap. XLIX.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


657


CHAP. XLVII.

But the Greeks will say that these accounts
are fabulous, although two whole nations are
witnesses to their truth. But why may we not
consider the accounts of the Greeks as fabulous
rather than those? Perhaps some one, how-
ever, wishing not to appear blindly to accept his
own statements and reject those of others, would
conclude, after a close examination of the mat-
ter, that the wonders mentioned by the Greeks
were performed by certain demons ; those among
the Jews by prophets or by angels, or by God
through the means of angels ; and those recorded
by Christians by Jesus Himself, or by His power
working in His apostles. Let us, then, compare
all these accounts together ; let us examine into
the aim and purpose of those who performed
them ; and let us inquire what effect was pro-
duced upon the persons on whose account these
acts of kindness were performed, whether bene-
ficial or hurtful, or neither the one nor the other.
The ancient Jewish people, before they sinned
against God, and were for their great wickedness
cast off by Him, must evidently have been a
people of great wisdom.' But Christians, who
have in so wonderful a manner formed them-
selves into a community, appear at first to have
been more induced by miracles than by exhorta-
tions to forsake the institutions of their fathers,
and to adopt others which were quite strange to
them. And indeed, if we were to reason from
what is probable as to the first formation of the
Christian society, we should say that it is in-
credible that the apostles of Jesus Christ, who
were unlettered men of humble life, could have
been emboldened to preach Christian truth to
men by anything else than the power which was
conferred upon them, and the grace which ac-
companied their words and rendered them effec-
tive ; and those who heard them would not have
renounced the old-established usages of their
fathers, and been induced to adopt notions so
different from those in which they had been
brought up, unless they had been moved by
some extraordinary power, and by the force of
miraculous events.

CHAP. XLVIII.

In the next place, Celsus, after referring to
the enthusiasm with which men will contend
unto death rather than abjure Christianity, adds
strangely enough some remarks, in which he
wishes to show that our doctrines are similar to
those delivered by the priests at the celebration
of the heathen mysteries. He says, "Just as
you, good sir, believe in eternal punishments, so
also do the priests who interpret and initiate
into the sacred mysteries. The same punish-


^lAoao^o)'.


ments with which you threaten others, they
threaten you. Now it is worthy of examina-
tion, which of the two is more firmly established
as true ; for both parties contend with equal
assurance that the truth is on their side. But
if we require proofs, the priests of the heathen
gods produce many that are clear and convin-
cing, partly from wonders performed by demons,
and partly from the answers given by oracles,
and various other modes of divination." 'He
would, then, have us believe that we and the
interpreters of the mysteries equally teach the
doctrine of eternal punishment, and that it is a
matter for inquiry on which side of the two the
truth lies. Now I should say that the truth lies
with those who are able to induce their hearei^
to live as men who are convinced of the truth
of what they have heard. But Jews and Chris-
tians have been thus affected by the doctrines
they hold about what we speak of as the worid to
come, and the rewards of the righteous, and the
punishments of the wicked. Let Celsus then,
or any one who will, show us who have been
moved in this way in regard to eternal punish-
ments by the teaching of heathen priests and
mystagogues. For surely the purpose of him
who brought to light this doctrine was not only
to reason upon the subject of punishments, and
to strike men with terror of them, but to induce
those who heard the truth to strive with all their
might against those sins which are the causes of
punishment. And those who study the prophe-
cies with care, and are not content with a cur-
sory perusal of the predictions contained in them,
will find them such as to convince the intelligent
and sincere reader that the Spirit of God was in
those men, and that with their writings there is
nothing in all the works of demons, responses
of oracles, or sayings of soothsayers, for one
moment to be compared.


CHAP. XLIX.

Let us see in what terms Celsus next addresses
us : " Besides, is it not most absurd and incon-
sistent in you, on the one hand, to make so
much of the body as you do — to expect that
the same body will rise again, as though it were
the best and most precious part of us ; and yet,
on the other, to expose it to such tortures as
though it were worthless ? But men who hold
such notions, and are so attached to the body,
are not worthy of being reasoned with ; for in
this and in other respects they show themselves
to be gross, impure, and l:)ent upon revolting
without any reason from the common belief.
But I shall direct my discourse to those who
hope for the enjoyment of eternal life with God
by means of the soul or mind, whether thej
choose to call it a spiritual substance, an intelli-


658


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII,


gent spirit, holy and blessed, or a living soul, or
the heavenly and indestructible offspring of a
divine and incorporeal nature, or by whatever
name they designate the spiritual nature of man.
And they are rightly persuaded that those who
live well shall be blessed, and the unrighteous
shall all suffer everlasting punishments. And
from this doctrine neither they nor any other
should ever swerve." Now, as he has often
already reproached us for our opinions on the
resurrection, and as we have on these occasions
defended our opinions in what seemed to us a
reasonable way, we do not intend, at each repe-
tition of the one objection, to go into a repeti-
tion of our defence. Celsus makes an unfounded
fcharge against us when he ascribes to us the
opinion that " there is nothing in our complex
nature better or more precious than the body ; "
for we hold that far beyond all bodies is the soul,
and especially the reasonable soul ; for it is the
soul, and not the body, which bears the likeness
of the Creator. For, according to us, God is
not corporeal, unless we fall into the absurd
errors of the followers of Zeno and Chrysippus.


But since he reproaches us with too great an
anxietj about the body, let him know that when
that feeling is a wrong one we do not share in
it, and when it is indifferent we only long for
that which God has promised to the righteous.
But Celsus considers that we are inconsistent
with ourselves when we count the body worthy
of honour from God, and therefore hope for its
resurrection, and yet at the same time expose it
to tortures as though it were not worthy of
honour. But surely it is not without honour for
the body to suffer for the sake of godliness, and
to choose afflictions on account of virtue : the
dishonourable thing would be for it to waste its
powers in vicious indulgence. For the divine
word says : " What is an honourable seed? The
seed of man. What is a dishonourable seed?
The seed of man." ' Moreover, Celsus thinks
that he ought not to reason with those who
hope for the good of the body, as they are un-
reasonably intent upon an object which can
never satisfy their expectations. He also calls
them gross and impure men, bent upon creating
needless dissensions. But surely he ought, as
one of superior humanity, to assist even the
rude and depraved. For society does not ex-
clude from its pale the coarse and uncultivated,
as it does the irrational animals, but our Creator
made us on the same common level with all
mankind. It is not an undignified thing, there-
fore, to reason even with the coarse and unre-


' Ecclus. X. 19. In the LXX. the last clause is, " What i
dishonourable seed ? They that transgress the commandments."


fined, and to try to bring them as far as possible
to a higher state of refinement — to bring the
impure to the highest practicable degree of
purity — to bring the unreasoning multitude to
reason, and the diseased in mind to spiritual
health.


In the next place, he expresses his approval
of those who " hope that eternal life shall be
enjoyed with God by the soul or mind, or, as it
is variously called, the spiritual nature, the rea-
sonable soul, intelligent, holy, and blessed;"
and he allows the soundness of the doctrine,
" that those who had a good life shall be
happy, and the unrighteous shall suffer eternal
punishments." And yet I wonder at what fol-
lows, more than at anything that Celsus has ever
said ; for he adds, " And from this doctrine let
not them or any one ever swerve." For cer-
tainly in writing against Christians, the very
essence of whose faith is God, and the promises
made by Christ to the righteous, and His warn-
ings of punishment awaiting the wicked, he
must see that, if a Christian were brought to
renounce Christianity by his arguments against
it, it is beyond doubt that, along with his Chris-
tian faith, he would cast off the very doctrine
from which he says that no Christian and no
man should ever swerve. But I think Celsus
has been far surpassed in consideration for his
fellow-men by Chrysippus in his treatise, On the
Subjugation of the Passions. For when he
sought to apply remedies to the affections and
passions which oppress and distract the human
spirit, after employing such arguments as seemed
to himself to be strong, he did not shrink from
using in the second and third place others which
he did not himself approve of. " For," says he,
" if it were held by any one that there are three
kinds of good, we must seek to regulate the
passions in accordance with that supposition ;
and we must not too curiously inquire into the
opinions held by a person at the time that he is
under the influence of passion, lest, if we delay
too long for the purpose of overthrowing the
opinions by which the mind is possessed, the
opportunity for curing the passion may pass
away." And he adds, "Thus, supposing that
pleasure were the highest good, or that he was
of that opinion whose mind was under the do-
minion of passion, we should not the less give
him help, and show that, even on the principle
that pleasure is the highest and final good of
man, all passion is disallowed." And Celsus, in
like manner, after having embraced the doctrine,
" that the righteous' shall be blessed, and the
wicked shall suffer eternal punishments," should
have followed out his subject ; and, after having
advanced what seemed to him the chief argu-


Chap. LIIL]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


659


ment, he should have proceeded to prove and
enforce by further reasons the truth that the
unjust shall surely suffer eternal punishment, and
those who lead a good life shall be blessed.


For we who have been persuaded by many,
yea by innumerable, arguments to lead a Chris-
tian life, are especially anxious to bring all men
as far as possible to receive the whole system of
Christian truth ; but when we meet with persons
who are prejudiced by the calumnies thrown out
against Christians, and who, from a notion that
Christians are an impious people, will not listen
to any who offer to instruct them in the princi-
ples of the divine word, then, on the common
principles of humanity, we endeavour to the best
of our ability to convince them of the doctrine
of the punishment of the wicked, and to induce
even those who are unwilling to become Chris-
tians to accept that truth. And we are thus
anxious to persuade them of the rewards of
right living, when we see that many things which
we teach about a healthy moral life are also
taught by the enemies of our faith. For you will
find that they have not entirely lost the common
notions of right and wrong, of good and evil.
Let all men, therefore, when they look upon the
universe, observe the constant revolution of the
unerring stars, the converse motion of the plan-
ets, the constitution of the atmosphere, and its
adaptation to the necessities of the animals, and
especially of man, with all the innumerable con-
trivances for the well-being of mankind ; and


until it is purged from these at the appointed
period of time, — for, according to Empedocles,
all mankind must be banished from the abodes
of the blessed for 30,000 periods of time, — we
must therefore believe that they are entrusted to
certain beings as keepers of this prison-house."
You will observe that Celsus, in these remarks,
speaks of such weighty matters in the language
of doubtful human conjecture. He adds also
various opinions as to the origin of man, and
shows considerable reluctance to set down any
of these opinions as false. When he had once
come to the conclusion neither indiscriminately
to accept nor recklessly to reject the opinions
held by the ancients, would it not have been in
accordance with that same rule of judging, if,
when he found himself not disposed to believe
the doctrines taught by the Jewish prophets and
by Jesus, at any rate to have held them as mat-
ters open to inquiry? And should he not have
considered whether it is very probable that a
people who faithfully served the Most High God,
and who ofttimes encountered numberless dan-
gers, and even death, rather than sacrifice the
honour of God, and what they believed to be
the revelations of His will, should have been
wholly overlooked by God? Should it not
rather be thought probable that people who de-
spised the efforts of human art to represent the
Divine Being, but strove rather to rise in thought
to the knowledge of the Most High, should have
been favoured with some revelation from Him-
self? Besides, he ought to have considered that

_..__ ^ ^ __ ^ the common Father and Creator of all, who sees

then, after thus considering die order of the uni- i !^"^ ^^^^^ ^^^ things, and who duly esteems the


verse, let them beware of doing ought which is
displeasing to the Creator of this universe, of the
soul and its intelligent principle ; and let them
rest assured that punishment shall be inflicted on
the wicked, and rewards shall be bestowed upon
the righteous, by Him who deals with every one
as he deserves, and who will proportion His re-
wards to the good that each has done, and to the
account of himself that he is able to give.' And
let all men know that the good shall be advanced
to a higher state, and that the wicked shall be
delivered over to sufferings and torments, in
punishment of their licentiousness and depravity,
their cowardice, timidity, and all their follies.


Having said so much on this subject, let us
proceed to another statement of Celsus : " Since
men are born united to a body, whether to suit
the order of the universe, or that they may in
that way suffer the punishment of sin ; or be-
cause the soul is oppressed by certain passions


' [Eccles. viii. ii. See __
rably annotated Plutarch's De,


ip. xl., JK/rrt. De Maistre has admi-
lay 0/ the Divine yud^meiit.]


ntention of every man who seeks Him and
desires to serve Him, will grant unto these also
some of the benefits of His rule, and will give
them an enlargement of that knowledge of Him-
self which He has once bestowed upon them.
If this had been remembered by Celsus and the
others who hate Moses and the Jewish prophets,
and Jesus, and His faithful disciples, who endured
so much for the sake of His word, they would
not thus have reviled Moses, and the pro])hets,
and Jesus, and His apostles ; and they would not
have singled out for their contempt the Jews
beyond all the nations of the earth, and said they
were worse even than the Egyptians, — a people
who, either from superstition or some other form
of delusion, went as far as they could in degrad-
ing the Divine Being to the level of brute beasts.
And we invite inquiry, not as though we wished
to lead any to doubt regarding the truths of
Christianity, but in order to show that it would
be better for those who in every way revile the
doctrines of Christianity, at any rate to suspend
their judgment, and not so rashly to state about
Jesus and His apostles such things as they do
not know, and as they cannot prove, either by


66o


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


what the Stoics call " apprehensive perception," '
or by any other methods used by different sects
of philosophers as criteria of truth.

CHAP. LIV.

When Celsus adds, " We must therefore be-
lieve that men are entrusted to certain beings
who are the keepers of this prison-house," our
answer is, that the souls of those who are called
by Jeremiah "prisoners of the earth," ^ when
eager in the pursuit of virtue, are even in this life
delivered from the bondage of evil ; for Jesus
declared this, as was foretold long before His
advent by the prophet Isaiah, when he said that
" the prisoners would go forth, and they that
were in darkness would show themselves." ^
And Jesus Himself, as Isaiah also foretold of
Him, arose as " a light to them that sat in dark-
ness and in the shadow of death," "* so that we
may therefore say, " Let us break their bands
asunder, and cast their cords from us." 5 If
Celsus, and those who like him are opposed to
us, had been able to sound the depths of the
Gospel narratives, they would not have coun-
selled us to put our confidence in those beings
whom they call " the keepers of the prison-
house." It is written in the Gospel that a wo-
man was bowed together, and could in no wise
lift up herself. And when Jesus beheld her, and
perceived from what cause she was bowed to-
gether, he said, " Ought not this daughter of
Abraham, whom Satan has bound, lo, these
eighteen years, to be loosed from this bond on
■the Sabbath day? " ^ And how many others are
still bowed down and bound by Satan, who hin-
ders them from looking up at all, and who would
have us to look down also ! And no one can raise
them up, except the Word, that came by Jesus
Christ, and that aforetime inspired the prophets.
And Jesus came to release those who were under
the dominion of the devil ; and, speaking of him.
He said with that depth of meaning which char-
acterized His words, " Now is the prince of this
world judged." We are, then, indulging in no
baseless calumnies against demons, but are con-
demning their agency upon earth as destructive
to mankind, and show that, under cover of ora-
cles and bodily cures, and such other means,
they are seeking to separate from God the soul
which has descended to this " body of humilia-
tion ; " and those who feel this huniiliation ex-
claim, " O wretched man that I am ! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? "7 it
is not in vain, therefore, that we expose our


' KaTakr^nTiKr) <pavTa<Tia,

' Lam. iii. ^4.

3 Isa. xlix. 9!

* Isa. ix. 2.

5 Ps. ii. 3.

^ Luke xiii. 11

' Rom. vii. 24


16.


bodies to be beaten and tortured ; for surely it |
is not in vain for a man to submit to such suffer- |
ings, if by that means he may avoid bestowing i
the name of gods on those earthly spirits that I
unite with their worshippers to bring him to de-
struction. Indeed, we think it both reasonable
in itself and well-pleasing to God, to suffer pain
for the sake of virtue, to undergo torture for the
sake of piety, and even to suffer death for the
sake of holiness ; for " precious in the sight of
God is the death of His saints ; " *^ and we main-
tain that to overcome the love of life is to enjoy
a great good. But when Celsus compares us to
notorious criminals, who justly suffer punishment
for their crimes, and does not shrink from placing
so laudable a purpose as that which we set be-
fore us upon the same level with the obstinacy
of criminals, he makes himself the brother and
companion of those who accounted Jesus among
criminals, fulfilling the Scripture, which saith,
" He was numbered with transgressors." 9


Celsus goes on to say : " They must make
their choice between two alternatives. If they
refuse to render due service to the gods, and to
respect those who are set over this service, let
them not come to manhood, or marry wives, or
have children, or indeed take any share in the
affairs of life ; but let them depart hence with
all speed, and leave no posterity behind them,
that such a race may become extinct from the
face of the earth. Or, on the other hand, if
they will take wives, and bring up children, and
taste of the fruits of the earth, and partake of
all the blessings of life, and bear its appointed
sorrows (for nature herself hath allotted sorrows
to all men ; for sorrows must exist, and earth is
the only place for them), then must they dis-
charge the duties of life until they are released
from its bonds, and render due honour to those
beings who control the affairs of this life, if they
would not show themselves ungrateful to them.
For it would be unjust in them, after receiving
the good things which they dispense, to pay
them no tribute in return." To this we reply,
that there appears to us to be no good reason
for our leaving this world, except when piety
and virtue require it ; as when, for example,
those who are set as judges, and think that they
have power over our lives, place before us the
alternative either to live in violation of the com-
mands of Jesus, or to die if we continue obe-
dient to them. But God has allowed us to
marry, because all are not fit for the higher, that
is, the perfectly pure life ; and God would have
us to bring up all our children, and not to destroy


8 Ps. cxvi. 15.

9 Isa. liii. 12.


Chap. LVIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


66 1


any of the offspring given us by His providence.
And diis does not conflict with our purpose not
to obey the demons that are on the earth ; for,
" being armed with the whole armour of God,
we stand " ' as athletes of piety against the race
of demons that plot against us.

CHAP. LVI.

Although, therefore, Celsus would, in his own
words, " drive us with all haste out of life," so
that " such a race may become extinct from the
earth ; " yet we, along with those who worship
the Creator, will live according to the laws of
God, never consenting to obey the laws of sin.
We will marry if we wish, and bring up the chil-
dren given to us in marriage ; and if need be,
we will not only partake of the blessings of life,
but bear its appointed sorrows as a trial to our
souls. For in this way is divine Scripture accus-
tomed to speak of human afflictions, by which,
as gold is tried in the fire, so the spirit of man
is tried, and is found to be worthy either of con-
demnation or of praise. For those things which
Celsus calls evils we are therefore prepared, and
are ready to say, " Try me, O Lord, and prove
me ; purge my reins and my heart." ^ For " no
one will be crowned," unless here upon earth,
with this body of humiliation, " he strive law-
fully." 3 Further, we do not pay honours sup-
posed to be due to those whom Celsus speaks
of as being set over the affairs of the world. For
we worship the Lord our God, and Him only
do we serve, and desire to be followers of Christ,
who, when the devil said to Him, " All these
things will I give thee if thou wilt fall down and
worship me," answered him by the words, " Thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only
shalt thou serve." ■♦ Wherefore we do not render
the honour supposed to be due to those who,
according to Celsus, are set over the affairs of
this world ; for " no man can serve two masters,"
and we "cannot serve God and mammon,"
whether this name be applied to one or more.
Moreover, if any one " by transgressing the law
dishonours the lawgiver," it seems clear to us
that if the two laws, the law of God and the law
of mammon, are completely opposed to each
other, it is better for us by transgressing the law
of mammon to dishonour mammon, that we may
honour God by keeping His law, than by trans-
gressing the law of God to dishonour God, that
by obeying the law of mammon we may honour
mammon.

CHAP. LVII.

Celsus supposes that men " discharge the
duties of life until they are loosened from its


Eph. vi. II.
Ps. xxvl. 2.
2 Tim. ii. 5.
Matt. iv. 9,


bonds," when, in accordance with commonly
received customs, they offer sacrifices to each of
the gods recognised in the state ; and he fails
to perceive the true duty which is fulfilled by an
earnest piety. For we say that he truly dis-
charges the duties of life who is ever mindful
who is his Creator, and what things are agree-
able to Him, and who acts in all things so that
he may please God. Again, Celsus wishes us to
be thankful to these demons, imagining that we
owe them thank-offerings. But we, while recog-
nising the duty of thankfulness, maintain that we
show no ingratitude by refusing to give thanks
to beings who do us no good, but who rather set
themselves against us when we neither sacrifice
to them nor worship them. We are much more
concerned lest we should be ungrateful to God,
who has loaded us with His benefits, whose
workmanship we are, who cares for us in what-
ever condition we may be, and who has given us
hopes of things, beyond this present life. And
we have a symbol of gratitude to God in the
bread which we call the Eucharist. Besides, as
we have shown before, the demons have not the
control of those things which have been created
for our use ; we commit no wrong, therefore,
when we partake of created things, and yet re-
fuse to offer sacrifices to beings who have no
concern with them. Moreover, as we know that
it is not demons, but angels, who have been set
over the fruits of the earth, and over the birth
of animals, it is the latter that we praise and
bless, as having been appointed by God over
the things needful for our race ; yet even to
them we will not give the honour which is due
to God. For this would not be pleasing to God,
nor would it be any pleasure to the angels them-
selves to whom these things have been commit-
ted. Indeed, they are much more pleased if we
refrain from offering sacrifices to them than if
we offer them ; for they have no desire for the
sacrificial odours which rise from the earth.


Celsus goes on to say : " Let any one inquire
of the Egyptians, and Jie will find tliat every-
thing, even to the most insignificant, is commit-
ted to the care of a certain demon. The body
of man is divided into thirty-six parts, and as
many demons of the air are appointed to the
care of it, each having charge of a different part,
although others make the number much larger.
All these demons have in the language of that
country distinct names ; as Chnoumen, Chna-
choumen. Gnat, Sicat, Biou, Erou, Erebiou,
Ramanor, Reianoor, and other such Egyptian
names. Moreover, they call upon them, and are
cured of diseases of particular parts of the body.
What, then, is there to prevent a man from
giving honour to these or to others, if he would


662


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIIT.


rather be in health than be sick, rather have
prosperity than adversity, and be freed as much
as possible from all plagues and troubles? " In
this way, Celsus seeks to degrade our souls to
the worship of demons, under the assumption
that they have possession of our bodies, and
that each one has power over a separate mem-
ber. And he wishes us on this ground to put
confidence in these demons of which he speaks,
and to serve them, in order that we may be in
health rather than be sick, have prosperity rather
than adversity, and may as far as possible escape
all plagues and troubles. The honour of the
Most High God, which cannot be divided or
shared with another, is so lightly esteemed by
him, that he cannot believe in the ability of God,
if called upon and highly honoured, to give to
those who serve Him a power by which they
may be defended from the assaults directed by
demons against the righteous. For he has never
beheld the efficacy of those words, " in the name
of Jesus," when uttered by the truly faithful, to
deliver not a few from demons and demoniacal
possessions and other plagues.


Probably those who embrace the views of
Celsus will smile at us when we say, " At the
name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in
heaven, of things on earth, and of things under
the earth, and every tongue " is brought to
" confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory
of God the Father." ' But although they may
ridicule such a statement, yet they will receive
much more convincing arguments in support of
it than Celsus brings in behalf of Chnoumen,
Chnachoumen, Cnat, Sicat, and the rest of the
Egyptian catalogue, whom he mentions as being
called upon, and as healing the diseases of dif-
ferent parts of the human body. And observe
how, while seeking to turn us away from our
faith in the God of all through Jesus Christ, he
exhorts us for the welfare of our bodies to faith
in six-and-thirty barbarous demons, whom the
Egyptian magi alone call upon in some unknown
way, and promise us in return great benefits.
According to Celsus, then, it would be better for
us now to give ourselves up to magic and sor-
cery than to embrace Christianity, and to put
our faith in an innumerable multitude of demons
than in the almighty, living, self-revealing God,
who has manifested Himself by Him who by His
great power has spread the true principles of
holiness among all men throughout the world ;
yea, I may add without exaggeration, He has
given this knowledge to all beings everywhere
possessed of reason, and needing deliverance
from the plague and corruption of sin.


Celsus, however, suspecting that the tendency
of such teaching as he here gives is to lead to
magic, and dreading that harm may arise from
these statements, adds : " Care, however, must
be taken lest any one, by familiarizing his mind
with these matters, should become too much
engrossed with them, and lest, through an
excessive regard for the body, he should have
his mind turned away from higher things, and
allow them to pass into oblivion. For perhaps
we ought not to despise the opinion of those
wise men who say that most of the earth-demons
are taken up with carnal indulgence, blood,
odours, sweet sounds, and other such sensual
things ; and therefore they are unable to do
more than heal the body, or foretell the fortunes
of men and cities, and do other such things as
relate to this mortal life." If there is, then, such
a dangerous tendency in this direction, as even
the enemy of the truth of God confesses, how
much better is it to avoid all danger of giving
ourselves too nruch up to the power of such
demons, and of becoming turned aside from
higher things, and suffering them to pass into
oblivion through an excessive attention to the
body ; by entrusting ourselves to the Supreme
God through Jesus Christ, who has given us such
instruction, and asking of Him all help, and the
guardianship of holy and good angels, to defend
us from the earth-spirits intent on lust, and
blood, and sacrificial odours,^ and strange sounds,
and other sensual things ! For even, by the
confession of Celsus, they can do nothing more
than cure the body. But, indeed, I would say
that it is not clear that these demons, however
much they are reverenced, can even cure the
body. But in seeking recovery from disease, a
man must either follow the more ordinary and
simple method, and have recourse to medical
art ; or if he would go beyond the common
methods adopted by men, he must rise to the
higher and better way of seeking the blessing of
Him who is God over all, through piety and
prayers.

CHAP. LXI,

For consider with yourself which disposition
of mind will be more acceptable to the Most
High, whose power is supreme and universal,
and who directs all for the welfare of mankind
in body, and in mind, and in outward things, —
whether that of the man who gives himself up
to God in all things, or that of the man who is
curiously inquisitive about the names of demons,
their powers and agency, the incantations, the
herbs proper to them, and the stones with the
inscriptions graven on them, corresponding sym-


2 [Observe this traditional objection to incense. Comp. vol. ii.
532-]


Chap. LXIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


663


bolically or otherwise to their traditional shapes ?
It is plain even to the least intelligent, that the
disposition of the man who is simple-minded,
and not given to curious inquiries, but in all
things devoted to the divine will, will be most
pleasing to God, and to all those who are like
God ; but that of the man who, for the sake of
bodily health, of bodily enjoyment, and outward
prosperity, busies himself about the names of
demons, and inquires by what incantations he
shall appease them, will be condemned by God
as bad and impious, and more agreeable to the
nature of demons than of men, and will be given
over to be torn and otherwise tormented by
demons. For it is probable that they, as being
wicked creatures, and, as Celsus confesses, ad-
dicted to blood, sacrificial odours, sweet sounds,
and such like, will not keep their most solemn
promises to those who supply them with tliese
things. For if others invoke their aid against
the persons who have already called upon them,
and purchase their favour with a larger supply
of blood, and odours, and such offerings as they
require, they will take part against those who
yesterday sacrificed and presented pleasant offer-
ings to them.

CHAP. LXII.

In a former passage, Celsus had spoken at
length on the subject of oracles, and had referred
us to their answers as being the voice of the
gods ; but now he makes amends, and confesses
that " those who foretell the fortunes of men and
cities, and concern themselves about mortal af-
fairs, are earth-spirits, who are given up to fleshly
lust, blood, odours, sweet sounds, and other such
things, and who are unable to rise above these
sensual objects." Perhaps, when we opposed
the theological teaching of Celsus in regard to
oracles, and the honour done to those called
gods, some one might suspect us of impiety when
we alleged that these were stratagems of demo-
niacal powers, to drtiw men away to carnal indul-
gence. But any who entertained this suspicion
against us, may now believe that the statements
put forth by Christians were well-founded, when !
they see the above passage from the writings of
one who is a professed adversary of Christianity,
but who now at length writes as one who has
been overcome by the spirit of truth. Although,
therefore, Celsus says that " we must offer sacri-
fices to them, in so far as they are profitable to
us, for to offer them indiscriminately is not allowed
by reason," yet we are not to offer sacrifices to
demons addicted to blood and odours ; nor is
the Divine Being to be profaned in our minds,
by being brought down to the level of wicked
demons. If Celsus had carefully weighed the
meaning of the word "profitable," and had con-
sidered that the truest profit lies in virtue and in


virtuous action, he would not have applied the
phrase " as far as it is profitable " to the service
of such demons, as he has acknowledged them
to be. If, then, health of body and success in
life were to come to us on condition of our serv-
ing such demons, we should prefer sickness and
misfortune accompanied with the consciousness
of our being truly devoted to the will of God.
For this is preferable to being mortally diseased
in mind, and wretched through being separate
and outcasts from God, though healthy in body
and abounding in earthly prosperity. And we
would rather go for help to one who seeks noth-
ing whatever but the well-being of men and of
all rational creatures, than to those who delight
in blood and sacrificial odours.


CHAP. LXIII.

After having said so much of the demons, and
of their fondness for blood and the odour of sacri-
fices, Celsus adds, as though wishing to retract
the charge he had made : " The more just opin-
ion is, that demons desire nothing and need
nothing, but that they take pleasure in those who
discharge towards them offices of piety." If
Celsus believed this to be true, he should have
said so, instead of making his previous state-
ments. But, indeed, human nature is never
utterly forsaken by God and His only-begottem
Son, the Truth. Wherefore even Celsus spoke the
truth when he made the demons take pleasure in
the blood and smoke of victims ; although, by the
force of his own evil nature, he falls back intO'
his errors, and compares demons with men ^vho^
rigorously discharge every duty, even to those
who show no gratitude ; while to those who are
grateful they abound in acts of kindness. Here
Celsus appears to me to get into confusion. At
one time his judgment is darkened by the £»flu>-
ence of demons, and at another he recovers from
their deluding power, and gets some glimpses, of
the truth. For again he adds : "We must never
in any way lose our hold of God, whether by
day or by night, whether in public or in secret,
whether in word or in deed, but in whatever we
do, or abstain from doing." That is, as I un-
derstand it, whatever we do in public, in all our
actions, in all our words, " let the soul be con-
stantly fixed upon God." And yet again, as
though, after struggling in argument against the
insane inspirations of demons, he were com-
pletely overcome by them, he adds : " If this is
the case, what harm is there in gaining the favour
of the rulers of the earth, whether of a nature
different from ours, or human princes and kings?
For these have gained their dignity through the
instrumentality of demons." In a former part,
Celsus did his utmost to debase our souls to the
worship of demons ; and now he wishes us to


664


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


seek the favour of kings and princes, of whom,
as the world and all history are full of them, I
do not consider it necessary to quote examples.

CHAP. LXIV.

There is therefore One whose favour we should
seek, and to whom we ought to pray that He
would be gracious to us — the Most High God,
whose favour is gained by piety and the prac-
tice of every virtue. And if he would have
us to seek the favour of others after the Most
High God, let him consider that, as the motion
of the shadow follows that of the body which
casts it, so in like manner it follows, that when
we have the favour of God, we have also the
good-will of all angels and spirits who are friends
of God. For they know who are worthy of the
divine approval, and they are not only well dis-
posed to them, but they co-operate with them
in their endeavours to please God : they seek
His favour on their behalf; with their prayers
they join their own prayers and intercessions
for them. We may indeed boldly say, that men
who aspire after better things have, when they
pray to God, tens of thousands of sacred powers
upon their side. These, even when not asked,
pray with them, they bring succour to our mortal
race, and if I may so say, take up arms along-
side of it : for they see demons warring and
fighting most keenly against the salvation of
those who devote themselves to God, and de-
spise the hostility of demons ; they see them
savage in their hatred of the man who refuses to
serve them with the blood and fumes of sacri-
fices, but rather strives in every way, by word
and deed, to be in peace and union with the
Most High through Jesus, who put to flight mul-
titudes of demons when He went about " heal-
ing," and delivering " all who were oppressed
by the devil." '

CHAP. LXV.

Moreover, we are to despise ingratiating our-
selves with kings or any other men, not only if
their favour is to be won by murders, licentious-
ness, or deeds of cruelty, but even if it involves
impiety towards God, or any servile expressions
of flattery and obsequiousness, which things are
unworthy of brave and high-principled men,
who aim at joining with their other virtues that
highest of virtues, patience and fortitude. But
whilst we do nothing which is contrary to the
law and word of God, we are not so mad as to
stir up against us the wrath of kings and princes,
which will bring upon us sufferings and tortures,
or even death. For we read : " Let every soul
be subject unto the higher powers. For there
is no power but of God : the powers that be are

' Acts ^. 38.


ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth
the power, resisteth the ordinance of God." ^
These words we have in our exposition of the
Epistle to the Romans, to the best of our ability,
explained at length, and with various applica-
tions ; but for the present we have taken them
in their more obvious and generally received ac-
ceptation, to meet the saying of Celsus, that "it
is not without the power of demons that kings
have been raised to their regal dignity." Here
much might be said on the constitution of kings
and rulers, for the subject is a wide one, em-
bracing such rulers as reign cruelly and tyran-
nically, and such as make the kingly office the
means of indulging in luxury and sinful pleas-
ures. We shall therefore, for the present, pass
over the full consideration of this subject. We
will, however, never swear by " the fortune of the
king," nor by ought else that is considered equiv-
alent to God. For if the word " fortune " is
nothing but an expression for the uncertain
course of events, as some say, although they
seem not to be agreed, we do not swear by that
as God which has no existence, as though it did
really exist and was able to do something, lest
we should bind ourselves by an oath to things
which have no existence. If, on the other hand
(as is thought by others, who say that to swear
by the fortune of the king of the Romans is to
swear by his demon), what is cahed the fortune
of the king is in the power of demons, then in
that case we must die sooner than swear by a
wicked and treacherous demon, that ofttimes
sins along with the man of whom it gains pos-
session, and sins even more than he.

CHAP. LXVI.

Then Celsus, following the example of those
who are under the influence of demons — at one
time recovering, at another relapsing, as though
he were again becoming sensible — says: "If,
however, any worshipper of God should be or-
dered to do anything impious, or to say anything
base, such a command should in no wise be
regarded ; but we must encounter all kinds of
torment, or submit to any kind of death, rather
than say or even think anything unworthy of
God." Again, however, from ignorance of our
principles, and in entire confusion of thought,
he says : " But if any one commands you to
celebrate the sun, or to sing a joyful triumphal
song in praise of Minerva, you will by celebrat-
ing their praises seem to render the higher praise
to God ; for piety, in extending to all things,
becomes more perfect." To this our answer is,
that we do not wait for any command to cele-
brate the praises of the sun ; for we have been


Chap. LXVIII.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


665


taught to speak well not only of those creatures
that are obedient to the will of God, but even of
our enemies. We therefore praise the sun as the
glorious workmanship of God, which obeys His
laws and hearkens to the call, " Praise the Lord,
sun and moon," ' and with all your powers show
forth the praises of the Father and Creator of
all. Minerva, however, whom Celsus classes with
the sun, is the subject of various Grecian myths,
whether these contain any hidden meaning or
not. They say that Minerva sprang fully armed
from the brain of Jupiter ; that when she was
pursued by Vulcan, she fled from him to pre-
serve her honour ; and that from the seed which
fell to the ground in the heat of Vulcan's passion,
there grew a child whom Minerva brought up
and called Erichthonius,

"That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,
But from the teeming furrow took his birth,
The mighty offspring of the foodful earth." ^

It is therefore evident, that if we admit Minerva
the daughter of Jupiter, we must also admit
many fables and fictions which can be allowed
by no one who discards fables and seeks after
truth.

CHAP. LXVII.

And to regard these myths in a figurative
sense, and consider Minerva as representing pru-
dence, let any one show what were the actual
facts of her history, upon which this allegory is
based. For, supposing honour was given to
Minerva as having been a woman of ancient
times, by those who instituted mysteries apd
ceremonies for their followers, and who wished
her name to be celebrated as that of a goddess,
much more are we forbidden to pay divine hon-
ours to Minerva, if we are not permitted to wor-
ship so glorious an object as the sun, although
we may celebrate its glory. Celsus, indeed, says
that " we seem to do the greater honouEito the
great God when we sing hymns in honour of
the sun and Minerva ; " but we know it to be
the opposite of that. For we sing hymns to the
Most High alone, and His Only-begotten, who
is the Word and God ; and we praise God and
His Only-begotten, as do also the sun, the moon,
the stars, and all the host of heaven. 3 For these
all form a divine chorus, and unite with the just
among men in celebrating the praises of the
Most High God and His Only-begotten. We
have already said that we must not swear by a
human king, or by what is called " the fortune
i of the king." It is therefore unnecessary for us
I again to refute these statements : " If you are

' Ps. cxlviii. 3.

2 Homer's Iliad, ii. 547, 548.

3 [" Origen pointed out that hymns were addressed only to God and
to His Only-bemtten Word, who is also God. . . . The hymnody of
the primitive Church protected and proclaimed the truths which she
1 uight and cherished." — Liudon's Bampton Lectures, On the Divin-
ity 0/ our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, pp. 385, 386. S.J


commanded to swear by a human king, there is
nothing wrong in that. For to him has been
given whatever there is upon earth ; and what-
ever you receive in this life, you receive from
him." We deny, however, that all things which
are on the earth have been given to the king, or
that whatever we receive in this life we receive
from him. For whatever we receive rightly and
honourably we receive from God, and by His
providence, as ripe fruits, and " corn which
strengtheneth man's heart, and the pleasant vine,
and wine which rejoiceth the heart of man." •*
And moreover, the fruit of the olive-tree, to
make his face to shine, we have from the provi-
dence of God.

CHAP. LXVIII,

Celsus goes on to say : "We must not disobey
the ancient writer, who said long ago,

' Let one be king, whom the son of crafty Saturn ap-
pointed; ' " ^

and adds : " If you set aside this maxim, you
will deservedly suffer for it at the hands of the
king. For if all were to do the same as you,
there would be nothing to prevent his being left
in utter solitude and desertion, and the affairs of
the earth would fall into the hands of the wildest
and inost lawless barbarians ; and then there
would no longer remain among men any of the
glory of your religion or of the true wisdom."
If, then, " there shall be one lord, one king," he
must be, not the man " whom the son of crafty
Saturn appointed," but the man to whom He
gave the power, who " removeth kings and setteth
up kings," ^ and who " raiseth up the useful man
in time of need upon earth." ? For kings are
not appointed by that son of Saturn, who, ac-
cording to Grecian fable, hurled his father from
his throne, and sent him down to Tartarus (what-
ever interpretation may be given to this allegory),
but by God, who governs all things, and who
wisely arranges whatever belongs to the appoint-
ment of kings. We therefore do set aside the
maxim contained in the line,

"Whom the son of crafty Saturn appointed;"
for we know that no god or father of a god ever
devises anything crooked or crafty. But we are
far from setting aside the notion of a providence,
and of things happening direcdy or indirectly
through the agency of providence. And the
king will not " inflict deserved punishment " upon
us, if we say that not the son of crafty Saturn
gave him his kingdom, but He who " removeth
and setteth up kings." And would that all were
to follow my example in rejecting the maxim of
Homer, maintaining the divine origin of the


* Ps. civ. 15.

5 Homer's Iliad, ii. 205.

*> Dan. ii. 21.

7 Ecclus. X. 4 (LXX.).


666


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


kingdom, and observing the precept to honour
the king ! In these circumstances the king will
not " be left in utter solitude and desertion,"
neither will " the affairs of the world fall into the
hands of the most impious and wild barbarians."
For if, in the words of Celsus, " they do as I do,"
then it is evident that even the barbarians, when
they yield obedience to the word of God, will
become most obedient to the law, and most
humane ; and every form of worship will be
destroyed except the religion of Christ, which
will alone prevail. And indeed it will one day
triumph, as its principles take possession of the
minds of men more and more every day.

CHAP. LXIX.

Celsus, then, as if not observing that he was
saying anything inconsistent with the words he
had just used, "if all were to do the same as
you," adds : " You surely do not say that if the
Romans were, hi compliance with your wish, to
neglect their customary duties to gods and men,
and were to worship the Most High, or whatever
you please to call him, that he will come down
and fight for them, so that they shall need no
other help than his. For this same God, as
yourselves say, promised of old this and much
more to those who served him, and see in what
way he has helped them and you ! They, in
place of being masters of the whole world, are
left with not so much as a patch of ground or a
home ; and as for you, if any of you transgresses
even in secret, he is sought out and punished
with death." As the question started is, " What
would happen if the Romans were persuaded to
adopt the principles of the Christians, to despise
the duties paid to the recognised gods and to
men, and to worship the Most High?" this is
my answer to the question. We say that "if
two " of us " shall agree on earth as touching
anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for
them of the Father" of the just, " which is in
heaven ;" ' for God rejoices in the agreement of
rational beings, and turns away from discord.
And what are we to expect, if not only a very
few agree, as at present, but the whole of the
empire of Rome? For they will pray to the
Word, who of old said to the Hebrews, when
they were pursued by the Egyptians, " The Lord
shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your
peace ; " ^ and if they all unite in prayer with
one accord, they will be able to put to flight far
more enemies than those who were discomfited
by the prayer of Moses when he cried to the
Lord, and of those who prayed with him. Now,
if what God promised to those who keep His
law has not come to pass, the reason of its non-


' Matt, xviii. 19.
* Ex xiv. 14.


fulfilment is not to be ascribed to the unfaithful-
ness of God. But He had made the fulfilment
of His promises to depend on certain condi-
tions, — namely, that they should observe and
live according to His law ; and if the Jews have
not a plot of ground nor a habitation left to them,
although they had received these conditional
promises, the entire blame is to be laid upon
their crimes, and especially upon their guilt in
the treatment of Jesus.

CHAP. LXX.

But if all the Romans, according to the sup-
position of Celsus, embrace the Christian faith,
they will, when they pray, overcome their ene-
mies ; or rather, they will not war at all, being
guarded by that divine power which promised
to save five entire cities for the sake of fifty just
persons. For men of God are assuredly the
salt of the earth : they preserve the order of
the world ; ^ and society is held together as long
as the salt is uncorrupted : for " if the salt have
lost its savour, it is neither fit for the land nor
for the dunghill ; but it shall be cast out, and
trodden under foot of men. He that hath ears,
let him hear " ^ the meaning of these words.
When God gives to the tempter permission to
persecute us, then we suffer persecution ; and
when God wishes us to be free from suffering,
even in the midst of a world that hates us, we
enjoy a wonderful peace, trusting in the protec-
tion of Him who said, " Be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world." s And truly He has
overcome the world. Wherefore the world pre-
vails only so long as it is the pleasure, of Him
who received from the Father power to over-
come the world ; and from His victory we take
courage. Should He even wish us again to
contend and struggle for our religion, let the
enemy^pome against us, and we will say to them,
" I can do all things, through Christ Jesus our
Lord, which strengtheneth me." ^ For of " two
sparrows which are sold for a farthing," as the
Scripture says, " not one of them falls on the
ground without our Father in heaven." ^ And
so completely does the Divine Providence em-
brace all things, that not even the hairs of our
head fail to be numbered by Him.

CHAP. LXXI.

Celsus again, as is usual with him, gets con-
fused, and attributes to us things which none of
us have ever written. His words are : " Surely
it is intolerable for you to say, that if our present
rulers, on embracing your opinions, are taken by


[Comp. Cowper, Task, book vi., sub fiiiem.\
Luke xiv. 34, 35; Matt. v. 13.


5 John xvi. 33.

6 Phil. iv. 13.

7 Matt X 29, 30.


Chap. LXXIII.


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


667


the enemy, you will still be able to persuade
those who rule after them ; and after these have
been taken you will persuade their successors,
and so on, until at length, when all who have
yielded to your persuasion have been taken,
some prudent ruler shall arise, with a foresight
of what is impending, and he will destroy you
all utterly before he himself perishes." There
is no need of any answer to these allegations :
for none of us says of our present rulers, that if
they embrace our opinions, and are taken by the
enemy, we shall be able to persuade their suc-
cessors ; and when these are taken, those who
come after them, and so on in succession. But
on what does he ground the assertion, that when
a succession of those who have yielded to our
persuasion have been taken because they did
not drive back the enemy, some prudent ruler
shall arise, with a foresight of what is impend-
ing, who shall utterly destroy us? But here he
seems to me to delight in inventing and uttering
the wildest nonsense.

CHAP. LXXII,

Afterwards he says : " If it were possible,"
implying at the same time that he thought it
most desirable, " that all the inhabitants of Asia,
Europe, and Libya, Greeks and Barbarians, all
to the uttermost ends of the earth, were to come
under one law ; " but judging this quite impos-
sible, he adds, " Any one who thinks this possi-
ble, knows nothing." It would require careful
consideration and lengthened argument to prove
that it is not only possible, but that it will surely
come to pass, that all who are endowed with
reason shall come under one law. However, if
we must refer to this subject, it will be with great
brevity. The Stoics, indeed, hold that, when
the strongest of the elements prevails, all things
shall be turned into fire. But our belief is, that
the Word shall prevail over the entire rational
creation, and change every soul into His own
perfection ; in which state every one, by the
mere exercise of his power, will choose what
he desires, and obtain what he chooses. For
although, in the diseases and wounds of the
body, there are some which no medical skill can
cure, yet we hold that in the mind there is no
evil so strong that it may not be overcome by
the Supreme Word and God. For stronger than
all the evils in the soul is the Word, and the
healing power that dwells in Him ; and this
healing He applies, according to the will of
God, to every man. The consummation of all
things is the destruction of evil, although as to
the question whether it shall be so destroyed
that it can never anywhere arise again, it is
beyond our present purpose to say. Many
things are said obscurely in the prophecies on
the total destruction of evil, and the restoration


to righteousness of every soul ; but it will be
enough for our present purpose to quote the
following passage from Zephaniah : " Prepare
and rise early ; all the gleanings of their vine-
yards are destroyed. Therefore wait ye upon
Me, saith the Lord, on the day that I rise up
for a testimony ; for My determination is to
gather the nations, that I may assemble the
kings, to pour upon them Mine indignation,
even all My fierce anger : for all the earth shall
be devoured with the fire of My jealousy. For
then will I turn to the people a pure language,
that they may all call upon the name of the
Lord, to serve Him with one consent. From
beyond the rivers of Ethiopia My suppliants,
even the daughter of My dispersed, shall bring
My offering. In that day shalt thou not be
ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou hast
transgressed against Me : for then I will take
away out of the midst of thee them that 'rejoice
in thy pride ; and thou shalt no more be haughty
because of My holy mountain. I will also leave
in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people,
and they shall trust in the name of the Lord.
The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor
speak lies ; neither shall a deceitful tongue be
found in their mouth : for they shall feed and
lie down, and none shall make them afraid." '
I leave it to those who are able, after a careful
study of the whole subject, to unfold the mean-
ing of this prophecy, and especially to inquire
into the signification of the words, " When the
whole earth is destroyed, there will be turned
upon the peoples a language according to their
race," ^ as things were before the confusion^ of
tongues. Let them also carefully consider the
promise, that all shall call upon the name of
the Lord, and serve Him with one consent ; also
that all contemptuous reproach shall be taken
away, and there shall be no longer any injustice,
or vain speech, or a deceitful tongue. And thus
much it seemed needful for me to say briefly,
and without entering into elaborate details, in
answer to the remark of Celsus, that he consid-
ered any agreement between the inhabitants of
Asia, Europe, and Libya, as well Greeks as Bar-
barians, was impossible. And perhaps such a
result would indeed be impossible to those who
are still in the body, but not to those who are
released from it.

CHAP. LXXIII.

In the next place, Celsus urges us " to help
the king with all our might, and to labour with
him in the maintenance of justice, to fight for
him ; and if he requires it, to fight under him,
or lead an army along with him." To this our
answer is, that we do, when occasion requires,


Zeph. iii. 7-13.

" A language to last as long as the world." — BouHfeREAi;.


668


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


[Book VIII.


give help to kings, and that, so to say, a divine
help, " putting on the whole armour of God." '
And this we do in obedience to the injunction
of the apostle, " I exhort, therefore, that first of
all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giv-
ing of thanks, be made for all men ; for kings,
and for all that are in authority ; " ^ and the more
any one excels in piety, the more effective help
does he render to kings, even more than is given
by soldiers, who go forth to fight and slay as
many of the enemy as they can. And to those
enemies of our faith who require us to bear
arms for the commonwealth, and to slay men,
we can reply : " Do not those who are priests
at certain shrines, and those who attend on
certain gods, as you account them, keep their
hands free from blood, that they may with hands
unstained and free from human blood offer the
appointed sacrifices to your gods ; and even when
war is upon you, you never enlist the priests in the
army. If that, then, is a laudable custom, how
much more so, that while others are engaged in
battle, these too should engage as the priests
and ministers of God, keeping their hands pure,
and wrestling in prayers to God on behalf of
those who are fighting in a righteous cause, and
for the king who reigns righteously, that what-
ever is opposed to those who act righteously may
be destroyed ! " And as we by our prayers van-
quish all demons who stir up war, and lead to
the violation of oaths, and disturb the peace, we
in this way are much more helpful to the kings
than those who go into the field to fight for
them. And we do take our part in public affairs,
when along with righteous prayers we join self-
denying exercises and meditations, which teach
us to despise pleasures, and not to be led away
by them. And none fight better for the king
than we do. We do not indeed fight under
him, although he require it ; but we fight on his
behalf, forming a special army — an army of
piety — by offering our prayers to God.

CHAP. LXXIV.

And if Celsus would have us to lead armies
in defence of our country, let him know that we
do this too, and that not for the purpose of being
seen by men, or of vainglory. For " in secret,"
and in our own hearts, there are prayers which
ascend as from priests in behalf of our fellow-
citizens. And Christians are benefactors of their
country more than others. For they train up
citizens, and inculcate piety to the Supreme
Being ; and they promote those whose lives in
the smallest cities have been good and worthy,
to a divine and heavenly city, to whom it may
be said, " Thou hast been faithful in the smallest


* Eph. vi. II,
2 I Tim. ii.i.


city, come into a great one," ^ where " God
standeth in the assembly of the gods, and judg-
eth the gods in the midst ; " and He reckons
thee among them, if thou no more "die as a
man, or fall as one of the princes." *

CHAP. LXXV.

Celsus also urges us to " take office in the
government of the country, if that is required
for the maintenance of the laws and the support
of religion." But we recognise in each state
the existence of another national organization,?
founded by the Word of God, and we exhort
those who are mighty in word and of blameless
life to rule over Churches. Those who are am-
bitious of ruling we reject ; but we constrain
those who, through excess of modesty, are not
easily induced to take a public charge in the
Church of God. And those who rule over us
well are under the constraining influence of the
great King, whom we believe to be the Son of
God, God the ^^'ord. And if those who govern
in the Church, and are called rulers of the divine
nation — that is, the Church — rule well, they
rule in accordance with the divine commands,
and never suffer themselves to be led astray by
worldly policy. And it is not for the purpose
of escaping public duties that Christians decline
public offices, but that they may reserve them-
selves for a diviner and more necessary service
in the Church of God — for the salvation of
men. And this service is at once necessary and
right. They take charge of all — of those that
are within, that they may day by day lead better
lives, and of those that are without, that they
may come to abound in holy words and in deeds
of piety ; and that, while thus worshipping God
truly, and training up as many as they can in the
same way, they may be filled with the word of
God and the law of God, and thus be united
with the Supreme God through His Son the
Word, Wisdom, Truth, and Righteousness, who
unites to God all who are resolved to conform
their hves in all things to the law of God.

CHAP. LXXVI.

You have here, reverend Ambrosius, the con-
clusion of what we have been enabled to accom-
plish by the power given to us in obedience to
your command. In eight books we have em-
braced all that we considered it proper to say in
reply to that book of Celsus which he entitles A
True Discourse. And now it remains for the
readers of his discourse and of my reply to judge
which of the two breathes most of the Spirit of


3 Luke xix. 17.
■♦ Ps. Ixxxii. I, 7.
5 tjv(jTi]}t.a. TraTpt5o9.
omy of the primitive Chu


[A very notable
cnes in their divei


as to the auton-


Chap. LXXVI.]


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


669


the true God, of piety towards Him, and of that
truth which leads men by sound doctrines to the
noblest life. You must know, however, that Cel-
sus had promised another treatise as a sequel to
this one, in which he engaged to supply practical
rules of living to those who felt disposed to em-
brace his opinions. If, then, he has not fulfilled
his promise of writing a second book, we may
well be contented with these eight books which
we have written in answer to his discourse. But


if he has begun and finished that second book,
pray obtain it and send it to us, that we may
answer it as the Father of truth may give us
ability, and either overthrow the false teaching
that may be in it, or, laying aside all jealousy, we
may testify our approval of whatever truth it may
contain.

Glory be to Thee, our God ; Glory be to
Thee.


1


INDEXES.


t


TERTULLIAN

PART FOURTH.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Adam, his temptation and fall, poem.

Adultery, why coupled with idolatry
and murder, 78; its condemna-
tion under the Gospel, 79; law
of Moses no precedent for judg-
ing it, 80, nor Christ's pardon
of the adulterer, 85; apostolic
judgment of, 85; St. Paul's se-
verity towards, 86-93; has no
absolution on earth, 94; testi-
mony of St. John, 95 ; Epistle
of Barnabas on, 97 ; analogy of
leprosy, 97.

Apocalypse, vision of, interpreted,
160.

Barnabas, St., Epistle of, on adultery,

97-
Bishops of Rome, early, 156.

Chameleon described, 7.

Christ, the second Adam, 149; truly

God and man, 163.
Church, the, in what sense equivalent

to the Holy Spirit, 99.
Councils, general, no, 114 (note).
Creation, poem of, 132.

Dead Sea, origin of, poem, 131.

Divine unity, poem of, 142.

Divorce a novelty among the Ro-
mans, 66.

Dress, ancient, of Carthage, 5;
changes in, 5; heathen abuses
of, 9; Christian, the pallium
(mantle), 12; ornament in wo-
man's, derived from fallen angels,
15; unfitting for Christians, 16,
22; excess in, forbidden, 17; a
temptation to sin, 19, 24.

Enoch, prophecy of, rejected by the

Jews, 15, 26 (note).
Eve, creation of, type of the Church

from Christ, 149.

Fasting, defence of Montanistic, 102 ;
prmnitive origin of, 103 ; purpose
of, 104; regulated by the law of
Moses, 104; examples in Old
and New Testaments, 105-107 ;
recognised by the heathen, 113;
extreme view's of Tertullian on,
1 14 (note) ; spiritual discipline of,
attested by modern writers, 115
(note).

Fasts, general, appointed by bishops
and observed by general coun-
cils, III.


Festivals and fasts. Christian, 112.
Free-will, condition of all obedience,
' and occasion of Adam's sin, 51.

Greece, provinces of, no, 114 (note).

Heaven and hell, poetic description

of, 138-140.
Hermas, Shepherd of, apocryphal and

erroneous, 85, loi (note) ; called

"angelic," 156.
Holy Ghost, the Vicar of Christ, 27,

38 ; apostolic gift of, 53.
Hours of prayer, origin of, 108, 109.

Increase, primitive law of, repealed
in Christian dispensation, 53, 64.

Jonah, history of, poem, 127.
Judgment, the last, poem of, 135.

Keys, power of, personal gift to St.
Peter, 99, loi (note) ; exercised
by the Holy Spirit, 100.

Lot and his wife, poem, 129-131.

Marcion, heresy of, 144; antitheses,
156.

Marriage, single only allowed, 39, 53 ;
not preferable to celibacy, 40;
heathen example in, 42, 72 ; with
heathen not lawful to Christian
women, 44 ; dangers of such mar-
riage, 46; glory of true Christian
wedlock, 48; not a good in itself,
51 ; illustrated from St. Paul, 52.

Martyrs cannot give absolution for
sin, 100.

Monogamy, law of, shown in the in-
stitution of marriage, 53, 6i ;
defended against heretics and
psychics, 59; alone typifies
Christ and the Church, 62; ex-
amples of, and of continence, in
the Gospel, 65; recognised in
prayer for deceased husoand, 67 ;
a law for all Christians, 67 ; in
what case enjoined by St. Paul,
68, 70; general argument of Ter-
tullian on, 73 (note). (See Mar-
riagg.)

Mutation, a law of nature, 6; of
people and of animal life, 7.

Old Testament, harmony of, with
New, 147.

Parables of the Lost Sheep and the
Prodigal Son not applicable to


Christians, 80; the latter inter-
preted, 82.

Paraclete (Montanist), 102, no, in,
112, 116.

Passover, the Christian, 112.

Patriarchs and prophets, types of
evangelists and apostles, 151.

Penance, early Christian, 86, loi
(note) ; remedial, 87, loi (note).

Pentateuch, purpose of, 161.

Pentecost, the Christian, 112.

Persecution, God's discipline, 116
Satan the instrument of, 117
not to be shunned as evil, 118
instance of Rutilius, 119; only
Apostles commanded to flee, 1 19
Greek proverb on, answered
121 ; instance of Jonah, 122
duty of clergy in, 122 ; not to be
bought off, 122; table of perse-
cutions of Christians, 125 (note).

Peter, St., why given the power of
the keys, 99.

Phaethon, fable of, origin in history
of Sodom, 131.

Population, Christian, in each cen-
tury, 125 (note).

Prayers for the departed, a duty con-
sequent on belief in the resur-
rection of the body, 67.

Preparation, day of, observed as a
fast, 112.

Priesthood, in what sense belonging
to the laity, 54, 58 (note).

Resurrection of the flesh, poem of,

145.
Rome, early Bishops of, 156.
Rule of faith, the Apostles' Creed, 27.
Rutilius, story of his flight from

persecution, 119.

Sabbath (Saturday) not a fast except

on Easter Eve, 112.
Sodom, destruction of, poem, 129.
Stationary (fasting) days, 103, 108.

Trinity, the Divine, included in the
Holy Spirit, 99.

Types of Christ and the Church in
the Old Testament, 157; in the
Tabernacle and Temple, 158.

Woman, generic name, not for the
married only, 30, 38 (note) ; ap-
l^lied to the Blessed Virgin, 31 ;
why the woman. is to be veiled,
31, seqq.

Worship, public, by night in times of
persecution, 125,

673


TERTULLIAN

PART FOURTH.


INDEX OF TEXTS.'


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Gen. i. 8 39

Gen. xi. 26, 27, 28. . 130

Lev. X. 9 . . . .

108

Josh. X. 12-14 • •

109

i. 9, 10 .

136

xi. 26-xii. 5

7

xi. 44 . . .

50

xxiv. 19 . .

76

i. 10 . .

132

xii. 10-20.

19

xi. 44, 45 . .

S6

Judg. viii. 22, 23 .

i

i. 26, 27

91

xiii. 8 . .

%

xiv. 33-42. .

98

xiii. 22 . .

i. 28 .

S3

xvi., xvii. .

XIV. 43-45 . .

98

I Sam. i. I, 2 . .

i. 28 .

64

xvii. 5 . .

63

xvi. 8 . . .

158

i. 7-20 . .

106

!:^o9 • •

104

xix. 4 . .

130

xvi. 29

103

i. II . . .

108

ii. 8. .

^33

xix. II. .

42

xix. 2

56

i. 15. . .

108

ii. 9-14

147

xix. 30-38

79

xix. 15
xix. 18

78

ii. 12-17 •

"3

ii. 16, 17

103

XX. . . .

19

9?

ii 22-25 .

U3

11. 19, 20

30

xxi. 12-20

151

xix. 20

iii. 20 . .

106

ii. 21, 22

53

xxii. 1-19.

147

XX. 7

56

iv. 13 . .

113

ii.23 . .

9

xxiii. 2, 3, 4

"3

XX. 21

64

iv. 17-21 .

113

11.23 .

31

xxiii. 31 .

"3

xxi. II

64

XIV. 24-45 •

109

11.23 . .

i^

xxiv. 64, 65

it

xxi. 14

§4

xvi. 7 . .

25

11. 23 .

66

XXV. 21-24

xxii. 13 . .

64

xvi. 14 . .

117

ii. 23, 24

7

xxv. 27-34

"3

xxiii. 26-29 •

103

xxviii. 11-19

153

ii. 24 .

xxvi. 6-1 1

19

xxiv. 2 . . .

159

2 Sam. xi. ...

79

11. 24 .

'I

xxvii. 15 .

19

xxiv. 20 . .

xii. 1-13 .

79

ii. 25 .

xxviii. 12

116

Num. iv. 5 . . .

158

xii. 1-14 .

99

ii.25 .

34

xxxii. 30

165

xi. 1-6 . .

105

I Kings xiii. . .

113

111. I .

131

xxxviii.

79

xii. 5-8 . .
xii. 6-8 . .

152

xvii. I . .

106

iii. 6, 7

79

xxxviii. 12

-3C

24

63

xvii. 1-6 .

108

iii.7 .

8

xlix. 4 .

86

xvi. 38 . .

129

xix. 1-8 .

154

111. 7 .

34

Ex. i. 8-16 .

72

xvii. 8 . .

159

xix. 1-8, 9

106

iii. 9 .

106

iii. 8 . .

105

XX. I-I2 . .

105

xix. 3-7 .

108

111. 15 .
iii. 16 .

17

iv. 22 .

81

XXV, 1-9 . .

xix. 13 .

106

14

xvi. 1-3 .

105

Deut. iv. 24 . . .

76

xxi. . .

79

iii. 20 .

133

xvii. 8-12

109

V. 9 . . .

76

xxi. . .

. 106

iii. 21 ,

14

XX. 5 . .

64

V.9 . . .

157

2 Kings i. 9-12

154

iii. 21 ,

3'

XX. 5. .

76

VI. 3, 4 • •

157

viii. I . .

154

iii. 21-24

8

XX. 5 . .

157

vi. 15. . .

76

xviii., xix.

106

iii. 24 .

134

XX. 12 .

64

viii. 3. . .

105

2 Chron. xxix. xxx.

iv. . .

135

xxi. 24 .

54

viii. 12-14 •

105

xxxi. . . .

;s

^''■^ '

135

xxiii. 20-23

152

ix. II . . .

105

2 Chron. xxxii. . .

IV. 18, 19

g

xxiv. 18 .

11

ix. 25 . . .

105

Job i. 12 . . . .

117

iv. 19-24

xxv. 10, II

X. 17 . . .

54

i. 21 . . . .

5°

V. 21 .

15

xxvii. 20

xi. 26 . . .

71

v. 18 . . . .

76

V. 28, 29

IS

xxviii. 36

138

xviii. 17-19

152

xiv. 19 . . .

:ii

IS

xxxii.

25

xix. 21 . .

54

xxix. 22 . . .

vi. I, 2.

32

xxxii. 6 .

. 105

xxii. 13-21 .

ii

xxxii. 21 . .

. 78

vi. 3 .

59

xxxii. 20

• 25

xxiii. 19 . .

Ps.i. I ....

. 79

Vi.V:

151

xxxii. 32

. 122

xxv. 5, 6. .

64

vii. 12 . . .

• 76

IS

xxxiii. 18, I

9

. 105

XXX. I . .

71

xviii. 25, 26

. 56

vi. 19, 20

62

xxxiv. 4-9

. 105

XXX. 15 . .

71

xviii. 25, 26

. 94

vii. I .

151

xxxiv. 6, 7

: Ii

XXX. 19 . .

71

xix. 4 . . . .

. 120

vii.3 .

62

xxxiv. 14

xxxii. 2 . .

158

xix. 7 . . . .

. 79

vii. 7 .

62

xxxiv. 28

. 105

xxxii. 15. .

105

xxiv. 7 . . .

. 123

ix. 2-s .

104

xxxiv. 29-35

: '."si

xxxii. 39. .

7^

xxv. 7 . . .

21

ix. 5, 6.

104

xxxvii. I, 2

xxxii. 39. .

118

xxvi. 4, 5, 6 .

94

IX. 21, 22

129

xxxix. 30 .

138

xxxiv. 9-12.

■^3

xxix. 3 . . .

• %

X. 8-17

129

Lev. iii. 17 .

. 105

xxxiv.

10 .

xxxvii. 27 . .

674


TERTULLIAN: INDEX OF .TEXTS.


675


Ps. xxxix. 12
xl. 28 .
xlix. 14
1. 16, 18
li.4 .
li. 17 .
li. 18, 19
Ixix. 23
Ixxviii. 25
Ixxviii. 30, 3
Ixxxvi. 4
xcii. 12 .
xcvii. 3 .
cii. 9 . .
cvi. 31-33
cxix. 105
cxix. 144
cxxxiii. .
cxxxvi. 12
cxxxvii. 4
cxliv. 7 .
cxliv. II .
cxlvii. 6 .

Prov. vi. 32-34
viii. 36
xvi. 26

Eccles. iii. i
iii. I
vi. 7

Isa. i. 2-4
i. 10-15


VI.

vi. 9 .
vi. 9, 10
vi. 10
xi. I, 2
xxii. 13
XXV. 8
xxix. 21
xxxvi., xxxvii
xlii. 9
xlii. 14
xliii. 18
xlv. 7
xlv. 7

xlv. 21

Iii. n

liii.7.

liv. I .

Iviii. 3, 4,

Iviii. 3-7

Ixiv. 4
Jer. ii. 13.

IV. 3 .

vi. 20

vii. II

vii. 16

xi. 14

xiv. II, 1

xvii. 10

XX. 7, 8

xxxi. 29,

xxxi. 34

xxxiv. 8-

xliv. 19
Lam. iii. 41


Ezek.


ix. 4, 6
xvi. 49
xviii. 1-4
xviii. 23
xviii. 32
xxxiii. II


PAGE

106
137
94
98
104
113
44

■si
105

108

80
163
III
104

47
83

36
94
129

105
27
61

'tl

157
43

i

160


147

160
114

151

82
106
78
76
78
76
118
76
94
123

151
112

103
146
151

78

157

u

76
76

II

64

14
154
149
105
138

106

64

75
75
75


Ezek. xxxiii. 11
xxxiv. 1-4
Dan. i.


VI. 10 .
ix. I, 3, 4
ix. 20, 21
ix. 23
X. 1-3
X. 5.


Hos. i. 2, 3
iii. 1-3

V. 7 .
vi. 6
Joel ii. 15
Amos viii. I
Jonah i., iv.
iii. .
Mic. vi. 8 .
Nahum i. 2
Hab. ii. 4.
Hag. ii. 6, 7
Zech. vii. 5
xiii. 7
Xlii. 9
Mai. iii. 16
Matt. iii. 9
iii. 9
iii. 10


IV. 3

IV. 4

iv. 12
v-3

V. 3
V. 6
V. 9
V. 9

V. II

V. 14,

V. 17

V. 17

V. 17

V. 17

V. 20

V. 21, 22

V. 23, 24
V. 27, 28
V. 28 .
V. 28 .
V. 32 .
V. 32 .
V. 36 .
V- 38, 39
V. 42 .
V. 42 .


VI. 13 .
vi. 16-18
vi. 24 .
vi. 25-34
vi. 26 .
vi. 27 .
vi. 28-30
vi. 31 .
vi. 34 .
vi. 34 .
vii. I .
vii. 2 .


PAGE

94
81

107
90
108
109
109
107
107
107
107
107
79

Z9
83

75

"P

84
106

75
76
54
72
106
122
118


PAGE

vii. 6 . . . . 46

Matt. xxii. 30 . . ,

vii. 13, 14

114

xxii. 37-40 .

viii. 21, 22

64

xxii. 39 . .

viii. 30-34

^3

xxiii. 1-3

ix. 10, n

83

xxiii. 8 . .

ix. 12 . .

83

xxiii. 8 . .

ix. 13 •

75

xxiii. 8 . .

IX. 14, IS

103

xxiii. 9 . .

X. 5 .

119

xxiii. 35 . .

X. 8 .

76

xxiv. 12 .

X. 17 .

119

xxiv. 13 .

X. 22 .

120

xxiv. 19 .

X. 23 .

40

xxiv. 19 .

X. 23 .

119

Xxiv. 29 .

X. 26 .

36

XXV. 8, 9 .

X. 28 .

76

XXV. 31-33

X. 28 .

120

XXV. 32, 33

X. 29 .

5°

XXV. 44 .

X. 29 .

66

XXV. 46

X. 29 .

118

xxvi. 28

X. 32. 33

120

xxvi. 38

X; 37. 38

120

xxvi. 39

XI. 7-15

148

xxvi. 41

xi. 9 .

65

xxvi. 41

xi. 13 .

78

xxvi. 41

xi. 13 .

103

xxvii. 33

XI. 19 .

f5

xxvii. 45-54 .

xi. 19 .

•83

xxvii. 51-54 .

xi. 19 .

103

xxvii. 55, 56 .

xi. 21 .

84

Mark i. 29, 30 . . .

xi. 23, 24

106

ii. 7 .

xi. 30 .

59

ii. 9-1 1

xii. 7 .

75

ii. 15, 16
ii. 18-20

xii. 32.

87

XI 1. 38-41

129

iv. 21 .

xiii. 52

112

iv. 28 .

XV. II.

103

V. II .

xvi. 13-19

65

v. 11-14

XVI. 18, 19

99

vi. 27 .

xvii. 1-8 .

65

vii. 15

xvii. 1-13

105

viii. 38

xvii. 4 .

106

ix. 1-13

xvii. 21

107

ix. 2-9

xviii. 1-4

65

ix. 5 .

xviii. II

li

IX. 17 .

xviii. 20

ix. 29 .

xviii. 20

99

X. 5 •

xviii. 22

98

X.8 .

xix. 3-8

66

x. 13-15

xix. 5 .

48

X. 17-27

xix. 5, 6

40

X. 18 .

xix. 6 .

62

X. 23, 24

xix. 8 .

66

X. 28 .

xix. 12

23

xi. 17 .

xix. 12

42

xii. 18-27

xix. 12

60

xii. 18-27

xix. 12

64

xii. 24, 25

xix. 12

65

xii. 25 .

xix. 12

71

xii. 25

xix. 12

125

xii. 29, 3c

)

xix. 13-15

65

xii. 31

XIX. 16-26

71

xiv. 24

xix. 17 .

75

XV. 23

xix. 19 .

19

XV. 42

xix. 23, 24

48

xvi. 33-3

9

xix. 27 .

'5'

Luke 1. 17 .

XX. 1-16 .

. 67

i. 26, 27

x.\i. 13 .

75

i.38 .

xxii. 11-14

83

1 52 .

xxii. 14 .

125

i. 76 .

xxii. 21 .

124

ii-3o •

xxii. 23-33

39

11. 3(^38

xxii. 23-33

. 64

iii ^i '

xxii. 29, 30

58

xxii. 30

• '5

iii. 8 .

676


TERTULLIAN: INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Luke iii. 8 . . .

98

Luke xxiv. 39 . . . 41

Acts xiii. 17-19 . . 7

I Cor.i. 27, 28 . . . 117

iii. 12. . .

84

xxiv. 48, 49

158

XV. 7-11 ,

99

ii. 2 .

88

iii. 14. . .

84

John i. 1-14 . .

62

XV. 10 .

63

ii. 6 .

82

iv. I, 2 . .

107

i. II .

161

XV. 10 .

79

ii. 6, 7

10

iv. 3 . . .

107

i. 14 .

79

XV. 28, 29

1^

ii. 8 .

83

iv.4 . . .

'S^

i.14 .

XV. 30 .

ii. 9 .

146

V. 21 . . .

83

ii. i-ii

65

xvi. 1-3

94

11. 14 .

103

V. 21 . . .

98

ii. 19 .

91

xvi. 3 .

70

iii. 2 .

68

V. 29, 30 . .

83

ii. 19-22

158

xvi. 4 .

86

iii. 8 .

67

V; 33-35- •

103

48

iii. 6 .

150

xix. . .

143

iii. 16 .

46

VI. 20 . . .

iii. 21 .

25

xix. 19 .

15

iii. 16.

80

vi. 21

112

iii. 34 .

114

XX. 9-12

98

iii. 16, 17

18

vi. 25

112

iv. 1-25

85

XX. 28 .

46

iii. 16, 17, I

91

vi. 30

. 67

iv. 16-18

■ 65

XX. 28 .

80

iii. 21 . .

20

vi-35

84

iv. 31-34

. 112

xxi. 13 .

120

iv. 3 .

25

VI. 36

75

V. 33-35

14S

xxi. 20-26

70

IV. 7 .

il

vi. 37

76

V. 34 • ■

• 11

xxii. 28

100

IV. 7 .

vii. 24-30 .

148

V. 44 .

xxiii. 2 .

88

iv. 8 .

88

vii. 26 . .

65

vi. 27 .

112

xxiv. 26

123

iv.8 .

no

vii. 34 . .

65

vii. 37-39

'y

xxviii. 17-29

147

iv. 15.

63

vii. 34 . .

103

viii, 39

63

xxviii. 26, 27

105

V. I .

?(■

viii. 1-3 . .

. 65

X. II .

. 80

Rom. i. I . . .

89

V. 2 .

87

viii. 16 . .

20

X. 12 .

. 122

i. 17 .

54

v-3 •

90

viii. 18 . .

122

X. 27 .

. 80

i. 28 .

147

V. 3 •

III

viii. 32, 33 •
ix. 26 . . .

83

xii. 40 .

. 105

ii. 13 .
ii. 28, 29

54

V. 5 •

7^

120

xii. 43 .

28

40

V. 5 •

86

ix. 28-36 .

65

xiv. 2 .

67

iii. 26 .

76

V. 6 .

20

ix. 28-36 .

105

xiv. 16

• 27

iii. 29 .

80

V.6 .

88

ix. 33 . . •

106

xiv. 26

27

111. 31 .

79

V. 6 .

. 94

ix. 59, 60 .

H

xiv. 26

109

iv. . .

63

v.6-9

. 147

ix. 62 . . .

7f

xiv. 27

48

iv. II .

i^

V. 9-11

. 94

X. 12-14. .

106

XIV. 30

. 149

iv. II, 12

63

V. II .

• 45

x. 13 . . .

84

XV. 2 .

. 146

iv. 16 .

19

V. 12 .

. 76

X. 27 . . .

19

XV. 4, 5, 6

146

vi. 1-12

93

V. 12 .

. 96

xi. 3 . . .

112

XV. 26 . .

99

vi. 3 •

72

vi. I, 2, ;;

• 47

XI. 4 . . .

76

xvi. 12, 13

27

VI. 13 •

164

vi. 1-6

. 76

xi. 29, 30 .

129

xvi. 12, 13

59

vi. 19 .

164

vi. 3 •

• l^

xi.33. . .

7I

xvi. 13 .

28

vii. I .

44

VI. 3 .

. 88

xn.4,5 • •

xvi. 13

109

vii. 1-3

66

vi. 9, 10, II

• 91

xii. 48 . .

104

xvi. 14 .

60

vii. 2, 3

70

vi. 13. 14

• 91

xii. 50 . .

100

xix. 17 .

158

vii. 6 .

70

VI. 15. .

. 46

xiii. 24 . .

114

xix. 19, 20

158

vii. 12.

79

VI. 15-17

VI. 18, 19, 2C

• 91

XV. I, 2 . .

^3

xix. 33, 34

100

vii. 18

93

• 91

XV. 3-7 . .

80

XX. 17 . .

41

viii. 2 .

93

vi. 19, 20

. 18

XV. 8-10 . .

80

XX. 22

158

viii. 3-5

vi. 19, 20

. 46

XV. 23 . .

83

XX. 23

76

viii. 5, 6
viii. 6, 7,

vi. 19, 20

80

xvi. 9 . . .

124

XX. 23

99

5

93

vii. . .

29

xvi. 13 . .

46

Acts i. 4 .

150

viii. 8 .

114

vii. .

40

xvi. 15 . .

7I

i- 4. 5
i. 6-8

143

viii. 12

93

vii.

51

xvi. 16 . .

158

viii. 23
viii. 26

150

vii. .

162

xvi. 16 . .

103

ii. 1-4

108

61

vii. I .

60

xvi. 19-31 .

Isi

ii. 13

108

viii. 32

123

vii. I, 2

68

xvi. 19-31 .

ii. 15

108

ix. 4 .

81

vii. 1-3

91

xvii. 28, 29 .

42

ii. 22

99

ix. 10-13

82

vii. 5 .

33

xviii. I . .

108

iii. i-ii

98

X. 10 .

103

vii. 5 .

59

xviii. 18-27 •

71

iii. 22, 23

152

xi. 11-36

82

vii. 5 .

56

xviii. 19 . .

'i

iv. 34, 35

123

xi. 17-20

146

vii. 6-8

44

xviii. 24, 25

v. 1-16.

xi. 22 .

76

vii. 7 .

45

xviii. 28 . .

151

V. 13-16

98

xii. 6 .

82

vii. 7 .

60

xix. 15 . .

56

vii. 2-4

7

xii. 15.

III

vii. 8, 9

52

xix. 46 . .

75

vii. 15 .

7

xii. 17.

25

vii. 8, 9

92

XX. 26-38 .

64

vii. 37 .

152

xii. 17.

54

vii. 9 .

75

XX. 27-40 .

^2

vii. 45 •

7

xiii. 9 . .

^9

vii. 12-14

44

XX. 34-36 .

58

viii. 20 .

123

xiii. 12, I

5

80

vii. 14 .

45

XX. 35, 36 .

15

ix. 15 .

IX. 36-43

xiii. 13

108

vii. 15, 16, I

7

45

XX. 35.36 •
XX. 36 . .

67

xiii. 13

"3

vii. 16

47

39

X. . .

143

xiii. 14

72

vii. 21, 22

28

xxi. 23 . .

42

X. 1-4 .

107

xiv. 4 .

76

vii. 26-28

92

xxi. 23 . .
xxi. 26 . .

72

X. 9 . .

108

xiv. 13

44

vii. 27, 28

43

137

X. 28 .

83

xiv. 17

112

vii. 27, 28

52

xxii. 20 . .

112

X. 30 .

107

xiv. 20, 21

112

vii. 29 .

42

xxii. 21 . .

85

X. 44-46

107

XV. 5 .

11

vii. 29 .

60

xxii. 31, 32 .

"7

''i;.3- •

83

I Cor. i. 14, 15

vii. 29 .

61

xxi ii. 39-43.

100

xiii. 46 .

120

i. 21 .

83

vii. 29, 30

23

xxiii. 4

4-47-

109

xiii. 6-1

2

99

i. 26, 27

48

vii. 31

23

TERTULLIAN

: INDEX OF

TEXTS.

677

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

I Cor. vii. 32 . . . 20

2 Cor. V. I .... 151

Eph. v. 3 93

I Tim. ii. 7 . . . . 89

vii. 32-34

60

V- 4

43

V. 5, 6 .

93

ii. II, 12

33

vii- 32-35

55

V- 5

150

V. 7, 8 .

^t

ii. 14 .

148

vii. 34

20

V- 17

79

V. II .

98

iii. I, 2

54

vii. 34

29

V. 17

112

V. II, 12

94

iii. 1-7

69

vii. 35

40

vi. 14-16

15

V. 12 .

93

iv. I .

no

vii- 35

41

vi. 16-18

90

V. 16 .

121

iv. I, 2,

103

vii. 37

60

vi._i7. .

94

V. 18 .

93

iv. 1-3 ~

71

vii. 38, 3c

). 4

0

92

viii. 21

25

V. 19 .

"^l

IV. 4, 5

23

vii. 39

44

X.9

V. 19 .

48

iv. 10

75

vii. 39

P

xi. 2

98

V. 26, 27

^i

iv. 15

56

vii. 39

64

xi. 2

157

V. 31 .

48

V. 9 .

33

vii. 39

68

xi. 18

20

V. 31 .

53

V. 9, 10

43

vii. 40

60

xi. 20

88

V.32 .

103

V. 10 .

46

viii. 2.

88

xi. 27

107

VI. 9 .

54

V.13.

43

viii. 5, 6

'&

xii. I

\'.l

vi. 12 .

114

V. 14 .

70

viii. 7 .

xii. 7

vi. 16 .

121

V. 17 .

114

viii. 8.

103

xii. 7-

[0

87

vi. 18 .-

108

V. 22 .

94

viii. 12

88

xii. 9

87

Phil. i. 20 .

24

:ei:

108

ix. 1 .

88

xii. 9

117

i. 23 .

41

41

ix. i-S

65

xii. 10

20

I. 23

57

2 Tim. i. 15 .

iiS

• i.x. 4, 5

55

xii. 12

47

11. 4 . .

19

ii- 3. 4

56

i.K. 6 .

97

xii. 21

90

ii. 10 .

157

ii. 17, 18

144

ix. 9-18

U

Gal. i. 14 .

75

iii. 3 .

23

ii. 19.

41

ix. 15.

iMo-

79

iii- 3 •

40

iii. I .

. no

IX. 19 .

III

ii. 18

89

111.3,4.

20

iii- 1-5

74

ix. 22 .

70

iii., iv.

63

iii. 8 .

45

iii. 16

16

ix. 27 .

107

iii., iv.

70

iii. 12 .

45

Tit. i. 5, 6 .

54

X. 7 .

105

!i!-7-

63

iii. 12 .

47

i. 6 . .

43

X.8 .

79

54

iii. 13 .

78

i.6-9 .

69

X. II .

23

!i!- '3

123

iii. 13, 14

40

1.15,16.

147

X. II .

40

III. 20

157

iii. 15 .

109

III. 5 . .

74

X. II .

42

iii. 27

64

iii. 19 .

36

Heb. i. 3 . .

164

X. 23 .

24

III. 27

r

iii. 19 .

43

i. 14 .

129

X. 23 .

49

ii!- -7

80

iv. 3 .

41

ii. 10 .

56

X.53 .

54

iii. 28

15

IV. 3 .

156

iv. 15 .

'y?

X. 24 .

19

iv. 4 .

31

iv. 5 .

25

V. 11-14

68

X. 25 .

103

iv. 10

103

iv. 8 .

25

vi. I .

97

xi. . .

37

iv. 10

III

iv. 19 .

41

vi. I .

147

xi. 2 .

59

iv. 19

70

Col. i. 10 . .

56

vi. 4-8 .

97

xi. 2-16

22

IV. 19-31

151

ii. 5 . .

III

vi. 6 .

83

xi. 3 .

31

IV. 21-31

63

ii. 9 . .

158

vii. 19 .

159

XI. 3 .

32

iv. 27 .

151

ii. II .

40

vii. 26-vii

100

xi.6 .

37

iv. 28, 31

63

ii. 13, 14

96

viii. II

'4

xi. 7 .

50

iv. 31

22

ii. 14, 15

142

i.x. 3 .

158

XI. 10 .

^l

V. I .

79

iii- 5 •

93

IX. 3, 4

158

xi. 14 .

36

V. I .

103

iii. 8 .

93

IX. 7 .

'59

XI. 14, 15

32

V. 2-6

94

iii. 16 .

48

ix. II, 12

159

xi. 16.

E

V. 12

75

iii. 25 .

54

ix. 11-20

85

xii. 27

V- 13

22

IV. 2 . .

108

ix. 13 .

i5>.

xiii. 5 .

19

V-I3

79

I Thess. ii. 3

92

IX. 14 .

147

xiii. II

75

V. 14

19

ii. 12

56

ix. 19 .

158

xiii. 12

157

V. 17

59

iv. 3

50

ix. 19-22

157

xiv. 34, 3

5

3J

V. 19-21

92

jv- 3-5

92

IX. 26 .

40

XIV. 35

28

V. 19-21

93

IV. 13-17

22

X. I . .

IS7

XV. II

95

vi. 7 . .

76

V. 4, 5 -

80

X. I . .

159

XV. 22

72

Eph. i. 4 .

23

v-5

12!

X.38 .

54

XV. 22

149

i. 9, 10

62

V. 14

121

xi. I .

19

XV. 32

72

i- 13. 14

150

V. 16

54

xi. 13 .

56

XV. 32

100

1.23

70

V. 17

108

xi. 40 .

27

XV. 32

114

ii. I .

147

V. 21

37

xii. 2 .

149

XV. 33

43

ii. 2 ,

137

V. 23

22

xii. 24 .

27

XV. 45, 47

149

ii. 3.

93

2 Thess. ii. 15

59

xii. 26, 27

72

XV. 46

62

II. 12

45

ii: '5
111. 0

75

xiii. 12, 13

ii;S

XV. 50

22

ii. 19

45

59

Jas. ii. 8 . . .

19

XV. 53

21

iii. 14,

5

157

iii. 6

88

iii. I . .

156

XV. 53

43

iv. I

56

iii. 6

94

iv. 13-15

■;6

XV. 54

151

iv. 1-6

28

iii. II

88

V. 17 . .

105

XV. 58

iv. 4, 5, 6

157

iii. 14,

15

87

v. 17 . .

154

2 Cor. i. 22 .

"i

iv. 5, 6.

54

I Tim. i. I-?, 16

95

I Pet. i. 15 .

61

ii. 5-1 1

iv. 17-20

93

i. 15.

95

i. 16 .

50

Hi. 6 .

93

iv. 22. 23

107

i. 19 .

87

i. 17 .

=;4

iv. I, 2

90

IV. 26 .

97

i. 20 .

87

i. 19 .

91

iv. 4 .

83

iv. 27 .

121

i. 20 .

118

I. 20 .

23

V. I .

21

iv. 28, :

9

93

ii. 2 .

43

iii. I .

47

ej^


TERTULLIAN: INDEX OF TEXTS.


I Pet.


I John i.


PAGE

II . . .

63

i8. . .

100

20. . .

62

21 . . .

«3

1-4 . .

99

2, 3 • •

1^6

17 . . .

15'

20 . . .

19

S-14 • •

129

10. . .

138

16. . .

109

I, 2 . .

155

5, 6, 7, 8, 9

96

5-7 • •

80

. I, 2 . .

9b

John ii. 6


11.29


IV. 15

iv. 18

V. 16
V. 16,

2 John 7-10.


3 John ir
Jude 7 . .
14, 15
3


Rev.


i. 6
i. 20


!'• 5


11. 12
ii. 18
ii. 18,


PAGE
63

45
16
94

l\

90
90

15
90
90
90

95
90
90


Rev.


14 .

IV. 3. .

V. 5 . .
vi. 4 . .
vi. 8. .
vi. 9, 10
vii. 3
viii. 3, 4
xii. 9 .
xvii. . .
xxi. 4 .
xxi. 8 .
xxi. 8 .
xxii. 14, 15


PAGE
90
17

149
98
98

159

160

42
24
78

95
120
96


MINUCIUS FELIX.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Abortion, a heathen crime, 192.

Britain, climate of, 182.

»

Carthage, Church of, influence on
Latin theology, 169 (note).

Christ, Saviour because divine, 191.

Christians, low condition of, 175, 180;
calumnies against, 177, 190, 191 ;
purity of, 192; mutual love, 193;
spiritual worship and sacrifice,
193; free from crime, 195; glory
in martyrdom, 196; hope in
death, 197.

Cross, not worshipped by Christians,
191 ; sign of, recognised by hea-
then, 191.

Darius Hystaspes chosen by augury,

19S (note).
Demons, recognised by heathen as

well as Christians, 189; their

power over man, 190; subject to

Christians, 190.


Fate, only God's decree, 195.
Flowers, Christian use of, 197.

God, knowledge of, necessary to self-
knowledge, 181 ; proved by order
of nature, 182 ; by nature of man,
182; His unity proved, 183;
taught by heathen poets and phil-
osophers, 1S3, 184; spiritual na-
ture of, 193; government of the
Jews, 193.

Gods, heathen, recognised by Ro-
mans, 176; called elements by
Zeno, 184; absurd fables of,
184-186; impious rites of wor-
ship, 187-188, 191.

Incest, heathen, not Christian, 192.

Jews forsake God before forsaken by
Him, 193.

Man imperishable with God, 194,

198 (note).
Martyrdom, Christian, glory of, 196.


Minucius, his Latinity, 169 (note).

Octaviits, The, date, MSS. and edi-
tions, 170 (note), 198 (note).
Ostia, marine battles of, 173.

Philosophers, Greek, opinions of, on
the gods, 182 ; prove Divine
Unity, 184.

Poverty no evil to Christians, 195.

Providence denied by heathen, 175.

Resurrection proved by course of

nature, 194.
Roman power originated in violence,

not religion, 188.
Rome, church of, silence in first three

centuries, 169 (note).

Simonides, answer of, on the nature

of the gods, iSo.
Socrates quoted on celestial matters,

179.

World, destruction of, probable, 194.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


Job xiv. 7-15


194 I Jer. xvii. 5-7 .


PACE I

191 I I Cor. XV. 36


PAGE

194 I I Tim. iv. 7


PAGE

178


679


COMMODIANUS.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Antichrist, coming of, 211.

Catechumens, counsel to, 212.
Commodianus, history of, 202; sec-
ond poem, 219.
Cross, the Tree of Life, 210.

Demons, giants of Noah's day, 203.


Funeral pomp reproved, 218.

Gods, heathen, absurd fables of, 203.

Judgment, last, 212.

Matrons, adorning of, 214.
Millenium, after first resurrection,
211,218.


Pastor counselled, 218.
Penitents, counsel to, 212.

Resurrection taught in the Law, 203 ;
by Abel, 208.

Worship, abuse of, 218.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


Gen. vi. 3 . .
Deut. xxxii. 8, 9
Ps. xxxiii. 6 . .
civ. 29, 30 .
Prov. ii. 5 . .

XV. I . .


PAGE
254

245
217


Prov. xxiii. i
Dan. iii. 22 ,
Mark xii. 42 ,
Luke xii. 10 ,
xxi. 2 ,
John XX. 22 ,


PAGE

217
211
217
252
217
254


Acts i. 8 . .

1 Cor. xii. 3 .

xii. 4-7
xii. II

2 Cor.vi. 10 .
Gal. V. 22


PAGE

254
254

255

III

252


Eph. i. 21
Heb. i. 14
Rev. ii. 9 .
iii. 14


PAGE

256
256


ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


BOOK I pp. 395-428

Preface. — Origen undertakes this treatise at the
desire of Ambrose, but thinks it unnecessary, as
the facts and doctrines of Christianity form its best
defence ; work begun on one plan and carried on
on another.

First objection of Celsus is, that Christians enter
into secret associations, some of which are illegal, —
his object being to discredit the " love-feasts " of the
Christians: Answer of Origen, c. i. Second objec-
tion of Celsus, that Judaism, on which Christianity
depends, had a barbarous origin : Answer, c. ii.
Celsus objects that Christians practise their doc-
trines in secret to avoid the penalty of death : An-
swer, c. iii. Morality of Christianity neither vener-
able nor new : Answer, c. iv. Celsus approves of
the views of Christians respecting idolatry, but
asserts that these views are prior to Christianity:
Answer, c. v. Asserts that the miracles of Chris-
tianity were performed by means of the invoca-
tion of demons : Answer, c. vi. That Christianity
is a secret system of belief : Answer, c. vii. Main-
tains that a man should die for his belief ; incon-
sistency of this with his profession as an Epi-
curean, c. viii. Maintains that reason ought to
be the guide of men in adopting opinions, and
charges Christians with inculcating a blind belief:
Answer, cc. ix.-xi. Boast of Celsus, that he is ac-
quainted with all the opinions of the Christians,
shown to be unfounded, c. xii. Misrepresentation
by Celsus of the statement in i Cor. iii. 18, 19 : Cor-
rection and explanation, c. xiii. Inconsistency of
Celsus in accepting the accounts of Greeks and Bar-
barians as to their antiquity, while rejecting the his-
tories of the Jews, cc. xiv.-xvi. Celsus objects to
giving an allegorical signification to the Jewish his-
tory; inconsistency of this, c. xvii. Challenges a
comparison between the writings of Linus, Musaeus,
etc., and the laws of Moses : Answer, c. xviii. Cel-
sus holds that the world was uncreated, and yet is
led to admit that it is comparatively modern, cc.
xix., XX. Celsus asserts that Moses borrowed his
doctrines from wise nations and eloquent men, and
thus obtained the reputation of divinity : Answer,
c. xxi. Circumcision, according to Celsus, first
practised by the Egyptians : Answer, c. xxii. The
followers of Moses, shepherds and herdsmen, were
led to believe in the unity of God through delusion
and vulgar conceit : Answer, c. xxiii. Various
names given to the one God by the followers of
Moses, all evincing their ignorance of His nature:
Discussion regarding the significance of the divine
names in various languages, cc. xxiv., x.xv. Celsus
charges the Jews with worshipping angels and prac-


tising sorcery: Answer, cc. xxvi., xxvii. Inconsis-
tency of Celsus in mtroducing a Jew, as an opponent
of Jesus, who does not maintain the character of a
Jew throughout the discussion : This Jew repre-
sented as accusing Jesus of having "invented his
birth from a virgin," and upbraiding Him with "be-
ing born in a certain Jewish village of a poor woman
of the country who gained her subsistence by spin-
ning, and who was turned out of doors by her
husband, a carpenter by trade, because she was con-
victed of adultery ; and after being driven away by
her husband and wandering about for a time, she
disgracefully gave birth to Jesus, an illegitimate
child, who, having hired himself out as a servant in
Egypt on account of his poverty, and having there
acquired some miraculous powers, on which the
Egyptians greatly pride themselves, returned to his
own country, highly elated on account of them, and
by help of them proclaimed himself a god," c.
xxviii. Preliminary remarks to a full answer to
these charges, cc. xxix.-.xxxii. Proof that the birth
of Christ from a virgin was predicted by the proph-
ets, cc. xxxiii.-xxxv. Proof that prophets existed
among the Jews, c. xxxvi. Possibility of the mirac-
ulous birth of Christ, c. xxxvii. Answer to the
assertion that Jesus wrought His miracles by magic,
and not by divine power, c. xxxviii. Scoffs of Cel-
sus regarding the mother of Jesus not deserving of
answer, c. xxxix. Celsus charges the narrative in
Matthew regarding the dove which alighted ui^on
the Saviour at His baptism with being fictitious;
shows great want of method and order in the manner
in which he brings his charges, c. xl. Answer, cc.
xli.-xlviii. Celsus sets aside the fact that the com-
ing of Jesus was predicted by the Jewish prophets,
perhaps because he was not acquainted with the
prophecies relating to Christ : Inconsistency of rep-
resenting the Jew as saying, " My prophet once de-
clared in Jerusalem that the Son of God will come
as the judge of the righteous and the punishcr of
the wicked," cc. xlix., 1. Detailed evidence from
prophecy respecting the birth of Christ, cc. li.-liii.
.'\nswer to objection of Celsus regarding the suffer-
ings of Christ, cc. liv.-lvi. Celsus asserts that every
man, born according to the decree of Divine Provi-
dence, is a son of God : Answer, c. Ivii. The Jew
of Celsus goes on to misrejiresent the Gospel ac-
count of the visit of the Magi, and of the slaughter
of the innocents by Herod : .Answer, cc. Iviii.-lxi.
Calumnies of Celsus regarding the number and
character and conduct of the disciples of Jesus:
Answer, cc. Ixii.-lxv. The absurdity of the story of
our Lord's removal when an infant, is, according to
Celsus, a proof that He was not divine: .Answer,
c. Ixvi. Celsus denies that the works of Jesus were
681


682


ORIGEN: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


at all remarkable as compared with those attributed
to Perseus and Amphion, and other mythological
personages, but admits afterwards that some of
them were remarkable, — such as His cures, and
His resurrection, and the feeding of the multitude, —
although he immediately afterwards compares them
to the tricks of jugglers, and denies that they can
furnish any proof of His being " Son of God : " An-
swer, cc. Ixvii., Ixviii. Objection of Celsus that the
body of Jesus could not have been that of a god,
nor could be nourished with sucH food as Jesus par-
took of : Answer, cc. Ixix., Ixx. Declares that opin-
ions of Jesus were those of a wicked and God-hated
sorcerer : Answer, c. Ixxi.

BOOK n pp. 429-464

This book contains Origen's answers to the
charges which Celsus, in the person of a Jew, brings
against the converts from Judaism to Christianity.
Main charge is, that " they have forsaken the law of
their fathers, in consequence of their minds being
led captive by Jesus ; that they have been most
ridiculously deceived ; and that they have become
deserters to another name and to another mode of
life." Answer to these charges, c. i. Digression
upon certain declarations of Jesus in the Gospels,
c. ii. Ignorance of Celsus evinced by the^ manner
in which he represents the Jew as addressing the
Israelitish converts, c. iii. Objection of Jew, that
Christianity takes its origin from Judaism, and that
after a certain point it discards Judaism : Answer,
c. iv. Assertion of Celsus, that Jesus was punished
by the Jews for His crimes, already answered, c. v.
Observance by Jesus of Jewish usages and sacrifi-
cial observances, no argument against His recogni-
tion as the Son of God, c. vi Language of Jesus
furnishes not the slightest evidence, but the reverse,
of arrogance : Quotations, c. vii. Allegation, that
when men are willing to be deceived, many persons
like Jesus would find a friendly reception; incon-
sistency of this ; various other charges disposed of,
c. viii. Assertion of Celsus, that Jesus could not
be deemed a god because He was currently reported
to have performed none of His promises, and, after
conviction and sentence, was found attempting to
conceal Himself and endeavouring to escape, and
was then betrayed by His disciples ; impossibility of
such things, according to Celsus, happening to a
god: Answer to these calumnies and objections, cc.
ix.-xi. Assertion of Celsus, that Jesus was inferior
to a brigand chief, because He was betrayed by His
disciples : Answer, c. xii. Celsus asserts that he
omits mention of many things in the life of Christ
which he could state to His disadvantage ; chal-
lenged to produce such : Several predictions of
Jesus quoted and commented on, c. xiii. Celsus
makes light of the admission that future events
were predicted by Jesus : Remarks of Origen in an-
swer, c. xiv. Assertion of Celsus, that the disciples
of Jesus devised the fiction that He foreknew every-
thing before it happened: Answer, c xv. Asserts
that the disciples wrote the accounts they have
given by way of extenuating the charges against
Him • Answer, c. xvi. Celsus alleges that a pru-
dent man — much more a god or spirit — would
have tried to escape dangers that were foreseen,
whereas Jesus did the reverse : Answer, c. xvii.
Objection of Celsus, that the announcements which
Jesus made regarding those disciples who were to
betray and deny Him had not the effect of deter-
ring them from their treason and perjurv, shown to
be self-contradictory, c. xviii. Further statement of
Celsus, that in such cases intending criminals aban-
don their intentions, shown to be untrue, c. xix.
Objection, that if Jesus had been a god, His pre-


dictions must infallibly have come to pass; and
assertion, that He plotted against the members of
His own table : Refuted, cc. xx.-xxii. Assertion,
that the things which He suffered could have been
neither painful nor distressing, because He sub-
mitted to them voluntarily and as a god, c. xxiii.
Misrepresentation of Celsus as to the language em-
ployed by Jesus during His sufferings, cc. xxiv., xxv.
Celsus charges the disciples with having invented
statements : Answer, c. xxvi. Alleges that Chris-
tian believers have corrupted the Gospel in order to
be able to reply to objections : Answer, c. xxvii. The
Jew of Celsus reproaches Christians with making
use of the prophets : Answer, c. xxviii. Assertion
of Celsus, that from such signs and misinterpre-
tations, and from proofs so mean, no one could
prove Jesus to be god and the Son of God : An-
swer, c. XXX. Charges Christians with sophistical
reasoning in saying that the Son of God is the
Logos Himself: Refutation, c. xxxi. Objection of
Celsus to our Lord's genealogy : Refutation, c.
xxxii. Celsus ridicules the actions of Jesus as un-
worthy of a god : Refutation, c. xxxiii. Inconsis-
tency of Celsus in representing the Jew as conversant
with Greek literature ; various remarks of Celsus
answered, c. xxxiv. Question of Celsus, why Jesus
does not give some manifestation of His divinity by
taking vengeance upon those who insult Him and
His Father: Answered, c. xxxv. Celsus scoffingly
inquires. What was the nature of the ichor in the
body of Jesus ? and asserts that Jesus rushed with
open mouth to drink of the vinegar and gall : An-
swer, cc. xxxvi., xxxvii. Sneer of the Jew, that
Christians find fault with Jews for not recognising
Jesus as God : Answer, c. xxxviii. Falsehood of
the assertion of this Jew of Celsus, that Jesus gained
over to His cause no one during His life, not even
His own disciples, c. xxxix. Jew goes on to assert
that Jesus did not show Himself to be pure from
all evil : Answer, cc. xli., xlii. Falsity of the state-
ment, that Jesus, after failing to gain over those who
were in this world, went to Hades to gain over
those who were there, c. xliii. Celsus asserts fur-
ther, that other individuals who have been con-
demned and died miserable deaths ought to be
regarded as greater and more divine messengers
of heaven than Jesus : Answer, c. xliv. Argument of
Celsus against the truth of Christianity, from the
different behaviour of the actual followers of Jesus
during His life and that of Christians at the present
day: Answer, c. xlv. Falsehood of the assertion,
that Jesus when on earth gained over to Himself
only sailors and tax-gatherers of the most worthless
character, c. xlvi. Answer to the question. By what
train of argument were Christians led to regard
Jesus as the Son of God .'' c. xlvii. Assertion of
Celsus, that Jesus is deemed by Christians to be
the Son of God because He healed the lame and
the blind and is asserted to have raised the dead :
Answer, c. xlviii. Statement of Celsus, that Jesus
convicted Himself of being a sorcerer : Refuted by
His predictions regarding false prophets, etc., cc.
xlix., 1. No resemblance between the works of
Jesus and those of a sorcerer, c. li. Inconsistency
of the Jew in raising the objections which he does,
seeing that the same objections might be raised
against the divinity of Mosaism, cc. lii.-liv. Jew
objects further, that the predictions, although act-
ually uttered, prove nothing, because many have
been deceived by juggling tricks; asserts also, that
there is no satisfactory evidence of the resurrection
of Jesus, the report of which can be explained in
other ways : Answer, cc. Iv.-lxii. Celsus proceeds
to bring, as a serious charge against Jesus, that He
did not appear after His resurrection to those who
had ill-treated Him and condemned Him, and to


ORIGEN: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


683


men in general : Answer, cc. Ixiii.-lxvii. Celsus
asserts, that it would have helped to manifest His
divinity if He had at once disappeared from the
cross: Answer, cc. Ixviii., Lxix. Inconsistency of
Celsus' statement that Jesus concealed Himself,
with the facts of the case, pointed out, c. Ixx. Cer-
tain declarations of Jesus regarding Himself, no-
ticed, c. Ixxi. Celsus asks why, if Jesus wished to
remain hid, a voice was heard from heaven pro-
claiming Him to be the Son of God? or, if He did
not seek concealment, why was He punished ? or,
why did He die? Answer, c. Ixxii. Celsus asserts,
that no witness is needed to refute the statements
of the Christians, because these are taken from their
own books, which are self-contradictory : Answer,
c. Ixxiv. Impossibility, according to Celsus, that a
god, who was expected to appear among men, should
be received with incredulity on his coming, or should
fail to be recognised by those who have been look-
ing for him : Answer, c. Ixxv. All objections
brought by the Jew against Christianity might be
retorted on himself: Illustrations, c. Ixxvi. Jew
professes his belief in a bodily resurrection and in
eternal life, c. Ixxvii. Asks if Jesus came into the
world to produce unbelief in the minds of men :
Answer, c. Ixxviii. Conclusion of the Jew is that
everything proves Jesus to have been a man : Gen-
eral refutation, c. Ixxix.


BOOK III. ...... pp. 465-496

Object of Book Third to refute the charges which
Celsus makes against Christianity in his own per-
son. Assertion of Celsus that the controversy be-
tween Jews and Christians is most foolish; that
there is nothing of importance in the investigations
of Jews and Christians; because, although both be-
lieve that a Saviour was predicted, yet they do not
agree on the point whether He has actually come
or not. Refutation of these statements generally,
cc. i.-iv. Celsus alleges that both Judaism and
Christianity originated in rebellion against the
state; impossibility of this, cc. v.-vii. Jews shown
from their language not to be Egyptians, c. viii.
Falsehood of the assertion that Christians do not
desire to convert all men, even if they could, c. ix.
Proof of Celsus in support of his assertion ; Answer,
cc. x.-xiii. Union of Christians alleged to rest upon
no substantial reason, save on rebellion and fear of
external enemies : Answer, cc. xiv., xv. Falsity
of the charge that Christians invent terrors, c. xvi.
Comparison of the articles of the Christian faith to
Egyptian temples, where, after passing through im-
posing avenues, nothing is found as an object of
worship save a cat, or an ape, or a crocodile, or a
goat, or a dog: Refutation of this, cc. xvii.-xxi.
Celsus asserts that the Dioscuri, and Hercules, and
yEsculapius, and Dionysus, are believed by the
Greeks to have become gods after being men ; but
that we refuse to recognise them as such, although
they manifested many noble qualities, displayed for
the benefit of mankind : General answer, c. xxii.
Comparison of our Lord's character with that of in-
dividuals referred to, c. xxiii. Unfairness of Celsus
in requiring Christians to believe the stories regard-
ing such beings, and yet refusing his assent to the
credibility of the Gospel narratives regarding Jesus,
C. xxiv. Examination of the case of /Esculapius,
cc. XXV., xxvi. ; of Aristeas of Proconnesus, cc. xxvi.-
xxix. Superiority of the churches of God over the
public assemblies, cc. xxix., xxx. Comparison of
the cases of Abaris the Hyperborean and of the
Clazomenian with Jesus, cc. xxxi., xxxii. Examina-
tion of the story of Cleomcdes of Astypalea, c. xxxiii.
Celsus alleges that there are many other similar in-
stances : This statement, even if true, shown to be


inapplicable, c. xxxiv. Celsus challenged to say
whether he believes such beings really to be demons,
or heroes, or gods : Consequences which will follow,
c. XXXV. Comparison of case of Antinous, the fa-
vourite of Hadrian, shown to be absurd, cc. x.\xvi.—
x.\.\viii. Allegation of Celsus that faith alone leads
Christians to give their assent to the doctrines of
Jesus : Examination of this statement, cc. xxxix.-xli.
Comparison of mortal flesh of Jesus to gold, silver,
or stone, shown to be inept, c. xlii. Celsus asserts,
that in ridiculing the worshippers of Jupiter, who
was buried in Crete, while worshipping Jesus, who
rose from the grave, we are guilty of inconsis-
tency : Answer, c. xliii. Various objections against
Christianity, gathered from the more unintelligent
Christians, adduced by Celsus; enumeration of
these: Answers, cc. xliv., xlv. Christians do desire
that there should be wise men among them, cc. xlv.-
xlvili. Allegation that only the low, and the vile,
and the ignorant, with women and children, are de-
sired as converts, shown to be false in the sense in
which it is advanced by Celsus, cc. xlix.-liv. Charge
brought against teachfers of Christianity of surrep-
titiously inculcating their doctrines upon children
without the knowledge of their parents, c. Iv. E.x-
amination of this charge, cc. Ivi.-lviii. Answer to
charge of Celsus, that Christians invite the wicked
alone to participation in their sacred rites, cc. lix.-
Ixii. Refutation of the charge that God does not
decide in accordance with truth, but with flattery,
c. Ixiii. Answer to question of Celsus, why sinners
are preferred over others, c. Ixiv. Falsehood of the
assertion that Christians are able to gain over none
but sinners, c. Ixv. Error of Celsus in denying the
possibility of a complete transformation of charac-
ter, c. Ixvi. His meaning ])robably was, that such
transformation could not be effected by punish-
ment; this shown to be false, c. Ixvii. Transforma-
tion of character, in certain cases, by means of
philosophical discourses, not a matter to excite sur-
jjrise : character of Christian preaching, c. Ixviii.
Examination of Celsus' statement, that to change a
nature entirely is exceedingly difficult, c. Ixix. God
can do all that it is possible for Him to do without
ceasing to be God, c. Ixx. Falsity of statement that
God alleviates the sufferings of the wicked through
pity for their wailings, but casts off the good, c. Ixxi.
No truly wise man could be misled by any state-
ments of an unintelligent Christian, c. Ixxii. 'Falsity
of statements, that the ambassador of Christianity
relates only ridiculous things, c. Ixxiii. That he
seeks after the unintelligent alone, c Lxxiv. That
he acts like a person who promises to restore pa-
tients to bodily health, but who prevents them from
consulting skilled physicians, who would expose his
ignorance, c. Ixxv. That the Christian teacher acts
like a drunken man, who should enter a company of
drunkards, and accuse those who were sober of being
drunk, c. Ixxvi. That he is like one suffering from
ophthalmia, who should accuse the clear-sighted
of blindness. Assertion of Celsus that Christians
lead on men by em|)ty hopes: Answer, c. Ixxvii.
Character of those who become converts, c. Ixxviii.
Christianity the best system which men were capa-
ble of receiving, cc. Ixxix.-lxxxi.

BOOK IV pp. 497-542

Subject of Fourth Book mainly to show that the
prophecies regarding Christ are true predictions,
c. i. The position maintained by certain Christians,
that there has already descended upon the earth a
certain god, or .Son of a god, who will make the in-
habitants of the earth righteous, and by the Jews,
that the advent of this being is still future, asserted
by Celsus to be false : Answer, c. ii. Question o£


684


ORIGEN: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


Celsus as to the meaning of such a descent: An-
swered, c. iii. Argument of Celsus turned against
himself, c. iv. Celsus misrepresents Christians as
saying that God Himself will come down to men,
and that it follows that He has left His own abode,
c. V. Celsus represents the object of God"s descent
to be a desire to make Himself known, and to make
trial of men; and this, he alleges, testifies to an ex-
cessive and mortal ambition on the part of God :
Answer, cc. vi.-ix. Celsus asserts, that Christians
talk of God in a way that is neither holy nor rever-
ential, and likens them to those who in the Bacchic
mysteries introduce phantoms and objects of terror :
Answer, c. x. Celsus endeavours to prove that the
statements in the Christian records regarding floods
and conflagrations are neither new nor wonderful,
but may be paralleled and explained from the ac-
counts of the Greeks: Answer, cc. xi.-xiii. Celsus
returns to the subject of the descent of God, alle-
ging that if He came down among men, He must
have undergone a change from better to worse,
which is impossible in the case of an immortal
being : Answer, cc. xiv.-xvi. Superiority of the
scriptural accounts of these matters over those of
the Greek mythology, c. xvii. Celsus repeats his
objections : Answer, cc. xviii., xix. Celsus' repre-
sentation of the manner in which the Jews maintain
that the advent of Jesus is still future, c. xx. Ab-
surdity of the statement of Celsus thai the overturn-
ing of the tower of Babel had the same object as
the Deluge, viz., the purification of the earth, c. xxi.
Proof that Jews brought on themselves the divine
wrath, because of their treatment of Jesus, c. xxii.
Celsus insolently compares Jews and Christians to
bats, and ants, and frogs, and worms, etc., c. xxiii.
Answer, cc. xxiv., xxv. Superiority of Christians
in their opinions and practice to idolaters, cc. xxvi.,
xxvii. Celsus misrepresents the language of Chris-
tians as to God's descent among men, and His in-
tercourse with them, cc. xxviii., xxix. Celsus, not
understanding the words, " Let Us make man in Our
image and likeness," has represented Christians as
saying that they resemble God because created by
Him : Answer, c. xxx. Celsus again asserts that
the Jews were fugitives from Egypt, who never per-
formed anything of note, and were never held in any
account: Answer, cc. xxxi., xxxii. Celsus, in very
ambiguous language, asserts that the Jews endeav-
oured to derive their origin from the first race of
jugglers and deceivers, and appealed to the testi-
mony of dark and ambiguous words : Answer, cc.
xxxiii.-xxxv. Celsus adduces instances of alleged
great antiquity put forth by other nations, and as-
serts that the jews wove together some most incred-
ible and stupid stories, regarding the creation of
man, the formation of the woman, the issuing of
certain commands by God, the opposition of the
serpent, and the defeat of God, who is thus shown to
have been weak at the very beginning of things, and
unable to persuade a single individual to obey His
will : Detailed answers to these misrepresentations,
cc. xx.\vi.-xl. Celsus next ridicules the accounts of
the Deluge and the Ark : Answers, cc. xli., xlii.
Goes on to carp at the histories of Abraham and
Sarah, of Cain and Abel, of Esau and Jacob, of
Laban and Jacob, c. xliii. Explanation of the state-
ment that "God gave wells to the righteous;"
other matters, also, to be allegorically understood,
c. xliv. Celsus does not recognise the love of truth
which characterizes the writers of Scri])ture ; figur-
ative signification of Sodom, and of Lot and his
daughters ; discussion on the nature of actions, c.
xlv. Spirit of hostility which characterizes Celsus,
in selecting from the narratives of Scripture what-
ever may serve as ground of accusation against
Christians, while passing without notice whatever


may redound to their credit : Instances, c. xlvi.
Celsus refers vaguely to the dreams of the butler
and baker in the history of Joseph, and endeavours
to find ground of objection in the history of Joseph's
conduct towards his brethren, c. xlvii. Asserts that
the more modest among Jews and Christians endeav-
our to give these things an allegorical meaning,
because they are ashamed of them : Answer, c.
xlviii. Falsity of his assertion that the scriptural
writings are mcapable of receiving an allegorical
meaning, cc. xlix., 1. The treatises which give alle-
gorical explanations of the law of Moses evidently
unknown to Celsus, otherwise he could not have
said that these allegorical explanations were more
shameful than the fables themselves: Illustrations,
c. li. Celsus refers to the work entitled " Contro-
versy between Papiscus and Jason," in support of
his assertions, cc. Hi., liii. Celsus conceals his real
opinions, although he ought to have avowed them,
when quoting from the Timcetcs of Plato, to the
effect that God made immortal things alone, while
mortal things are the work of others ; that the soul
is the work of God, while the body is different;
that there is no difference between the body of a
man and that of a bat : Examination of these state-
ments, cc. liv.-lix. Asserts that a common nature
pervades all bodies, and that no product of matter
is immortal : Answers, cc. Ix., Ixi. Maintains that
the amount of evil is a fixed quantity, which has
never varied: Answers, cc. Ixii.-lxiv. That it is
difficult for any but a philosopher to ascertain the
origin of evils, but that it is sufficient for the multi-
tude to say that they do not proceed from God, but
cleave to matter ; and that, as the cause of mortal
events never varies, the same things must always
return, according to the appoinied cycles : Answers,
cc. Ixv.-lxix. Assertion of Celsus that a thing which
seems to be evil may not necessarily be so : Exam-
ined, c. Ixx. Celsus misunderstands the anthropo-
pathic language of Scripture: Explanation, cc. Ixxi.-
l.xxiii. Celsus finds fault with Christians for assert-
ing that God made all things for the sake of man,
whereas they were made as much for the sake of
the irrational animals : Answer, c. Ixxiv. Celsus
holds that thunders, and lightnings, and rains are
not the works of God; that even if they were,
they were brought into existence as much for the
sake of plants, and trees, and herbs, as for that
of human beings : Answer, cc. Ixxv., Ixxvi. Celsus
maintains that the verse of Euripides, "The sun
and night are to mortals slaves," is untrue, as these
luminaries may be said to be created for the use of
ants and flies as much as of man : Answer, c. Ixxvii.
Asserts that we may be said to be created as much
on account of irrational animals as they on our ac-
count : Answer, cc. Ixxviii.-lxxx. Celsus maintains
that the superiority of man over irrational animals
in building cities and founding political commu-
nities is only apparent : Examination of this asser-
tion, cc. Ixxxi.-lxxxiv. No great difference, accord-
ing to Celsus, between the actions of men and those
of ants and bees, c. Ixxxv. Certain irrational ani-
mals, according to Celsus, possess the power of
sorcery; instances: Examination of these, cc. Ix.xxvi.,
Ixxxvii. Assertion that the thoughts entertained of
God by irrational animals are not inferior to those
of men ; illustrations : Answer, cc. Ixxxviii., Ixxxix.
Degrading views of Celsus, cc. xc.-xcix.

BOOK V pp. 543-572

Continuation of the subject, c. i. Celsus repeats
his denial that no God, or son of God, has either
come, or will come, to earth; that if certain angels
did come, by what name are they to be called .!■
whether by tliat of gods or some other race of be-


ORIGEN: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


685


I ings? in all probability such angels were demons:
' ]\efulation, cc. ii.-v. Celsus proceeds to express
I Surprise that the Jews should worship heaven and
I angels, and yet pass by the heavenly bodies, as the
sun and moon ; which procedure is, according to his
: view, most unreasonable : Refutation, cc. vi.-x. De-
fence of Christians against the same charge, cc. x.-
xiii. Celsus declares the Christian belief in the
future conflagiation of the world, in the salvation of
the righteous, in the resurrection of the body, most
foolish and irrational, alleging that this belief is not
held by some of the Christian believers, and addu-
cing certain considerations regarding the character
of God and the nature of bodies which render such
things impossible, c. xiv. Refutation in detail of
these objections, cc. xv.-xxiv. Examination of Cel-
sus' statement that the various quarters of the earth
were from the beginning allotted to different super-
intending spirits, and that in this way the adminis-
tration of the world is carried on, cc. xxv.-xxviii.
Considerations of a profounder kind may be stated
regarding the original distribution of the various
quarters of the earth among different superintend-
ing spirits, which considerations may be shown to
be free from the absurd consequences which would
follow from the views of Celsus; enumeration of
these, cc. xxix.-xxxiii. Statement of Celsus regard-
ing the request of the people of Marea and Apis to
the oracle of Ammon, as related by Herodotus, and
the inference which he seems to draw from it and
other similar instances adduced by him, examined
and refuted, cc. xxxiv.-xxxix. Examination of Cel-
sus'quotation from Pindar, that "Law is king of
all things," c. xl. Celsus goes on to state objec-
tions which apply to Jews much more than to Chris-
tians, viz., that the Jewish doctrine regarding heaven
is not peculiar to them, but has long ago been re-
ceived by the Persians; and proceeds to observe
that it makes no difference by what name the Su-
preme Being is called ; nor are the Jews to be deemed
holier than other nations because abstaining from
swine's flesh, etc. Detailed examination and refu-
tation of these statements, cc. xli.-xlix. Celsus
denies that the Jews were regarded by God with
greater favour than other nations : Answer, c. 1.
Statement of Celsus that, admitting Jesus to have
been an angel. He was not the first who came to
visit men, for the histories relate that there have
been many instances, several of which he enumer-
ates, c. Hi. Refutation, cc. liii.-lviii. Conclusion
of Celsus that Jews and Christians have the same
God, and that the latter adopt the Jewish accounts
regarding the six days ; other points of agreement
mentioned : Examination of these statements, as
well as of his admission that certain Christians will
admit the identity, while others will deny it, cc. lix.-
Ixii. Argument of Celsus against Christianity,
founded upon the existence of those who have wor-
shipped demons as their teacher, and of sects that
have hated each other, examined and refuted, c. Ixiii.
Celsus has misunderstood the prediction of the
apostle that deceivers will come in the last times,
c. Ixiv. Falsity of Celsus' statement that all who
differ so widely may be heard saying, " The world
is crucified to me, and I unto the world," c. Ixv.


BOOK VI pp. 573-610

Object of Sixth Book specially to refute those ob-
jections which Celsus brings against Christians, and
not those derived from writers on philosophy, c. i.
Explanation of the reasons which led the writers of
Scripture to adopt a simple style of address, c. ii.
Quotation from Plato regarding the "chief good,"
and remarks upon it, c. lii. Inconsistent conduct
of those who can so express themselves pointed out,


c. iv. Comparison of the Platonic phraseology, re-
garding the kindling of a light in the soul, with the
language of Scripture, c. v. Examination of the
question whether Plato was acquainted with doc-
trines more profound than those which are contained
in his writings, and demonstration of the fact that
the prophets did know of greater things than any in
Scripture, but did not commit them to writing, cc.
vi.-x. Celsus inquires whether, amid the perplexity
arising from the existence of different Christs, men
are to cast the dice to divine which of them they
ought to follow.' Answer, c. xi. Perversion of the
language of Paul regarding wisdom corrected, cc.
xii., xiii. Examination of Celsus' charge that Chris-
tians are uninstructed, servile, and ignorant, c. xiv.
Sneer of Celsus at the humility of Christians an-
swered, c. XV. Celsus charges Jesus with having
perverted the language of Plato in His saying re-
garding the impossibility of a rich man's entering
the kingdom of heaven : Answer, c. xvi. Compar-
ison of some points of Scripture doctrine with state-
ments of Plato, cc. xvii., xviii. Charge of Celsus
that Christians have misunderstood language of
Plato, in boasting of a "super-celestial" God- An-
swer, c. xix. Explanation of certain terms referring
to heaven, cc. xx., xxi. Assertion of Celsus, that
the Persian mysteries of Mithras contain many ob-
scure allusions to those heavenly things mentioned
in the Christian writings; absurdity of his state-
ments, cc. xxii., xxiii. Celsus refers to a certain
diagram, the statements regarding which he appears
to have borrowed from the sect of the Ophites;
which statements, however, are of no credibility, c.
xxiv. Description of said diagram, and explanation
of the names inscribed in it, cc. xxv., xxvi. Certain
statements of Celsus regarding the " seal " examined,
c. xxvii. Celsus asserts that Christians term the
Creator an "accursed" divinity, and asks what
could be more foolish or insane than such sensele.ss
wisdom ? Examination of these statements, cc.
xxviii., xxix. Celsus returns to the subject of the
seven ruling demons, and makes reference to the
diagram, c. xxx. Quotations illustrating the man-
ner of invoking said demons, c. xxxi. Remarks on
the procedure of Celsus, c. xxxii. Further state-
ments of Celsus, c. xxxiii. Continuation of state-
rnenls of Celsus, to the effect that Christians heap
together one thing after another, — discourses of
prophets, circles upon circles, effluents from an
earthly church, and from circumcision ; and a power
flowing from one Prunicos, a virgin and living soul;
and a heaven slain in order to live, etc., etc., c. xxxiv.
Detailed examination and answer to these state-
ments, cc. xxxv.-xxxvii. Celsus introduces other
charges, stating that there are inscriptions in the
diagram containing two words, "a greater and a less,"
which are referred to Father and Son : Answer, c.
xxxviii. Statement of Celsus, that names of demons
among the Greeks are different from what they are
among the Scythians; gives illustrations: Answer, c.
xxxix. Statement of Celsus, on the authority of Dio-
nysius, an EgvjJtian magician, that magic arts have no
power over philosophers, but only over uneducated
men and persons of corrupt morals : Falsitv of this
shown, c. xli. Allegation of Celsus, that Christians
have invented the fiction of the devil or Satan, as an
adversarv to God, who counterworks His plans and
defeats them ; that the Son of God, even, has been
vanquished by the devil; and that the devil will
exhibit great and marvellous works, and claim for
himself the glory of God: Examination and refuta-
tion of these statements, cc. xlii.-xliv. Celsus has
misunderstood the statements of Scripture regard-
ing Antichrist: Explanation of these, cc. xiv., xlvi.
Celsus perverts the language of Christians regard-
ing the " Son of God :" Answer, c. xlvii. Mystical


686


ORIGEN: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


meaning of " Son of God " explained, c. xlviii. Cel-
sus characterizes the Mosaic cosmogony as extremely
silly, and alleges that Moses and the prophets, from
ignorance, have woven together a web of sheer non-
sense . Answers, cc. xlix.-li. Celsus will not decide
whether the world was uncreated and indestructible,
or created but not destructible, c. Hi. Brings for-
ward objections that were raised against Marcion,
and after several disparaging observations on the
manner of the divine procedure towards men, asks
how it is that God created evil, etc., c. liii. An-
swer to the foregoing, cc. liv.-lix. Celsus repeats
charges formerly made regarding the days of crea-
tion, cc. Ix., Ixi. Comments on the expression,
"The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it:" An-
swer, c. Ixii. Asserts that "the first-born of every
creature " is the image of God, and that God did
not make man in His image, because he is unlike
to any other species of being; explanation of the
expression, "Man is made after the image of God,"
c. Ixiii. God partakes neither of form nor colour,
nor can motion be predicated of Him; explanation
of passages that seem to imply the reverse, c. Ixiv.
Inconsistency of Celsus with his declared opinions,
in saying that God is the source of all things; as-
serts that He cannot be reached by word : Explana-
tion and distinction, c. Ixv. Celsus asks, in the
person of another, how it is possible to know God,
or to learn the way that leads to Him, because dark-
ness is thrown before the eyes, and nothing distinctly
seen : Answer to this query, and remark of Celsus
retorted upon himself, cc. Ixvi.-lxviii. Celsus rep-
resents our answer as being this : " Since God is
great and difficult to see, He put His own .Spirit
into a body that resembled ours, and sent it down
to us, that we might be enabled to hear Him, and
become acquainted with Him :" Examination of
this statement, cc. Ixix., Ixx According to Celsus,
our doctrine regarding the spirit is the same as that
of the .Stoics, who maintain that " God is a spirit,
diffused through all things, and containing all things
within Himself : " Answer, c. Ixxi. Assertion that
the Son of God would not be immortal, because
He was a spirit existing in a human body : Answer,
c. Ixxii. Criticises, in scoffing language, the Incar-
nation; exposure of his errors, c. Ixxiii. Returns
to the subject of Marcion's opinions ; introduces
" two sons of God," and speaks scoffingly of the
supposed controversies between them, c. Ixxiv.
Maintains that the body of Jesus must have been
different from that of other beings, in virtue of His
divine qualities. Consideration of the prophecies
regarding Jesus : Answers to his statements, cc.
Ixxv.-lxxvii. Celsus ridicules the sending of God's
Spirit into one corner of the world alone, and com-
pares God to Jupiter in the comedy, who sent Mer-
cury to the Athenians and Lacedaemonians: Answer,
cc. Ixxviii., Ixxix. Celsus terms the Chaldeans a
divinely inspired nation; speaks of the Egyptian
people as also inspired, although he condemned
them formerly, and refuses this title to the Jews ;
inconsistency of all this, c. Ixxx. Pretends not to
understand how God could send His Son amongst
wicked men, who were to inflict punishment upon
Him : Answer, c. Ixxxi.


BOOK VII pp. 611-639

Celsus denies that the Jewish prophets predicted
any of the events which occurred in the life of
Christ, and asserts that those who believe in the
existence of another God, besides that of the Jews,
cannot refute his objections; while Christians, who
recognise the God of the Jews, rely for their de-
fence on the alleged predictions regarding Christ:
Remarks, c ii. Celsus declares Christians incon-


sistent in rejecting the ancient Grecian oracles of
Delphi, Dodona, Clarus, Branchidae, Jupiter Am-
nion, etc., which nevertheless were of high impor-
tance, while insisting that the sayings uttered in
Judea are marvellous and unchangeably true : De-
tailed answer to this objection, cc. iii.-viii. Asserts
that many individuals assume the attitude of inspi-
ration, and claim to be God, or the Son of God, or
the divine Spirit, and to have come down to save a
perishing world, and promise rewards to those who
do them homage, and threaten vengeance upon
others ; and, moreover, to these promises add strange
and unintelligible words, which may be applied by
any impostor to his own purposes, c. ix. Answer
to these charges, cc. x.-xii. Falsity of Celsus' state-
ment that God favours the commission of evil, c.
xiii. Celsus objects, that even if the prophets fore-
told that the great God would become a slave, or
die, there was no necessity that He should do so
simply because such things had been predicted :
Answers, cc. xiv.-xvii. Celsus objects further, that
if the prophets of the God of the Jews foretold that
Jesus was to be the Son of the same God, how could
commands have been given through Moses that the
Jews should accumulate wealth, extend their do-
minion, fill the earth, put their enemies to the
sword, under threat of being treated by God as His
enemies; whilst the man of Nazareth, His Son,
delivered commands of a totally opposite kind.?
Errors of Celsus pointed out in detail, and the na-
ture of the two dispensations explained, re. xviii.-
xxvi. Falsity of assertion that Christians believe
the Divine Being to be corporeal in His nature,
and to possess a body like a man, c. xxvii. Celsus
alleges that the idea of a better land than this, to
which Christians hope to go after death, has been
borrowed from the divine men of a former age, and
quotes from Homer and Plato in support of his
assertion : .A.nsvvers, cc. xxviii.-xxxi. Celsus next
assails the doctrine of the resurrection, and asserts
that we uphold this doctrine in order that we may
see and know God: Answer, cc. xxxii.-xxxiv. The
oracles of Trophonius, etc., to which Celsus would
direct Christians, assuring them that there they
would see God distmctly, shown to be demons, c.
XXXV. Language of Christians as to the manner in
which they see God misrepresented by Celsus, cc.
xxxvi.-xxxix. Language of Celsus quite inappro-
priate as addressed to Christians, and applicable
only to those whose doctrines differ widely from
theirs, c. .xl. Celsus recommends Christians' to fol-
low the guidance of divinely inspired poets, wise men,
and philosophers, without mentioning their names:
Remarks on this, c. xli. Proceeds to name Plato
as an effective teacher of theological truth, quoting
from the Timtrus to the effect that it is a hard mat-
ter to find out the Maker and Father of the universe,
and an impossibility to make Him known to all after
having found Him; and remarking that Christians
cannot follow the example of Plato and others, who
proceed by analysis and synthesis, because they are
wedded to'the flesh : Answers, cc. xlii.-xlv. General
remarks upon the tone in which Christians carry on
controversy with their opponents, c. xlvi. Actions
of those who, although seeming to be wise, did not
yield themselves to the divine teaching, c. xlvii.
Purity of life exhibited by Christians, c. xlviii.
Even by those who are unable to investigate the
deeper questions of theology, c. xlix. Explanation
of certain scriptural expressions regarding "birth"
or "generation," c. 1. Difference between Chris-
tians and those who received a portion of the Divine
.S])irit before the dispensation of Christianity, c. li.
Celsus proceeds to say to Christians that they
would have done better to have selected as the ob-
ject of their homage some one who had died a glo-


ORIGEN: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


687


rious death, whose divinity might have received the
support of some myth to perpetuate his memory,
and names Hercules, ^sculapius, Anaxarchus, and
Epictetus, as instances, alleging that Jesus never
uttered under suffering any words that could be
compared to their utterances, c. liii. Answers, cc.
liv.-lv. Sneering remark of Celsus that we might
better have given the name of Son of God to the
Sibyl than to Jesus, c. Ivi. Scoffing advice of Cel-
sus, that we had better choose Jonah than Jesus for
our God : Answer, c. Ivii. Celsus asserts that the
Christian precept, " Whosoever shall strike thee on
the one cheek, turn to him the other also," is an
ancient saying, admirably expressed long ago, and
reported by Christians in a coarser way, and quotes
from Plato in support of his statement : Answer,
cc. Iviii.-lxi. Celsus goes on to say that Christians
cannot tolerate temples, altars, or images, and that
in this peculiarity they resemble .Scythians and other
barbarous nations, adducing quotations from He-
rodotus and Heraclitus in support of his opinion
that none, save those who are utterly childish, can
take these things for gods, c. Ixii. Detailed answer,
cc. Ixiii.-lxvi. Celsus remarks that Christians will
not admit that these images are erected in honour of
certain beings who are gods, but maintain that these
are demons, and ought not to be worshipped: Re-
marks in answer, c. Ixvii. Asks why demons are
not to be worshipped, and asserts that everything,
whether the work of angels, demons, or heroes, is
part of the providential government of the Most
High God . Answers, cc. Ixviii.-lxx.

BOOK Vni pp. 640-669

Celsus, after his question regarding the worship
of demons, proceeds to represent us as saying that
it is impossible to serve many masters, and remarks
that this is the language of sedition, and used only
by those who stand aloof from all human society,
etc. Consideration of the true language of .Scripture
upon this and kindred points, in answer to this state-
ment, cc. ii.-viii. Reckless language of Celsus, who
would have us believe that we are led by our wor-
ship of God to that of other things which belong to
God, without injury to ourselves, and who yet adds,
" We may honour none except those to whom that
right has been given by God : " Remarks, c. ix.
Nature of the honour which Christians pay to the
Son of God, c. x. Celsus asserts that those who
uphold the unity of God are guilty of impiety: An-
swer, c. xi. That if Christians worshipped one God
alone, they would have valid arguments against the
worship of others, but they pay excessive reverence
to one who is the servant of God : Refutation, cc.
xii.-xiv. Celsus quotes from the opinions of some
obscure heretical sect, contained in what is called a
Heavenly Dialoi^iie, to the effect that we suppose
another God, who is above the heavens, to be the
father of Him whom we honour, in order that we
may honour the Son of Man alone ; whom also we
assert to be stronger than God, who rules the world
and who rules over them : Answers, cc. xv.-xvi.
Celsus goes on to say, that our shrinking from rais-
ing altars, statues, and temples, has been agreed
upon among us as the badge of a secret society:
Answer, cc. xvii.-xx. Assertion of Celsus, that
those devoted to the service of God may take part
in public feasts or idol offerings- Answer, c. xxi.
Answer to objection that Christians themselves ob-
serve certain days, as the Preparation, the Passover,
and Pentecost, cc. xxii., xxiii. Reasons urged by
Celsus why Christians may make use of idol offer-
ings and public sacrifices at public feasts; examina-
tion of these, cc. xxiv.-xxvii. Celsus proceeds to
state that if Christians abstain from idol offerings,


they ought, in consistency, to abstain from all ani-
mal food, like the Pythagoreans : Answer, cc. xxviii.-
xxxii. Celsus alleges that if we come into the world
at all, we must give thanks, and first-fruits, and
prayers to demons, that they may prove good and
kind: Answer, cc. xxxiii., xxxiv. Celsus remarks
that the satraps of a Persian or Roman monarch
could do great injury to those who despised them,
and asks, will the satraps and ministers of air and
earth be insulted with impunity? Answer, cc. xxxv.,
xxxvi. Asserts that if Christians invoke those
whom they address by barbarous names they will
have power, but not if invoked in Latin and Greek;
falsity and absurdity of this statement, c. xxxvii.
Misrepresents the language addressed by Christians
to the Grecian statues, c. xxxviii. Scoffing language
of Celsus to the Christians on the rejection of Jesus,
whom he terms a demon, and on His inability to
save His followers from being put to death, c. xxxix.
Contrast between the Christian and heathen doc-
trine of punishment, c. xl. Railing address of Cel-
sus, to the effect that although Christians may revile
the statues of the gods, they would not have 'reviled
the gods themselves with 'impunity ; that nothing
happened to those who crucified Jesus; that no
father was ever so inhuman as was the Father of
Jesus, etc., etc.: Answers, cc. xli.-xliv. Celsus as-
serts that it is of no use to collect all the oracular
responses that have been delivered, for the world
is full of them, and many remarkable events have
happened in consequence of them, which establish
their reality and divinity; general remark in answer,
c. xlv. Contrast between conduct of Pythian priest-
ess, who frequently allowed herself to be bribed,
and that of the proj^hels, who were admired fof
their downright truthfulness, c. xlvi. Assertion of
Greeks, that the Jewish history contains fabulous
accounts, refuted, c. xlvii. Endeavour of Celsus to
show that the doctrines delivered at the celebration
of the pagan mysteries are the same as those of the
Christians; absurdity of this, c. xlviii. Celsus re-
proaches Christians with inconsistency in their
treatment of the body: Answer, cc. xlix., 1. Celsus
approves the Christian doctrine that the righteous
shall enjoy everlasting life, and the wicked shall
suffer everlasting punishment; inconsistency of this
on the part of Celsus, c. li. Anxiety of Origen to
bring all men to receive the whole system of Chris-
tian truth, c. Hi. Doubtful manner in which Celsus
speaks of certain weighty matters, and reluctance
on his part to set down any of them as false; in-
consistency of this with the manner in which he
treats the doctrines of Christianity, which he regards
with a hostile spirit, cc. liii., liv. Celsus asserts that
Christians must make their choice between two
alternatives; nature of these: Answer, cc. Iv.-lvii.
Seeks to degrade the souls of men to the worship
of demons, by referring to certain practices and
beliefs prevalent among the Egyptians: Answer, cc.
Iviii.-lix. Admits that there is a dangerous tendency
in demon-worshiji: Remarks, cc. Ix.-lxii. Vet adds
that the more just opinion is that demons desire and
need nothing, but that they take pleasure in those
who discharge towards them offices of |iiety : .An-
swer, cc. Ixiii.-lxv. Celsus admits that no worship-
per of God should submit to anything base, but
should encounter any torments or death, rather
than do anything unworthy of God ; and yet to cele-
brate the sun, or the ])raises of Minerva, is onlv to
renderhigherprai.se to God; inconsistency of this,
cc. Ixvi., Ixvii. Maintains that the Homeric saying
must be observed, " Let one be king, whom the son
of crafty .Saturn apjiointed ; " sense in which this
must be understood by Christians, c. Ixviii. Incon-
sistency on the part of Celsus, after what he has
said, in asking whether God would fight for the


688


ORIGEN: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


Romans, if they were to become converts to the
worship of the Most High, cc. Ixix., Ixx. Further
misrepresentations of Celsus pointed out, c. Ixxi.
Time will come when the Word will change every
soul into His own perfections, c. Ixxii. Celsus en-
joins us to help the king with all our might, and, if
required, to fight under him, or lead an army along
with him : Answer, c. Ixxiii. Also to take otifice in


the government of the country, if necessary for the
maintenance of the laws and the support of reli-
gion : Answer, c. Ixxv. Conclusion, in which Origen
mentions that Celsus had announced his intention
of writing a second treatise, which Origen requests
Ambrose to send him if he should have carried his
intentions into execution.


ORIGEN.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Africanus, letter to Origen, 3S5 and
note.

Angels, nature of, 241, 256; not es-
sentially (inherently) good, 257 ;
various offices of, 264 ; souls of,
287 ; incite to good and evil, 332 ;
how superior to men, 509; minis-
tering spirits, 544, 650, 664; not
to be invoked, 544, 650-652, 661 ;
not worshipped by Jews, 545.

Ante-Nicene theology, its errors, 223 ;
reliance on holy Scripture, 223;
its understanding of Church
teaching, 240, 382 (note), 383
(note).

Antichrist, the ideal evil, 594.

Antichthones (antipodes), mentioned
by St. Clement of Rome, 273.

Apostles, tradition of, the test of true
belief, 239; taught some things
of faith, others of opinion, 239;
character and power of, 423, 491.

Aristeas, story of, 474.

Aristotle, flight of, 425; his desertion
of Plato, 436.

Ark, Noah's, dimensions of, 516.

Ascension of Moses (apocryphal),
quoted by St. Jude, 328.

Barnabas, St., Epistle of, quoted, 424.

Beiiedicite (Song of the Three Chil-
dren), not in the Hebrew of
Daniel, 386,

Bethlehem, Christ's birth in, foretold,
418.

Bishops of Alexandria and Jerusalem,
succession of, 384 (note).

Body to be renewed and purified, 262,
not to be annihilated and re-
stored, 272, 346,' animal and
spiritual, 294; spiritual, nature
of, 346; change a gradual one,
347 ; identity of, 347 ; final con-
dition and habitation of, 34S ;
the work of God, 522; law of
change in, 523; how honoured
by Christians, 659.

Celsus, two of the name, 399; Ori-
gen's opponent, an Epicurean,
399-

Christ, divine and incarnate, 240 ; as
Son of God, a Person, 246; be-
gotten, not in time, 246; the Im-
age, 247, and Power of God, 249;


has all things of the Father, 250;
mirror of the Father, 251 ; rep-
resented by the seraphim of
Isaiah, 253; incarnation of, a
wondrous mystery, 281 ; His
saints partake of His nature,
283; His humanity the restora-
tion of man, 343, 382 (note), and
the subjection of evil, 344, ends
the kingdom of Israel, 351, and
fulfils prophecy, 352 ; His eternal
generation, 376; how manifested
in His saints, 377 ; had a human
body and soul, 37S; the only
Mediator, 544 ; the Light of the
world, 575; His divine nature
not properly called "substance,"
603 (note) ; one with the Father,
643; all prayer to be made
through Him, 644; His king-
dom over all the earth, 667.

Christianity, proved by prophecies
and miracles, 397 ; persecuted
instead of philosophy, 39S ; its
higher morality, 398; condemns
idolatry, 39S ; esoteric teaching
of, 399; its doctrine consistent
with reason, 401 ; mysteries of,
401 ; proved by the lives of Chris-
tians, 407 ; not responsible for
heresies, 469; established by
God, not on rebellion, on fa-
bles, or on idolatry, 470; proved
by existing Christian churches,
in character and councils, 476;
invites good and bad, wise and
foolish, 490, 493; warns against
false philosophy, 493; fears God,
not man, 495; its better hope,
496.

Christians, secret meetings of, 397 ;
no sorcerers, 399; have not cor-
rupted the Gospel, 443; pro-
tected by God, 467 ; number and
unity of, 468; heresies among,
469; their low estate no reproach.
482; excel in wisdom, 482, and
in virtue, 484; character of their
teachers vindicated, 486-487 ;
power of their teaching, 491 ;
their lives compared with those
of the heathen, 506; acknowl-
edge God's love for all men, 508;
censures on, more applicable to
philosophers, 510; calumnies


against, 585, 627 ; purity of life
attained by, 631 ; why reject im-
ages, 635-637, 645; not seditious,
640; cannot keep heathen feasts,
647 ; rights and duty in this life,
660 ; obey rulers, 664 ; why wor-
ship God only, rejecting heathen
deities, 665; why decline public
offices, 668.

Chrysippus, on Good and Evil, 526 ;
Subjugation of the Passions, 658.

Church, existing, proof of the Divinity
of Christ,476; the Body of Christ,
595 ; spiritual Temple of God,

Circumcision, not derived from the
Egyptians, 405 ; probable origin
of, 564.

Clement of Rome, St., quoted, 273.

Creation, the, figurative meaning of,
365 ; days of, 596, 600.

Demons, how permitted by God, 638,
651 ; not honoured by Christians,
642, 64S, 652, nor feared, 648-652,
660; number acknowledged oy
the Egyptians, 662 ; vileness of
their worship, 663.

Devil, the nature of, 240, rational,
257; his power over man, 261;
not incapable of good, 265 ; not
the sole cause of sin, 329; his
power illustrated from holy
Scripture, 329 ; permitted by
God, 350.

Divination, theory of, by means of
animals, 537 ; a deceit of demons,
538 ; forbidden in the Law, 539.

Egyptian mythology, fables of, 405.

Enoch, book of, 252, 380; not canoni-
cal, 567.

Eros, fable of, in Plato, 515.

Eve, creation of, compared with Pan-
dora in Hesiod, 514.

Evil, origin and growth of, 526; not
justified by good effects, 528.

Faith, before, not contrary to, reason,
400; its foundation and effects,
4S0; dependent on the will, 491.

Falling from grace not immediate,
2 s6.

Feasts, Christian, 647 ; heathen, for-
bidden to Christians, 648.
6S9


690


ORIGEN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Foreknowledge, not the cause of
events, 440 ; no proof of divinity,

539-
Free-will, possessed by all, 240, 265,
267, 290; first occasion of sin,
292 ; controlled not by desire but
by reason, 303 ; Scripture proofs
of, 305 ; instance of Pharaoh
answered, 309; illustrated from
nature, 310, and from the para-
ble of the Sower, 314; proof of
God's justice, 320; implies man's
co-working with God, 321, 328;
objections answered, 324 ; defini-
tion of, 347, 383 (note).

Gehenna, meaning of, 584.

God, incorporeal, 242, 377, 621 ;
spirit and truth (reality), 243;
incomprehensible, 243; invisible,
known, not seen of Christ, 245;
Father eternal, 250; in all as
Father and Son, 254 ; the Father
the same in Old and New Testa-
ments, 275; revealed in Christ,
277 ; anthropomorphic terms re-
garding, 277, 513, 529, 600;
knowledge of, in a future life,
29S ; permits the powers of evil,
333 ; His likeness the highest
good to man, 344; how He will
be all in all, 345; shown to be
One by His works, 405 ; why
reveals Himself to man, 500;
Creator of the material world,
521; not the author of evil,
598, 61 5, 638 ; manifested by the
Word, 603-604 ; spiritually wor-
shipped, 606; seen with the
spiritual body, 624; above all
gods, 640; ruler of nations, 666.

Goodness, essential to God, not to
any created being, 260; instance
of St. Peter, 265; identical (in
God) with His justice, 278;
goodness of rational beings de-
stroyed through free-will, 292.

Gregory Thaumaturgus, St., Origen's
letter to, 298.

Heaven, as revealed in holy Scrip-
ture, 582 ; as taught by the Per-
sians and others, 583-584; the
spiritual meaning of Canaan,
621.

Heavenly bodies, the, may be re-
garded as living beings, 263.

Hebrew Old Testament, variations
from the Septuagint, 386 ; pas-
sages quoted from, not found
therein, 389.

Hecataeus, historian, on Jewish learn-
ing, 402. _

Heresies, origin of, 469 ; how re-
garded by Christians, 570.

Hermas, Pastor, on creation of mat-
ter, 252 ; on interpretation of
Scripture, 359.

Hermippus on the Jews, 402.

Holy Ghost is God, 240; inspired
the a])ostles, 240 ; incorporeal,
242; His divinity shown by bap-
tism in His name, 252; repre-
sented by the seraphim of Isaiah,
253; eternally existent, 253; in
the saints only, 254; one in Old


and New Testaments, 284; im-
parted to all men after the
Ascension, 285-, proceeds from
the Father, 344, 3S3 (note).
Holy Scripture, spiritual meaning of,
241, 354. 361. 373; compels be-
lief, as foretold by Christ, 350;
prophecies fulfilled, 353; under-
stood too literally by the Jews,
356; threefold interpretation of,
359-365; literal sense not ex-
cluded, 368; histories types of
heavenly things, 371 ; written for
all, not for the learned only, 573,

635-
Humility, Christian, 580.

Idolatry condemned by Christians
and heathen, 398, and by Jewish
law, 510.

Incorporeal, how understood, 241.

James, St., the Just, Josephus' ac-
count of, 416.

Jesus silent under accusation, 395 ;
charged with sorcery, 399; His
divine mission shown by His
disciples, 407, by His birth and
miracles, 408, and by His death,
409; His miraculous birth con-
sistent with reason, 410, and
prophecy, 41 1 ; the miracle at
His baptism credible to Jews,
413; witness of Moses, 415, and
of later prophets,4i6, 418; proph-
ecies of His suffering, 420, and
second coming, 42 1 ; Son of God,
421, 595; His epiphany, 422;
divinely protected as man, 426;
not paralleled in history, 426;
proved as Christ by the existence
of churches, and by the power of
His name, 427; His miracles
not magic, 427, 450-452 ; His
spiritual teaching of the Law,
430; His humility, 432; the
Word of God, 433, 480 ; His sub-
mission to betrayal and death,
433, 438, 441 ; His predictions
accomplished, 437 ; His resur-
rection real, 438, 453,473; His
foreknowledge not fate, 440; His
lineage, 444; His true victory,
445 ; incidents of His passion,
446; His descent into Hades,
448; vindicated by disciples,
448, and by miracles, 449; appear-
ances after resurrection, 455, and
at the transfiguration, 457 ; why
dead and buried, 459; not a
mere man, 464 ; His miracles
compared with heathen arts,
473; not honoured locallv as
heathen gods, 477 ; a rational
soul, 480 (note); His flesh incor-
ruptible, 481; His transfigura-
tion, how understood, 503 ; the
ideal Good, 494; various appear-
ances of, 60S; His example com-
pared with heathen gods and
heroes, 632-634.

Jews, learning of, acknowledged by
heathen authors, 402 ; prophets
of, 412; punished for rejecting
Christ, 433, 506; their unbelief
unreasonable, 446, 452, 461, but


a means to the calling of the
Gentiles, 463 ; their history veri-
fies prophecy, 465, and miracles,
466 ; not Egyptian rebels, 467 ;
excellences of their laws, 510,
and rites, 511 ; their true origin,
512; their history allegorical, 517,
518-521; why chosen of God,
556 ; divinely taught, 562 ; in fa-
vour with God, 565.

Languages, dispersion of, 555.

Law of Moses, spiritually interpreted,
365 ; in Deuteronomy, typical of
Christ's second coming, 375.

Laws of heathen nations contrary to
God's law, 557.

Leonides, father of Origen, 224.

Lucifer, Isaiah's prophecy interpret-
ed, 259.

Magi, the, their character and his-
tory, 422.

Man, the final object of creation, 530,
532 ; how benefited by labour,
531 ; alone has gift of reason,
534, 540, and idea of God, 536.

Marcion, heresy of, 597, 607.

Martyrs, Christian, number of, 468
(note).

Matter, cannot be uncreated or by
chance, 269, 379.

Mind, how incorporeal, 244.

Moses, history and law of, above
heathen writings, 403, spiritually
taught by Christ, 430, and hon-
oured by Christians, 431 ; paral-
lel between his miracles and
Christ's, 452; a witness against
idolatry, 510 ; his law in har-
mony with the Gospel, 617;
spiritually interpreted, 618-621.

Names of God and Christ, power of,
406, 427 ; not given to heathen
gods, 407; power of other names,

563-
Numenius, Pythagorean, 402; his
quotations of Scripture, 521 ; on
the worship of Serapis, 560.

Ophites, their diagram of heaven,
584, 590 ; anti-Christian, 586 ;
their seven demons, 586.

Oracles, heathen, discredited by the
heathen themselves, 611 ; the ut-
terance of demons, 612, 656.

Origen, pupil of Clement of Alexan-
dria, Introduction, 223 ; confess-
or, 223; birth and early training,
224; teacher, catechist, and as-
cetic, 225; his Hcxapla and other
writings, 226, 230-233; ordina-
tion, 227; deposition, 227; school
and pupils at Csesarea, 228; im-
prisonment and death, 229; char-
acter and attainments, 229, 235;
editions of his works, 233-234.

Pandora, story of, from Hesiod, 514.

Papiscns and yason, ^2\.

Paraclete, whv the Holy Spirit is so
called, 286.

Paul, St., Acts of, 246; his teach-
ing in regard to spiritual gifts,
255-


ORIGEN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


691


Peace on earth at the first comhig of
Christ, 444.

Periodicity, Celsus' theory of, de-
stroys free-will, 528.

Pharaoh, why his heart was hardened,
30S.

Philosophers, lives of, 425; follow
popular idolatry in practice, 574,
637 : cannot teach the knowledge
of God, 628.

Philosophy, deceits of, 396; mysteries
of, 401.

Plato, fable of his birth, 41 2 ; deserted
by Aristotle, 436; on the Light
of man, 574; philosophical say-
ings quoted and answered, 575-
582 ; his idea of heaven bor-
rowed from Scripture, 582 ; on
the knowledge of God, 628.

Powers, spiritual, opposing, 328 ; sig-
nified by princes, 335 ; illustrated
from mental working, 335 ; be-
fore the birth of man, 336.

Pre-existence of man, 372.

Princes, in Daniel and Ezekiel, mean
spiritual powers, 335.

Prophets, the, spake by Christ, 239;
inspired by the Holy Ghost, 61 2 ;
their purity of life, 613; spiritu-
ally interpreted, 617-620.

Punishment, eternal. Christian teach-
ing of, 495. 499. 50-. 541 (note),
657, 659.

Pythagoras, philosophy of, derived
from the Jews, 402.

Rational creatures, capable of good
and evil, 256; term includes evil
spirits, 257; final judgment of,
293; existed from the beginning,
342 ; fallen through free-will,
342; of one nature, 342, 3S1;
restored in the incarnation of
Christ, 343 ; why corporeal, 380.

Restoration, possible to all in the
end, 26<D, 261, 275, 327 ; to the
spirits in prison and to Sodom,
279.

Resurrection, necessary, 247; gives


knowledge of divine truth, 298;
of the body, 293, 294, 346, vindi-
cated, 549, how understood, 551,
5S6, 623 ; of Christ, Gospel
account of, 568 (note).

Revenge, an attribute of false gods,
not of the true God, 655.

Rewards and punishments, eternal,
240; principles of, 294; spiritual
nature of, 296; sensual ideas of,
297 ; rewards include a knowl-
edge of divine things, 298.

Rufinus, his prologue to Origen, and
textual changes in translation,
237-

Satan, scriptural teaching regarding,
592.

Septuagint, the, received by the
Church as canonical, 387.

Seraphim of Isaiah, meaning of, 376.

Sicarians, adjudged criminals by the
Romans, 436.

Simon Magus, allowed idolatry, 578;
dispersion of his sect, 578.

Sin, works its own punishment, 295 ;
original. Christian doctrine of,
631.

Sorcery, charged upon Christ, 399.

Soul of man, origin of, undetermined,
240; formed without the body,
264; theories on the final con-
dition of, 273-275; (aiiifiia) in all
beings, 286; distinct from spirit,
287; separated from the spirit
by sin, 296; God's care of, 313;
philosophical speculations on,
337 ; not tripartite, 337 ; whether
intermediate between flesh and
spirit, 338 ; subject to tempta-
tions of the flesh, 340; not of
different natures, 340; immortal,
as partaking the divine nature,
381; souls of aiif^els, 287; soul
of Christ, intermediate between
God and flesh, 282 ; soul of GoJ,
anthropomorphic term, 2S9.

Sower, parable of the, an illustra-
tion of free-will, 314.


Star in the east, the, 422.

Stoic theory of a future life, 552 ;
dilemma quoted, 616.

Substance, how distinct from quali-
ties, 379.

Susanna, history of, question of Afri-
canus, 385 ; Origen's answer,
386; play of Hebrew and Greek
words in, 388; why not in the
Hebrew of Daniel, 388; other
objections answered, 390.

Temptation, how affecting soul and

body, 338.
Tobit, book of, not acknowledged by

Jews, but used by the Churches,

391-
Trinity in Unity, the, co-equal, 255.
Tyre, Prince of, (in Ezekiel) how

fallen, 258; a spiritual power,

335-

Valentinus, heresy of, 590.
Visions of prophets and apostles
credible, 416.

Wells of the patriarchs, 517.

Wisdom, a name of Christ, 247 ;
threefold, 334 ; divinely taught
in Old and New Testaments,
482-485 ; does not mislead, 492 ;
divine and human distinguished,
579; Christian, distinguishes be-
tween knowledge and sense, 630.

Wisdom of Solo}non, book of, not
canonical, 379, 384 (note).

World, the, creation and fate of, 240;
causes of diversity in, 268; God
the soul of, 269 ; theory of iden-
tical worlds before and after the
present, refuted, 273 ; ages of, a
relative term, 273; meanings of
the term (kosmos), 273 ; theory
of planetary and heavenly
spheres, 275; variety of creation
in, 290; created in time, 340;
worlds preceding and following,
341-


ORIGEN.

PARTS FIRST AND SECOND.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


Gen.


PAGE

PAGE

i. r 290

Gen. xlviii. 22 . . . 368

i. I . .

347

xlix. I .

341

i. 2 . .
i. II

379
652
263

xlix. I .
xli.x. 1-4

613
390

i. 16 .

xlix. 10

419

i. 21

286

Ex. iii. 2 . .

288

i. 24 .

286

iii. 6 . .

276

i.26 .

560

iii. 8 . .

622

1.26 .

596

iii. 14 .

253

i. 26, 27

509

iv. 21 .

307

i. 26, 27, 2

S

344

iv. 23 .

309

ii. 2, 3, 4

601

iv. 24-26 .

329

li. 7. .

247

iv. 24, 25, 2

6 '

564

ii. 7 . .

254

viii. 27-29

3"

ii. 7. .

286

ix. 17 .

309

ii. 7 . .

513

xi. 5 • •

309

ii. 21, 22

^'J

xii. 8 .

648

ii. 24 .

282

xii. 12 .

309

ii. 24 .

520

xii. 23 .

329

ii. 24 .

?^

xii. 23 .

iii. . .

XIV. 14 .

666

iii. . .

592

xvi. 29 .

366

iii. 5, 6, 7

626

xix. 19 .

637

iii. 8 .

602

XX. 3, 4 .

iii. 17 .

622

XX. 3, 4, 5

545
356

iii. 19 .

346

XX. 5 . .

iii. 24 .

596

X.X. 5. .

654

iv. 8 .

517

XX. 12 .

277

iv. 10 .

340

XX. 12, 13-1

6

368

iv. 17, 18

210

XX. 18 .

601

V. I . .

596

XX. 21 .

581

V. 3. .

248

xxi. 2 .

562

vi. 2 .

466

xxi. 24 .

621

vi. 2 .

IS

xxi. 28, 29

267

vi. 3 .

xxii. 28 .

653

vi. 5, 6 .

600

xxiv. 2 .

454

ix. 25-27

613

xxiv. 2 .

540

xi. I, 2 .

555

xxiv. 2 .

58 r

xi. 4 .

497

XXV. 40 .

348

xi. 5-9 .

556

XXV. 40 .

361

XV. 5 .

547

xxxii. 4 .

461

XVII. 14

366

xxxiii. 20

277

xix. 10, II

458

XXXV. 2 .

392

xix. 17.

518

Lev. vi. 44 .

602

xxii. 12

328

xi. 13 .

xvi. 8 .

361

xxvi. 15

517

• 329

xxvii. 27

417

xvi. 8 .

592

xxvii. 41

517

xvi. 29 .

. 648

xxviii. 12, 13

583

xvii. 10, I

. 286

XXX. 42, 43

517

xvii. 14

• 338

xxxi. 10-13

390

xix. 26 .

• 539

xxxii. 24-31

390

xix. 31 .

• 407

xxxii. 38-

30

374

xix. 31 .

. 546

Lev. xxvi. 5 .

Num. vi. 24 .

XV. 32

xxiii. 23

xxiv. 17

xxiv. 17
Deut. i. 10 .

i. 31 .

11. 34 .

iv. 16-19

iv. 19 .

iv. 19, 20

iv. 24 . ,

iv. 24 .

iv. 24 .

V. 31 .

vi. 13 .

vi. 13-

viii. 3 .

ix. 3 .

X. 12, 13

xiii. 1-3
xiii. 4.
xiv. 5 .
xvi. 3 .
xviii. 14, 15
xviii. 14, 15
xxii. 23, 24
xxiv. 16

XXV. 4
XXV. 4
XXV. 4
XXV. 4

xxviii.
xxviii. 12
xxviii. 66
XXX. 15, 16,
xxxii. .
xxxii. .
xxxii. 8
xxxii. 8, 9
xxxii. 21
xxxii. 21
xxxii. 21
xxxii. 22
xxxii. 30
xxxii. 39
xxxiv. 5,
Josh. xxiv. 32
Judg. xix. 22
I Sam. ix. 10

XV. II

xvi. 14


PAGE
620
512
392

539

422

423
547
529
618

510
545

547

~i^

287
502
602
548
637

298

502

600

452
624

366
648
412

539
411
654
276
360
361
520

6i8
462
305
351

352
500
555

464
493
372
619
442
453
368

593
412

356


I Sam. xviii. 10

. 329

xviii. 10

. 356

2 Sam. xxii. 44, 45

• 463

xxiv. 14

. 223

I Kings iii. 16-28

. 390

iii. 28 .

. 391

iv. 29-34

. 482

X. 1-9 .

. 482

xi. 14 .

. 393

xii. 28 .

• 393

xiv. 12

. 412

xvii. 21, 2

2 . 454

xix. 18

. 362

xxii. 19-2

3 • 329

2 Kinffs i. 1 .

. 412

iv. 17

. 656

iv. 34,

35

• 454

ix. II

. 615

I Chron. xvi. 8

• 392

xvi. 22

. 609

xxi. I

. 327

Job i. 2 . .

• 593

i. 10, II .

• 334

ii. 10 . .

. 598

vii. I .

. '?'?4

. li\

viii. 9

X. 8 . .

. "in

XV. 14 .

. 78

XXV. 5 .

. 263

xl. 20 .

• 259

xl. 20 .

• 593

xl., xii. .

• 353

xii. I . .

• T.^'i

.xii. 34 .

: Hi

Ps. i. I . .

• 391

ii. 2 . .

• 335

ii.3 . .

. 660

n. 8 . .

. 278

. 500

ii.8 . .

• 557

iv. 6 . .

. 1^7';

vi. I . .

• 529

vii. 3-5 •

. 620

vii. 3-5 •

. 652

ix. 13, 14

• f-'l

xiii. 3. .

xvi. 9, 10

• 456

xvi. 9, 10

. 477

xviii. 10 .

:%

xviii. II .

• -

. 601

xix. 4 . .

. 424

692


ORIGEN: INDEX OF TEXTS.


69:


PAGE

Ps. xix. 8 6_'4 1

xxii. 15 . .

631

xxii. 19, 20 .

287

xxii. 27 . .

3SI

xxiv. 8 • .

640

xxiv. 19 . .

618

xxvi. 2 . .

661

xxvii. I . .

575

xxvii. 1-3 .

333

xxvii. I, 3 .

649

XXX. 3 . .

372

xxxiii. 5 . .
xxxiii. 6 . .

508

377

xxxiii. 9 . .

601

xxxiv. 7 . .

265

xxxiv. 7 . .

59'

xxxiv. 7 . .

tU

xxxiv. 10-14

xxxvi. 9 . .

242

xxxvi. 9 . .

575

xxxvii. 8 . .

529
622

xxxvii. 9, 1 1

xxxvii. 22 .

622

xxxvii. 29 .

622

xxxvii. 30 .

631

xxxvii. 30, 2

I .

xxxvii. 34 .

275

xxxvii. 34 .

622

xxxix. 5 .

631

xliii. 20 .

631

xliv. 19 .

289

xliv. 23 .

529

xliv. 25 .

631

xlv. I, 2 .

352

xlv. 2-5, 6, 5

421

xlv. 3, 4 .

60S

xlv. 7 . .

378

xlv. 7, 8 .

283

xlv. 13 .

375

xlviii. I, 2

622

xlix. 9, 10

579

xlix. 12 .
1. I . .

'ell

li. 5 . .

631

li. 10 . .

624

li. 10 . .
li. II . .

629

252

liv. 5 . .

428

liv. 5, 6 .

611

Iviii. 3 .

631

Ixii. I . .

260

Ixiii. 8 .

624

Ixviii. II

424

Ixviii. II

543

Ixviii. II

574

Ixix. 21 .

446

Ixix. 21 .

616

Ixxii. 7, 8

352

Ixxii. II .

285

Ixxiii. I .

281

l.vxvi. 2 .

622

Ixxvi. 10

331

Ixxvii. 2 .

624

Ixxviii. 1-3

520

Ixxviii. 2

ill

Ixxviii. 34

Ixxviii. 49

65.

Ixxviii. 65

529

Ixxxi. 5 .

467

Ixxxi. 13, I,!

305

Ixxxii. I .

• 509

Ixxxii. I .

. 640

Ixxxii. I .

. 668

Ixxxii. 7 .

. 668

Ixxxi v. 5 .

. 332

Ps. Ixxxvi. 8 .

Ixxxix. 32

Ixxxix. 50

xci. 13

xcv. 5

xcvi 4

xcvi. 5

xcvi. 5

xcvii. 9

ci. 8 .

cii. 25.

cii. 25, 26

cii. 26

cii. 26, 27

cii. 26, 27

cii. 27 . .

cii. 27. .

cii. 27 . .

civ. 4 . .

civ. 6 . .

civ. 14, 15

civ. 15 .

civ. 24 .

civ. 24 .

civ. 24-26

cv. 15 .

evil. 20 .

cvii. 20 .

cvii. 20 .

cvii. 20 .

cix. I, 2 .

cix. 8 . .

ex. I . .

cxvi. 7

cxvi. 13 .

cxvi. 15 .

cxviii. 2 .

cxviii. 19, 20

cxix. 18 .

cxix. 18 .

cxix. 18 .

cxix. y;^ .

cxix. 105

cxxvii. I .

cxxxi. I, 2

cxxxvi. 2

cxxxvi. 2

cxxxvii. 8, 9

cxli. 2

cxli. 2

cxlvii. 4 .

cxlvii. 15

cxlviii. 3

cxlviii. 3, 4

cxlviii. 4, 5

cxlviii. 5

cxlviii. 5
Prov. ii. 5 .

ii-5 •
II. 5 .

IV. 23 .
iv. 23 .

V. 15-17
vui. 5 .
viii. 22-2
ix. I -5

IX. 4 .
ix. 5, 6

X. 17 .
X. 19 .
xiii. 8 .
xiii. 25
xxii. 20,
xxii. 28
xxiii. 5


PAGE

544
599
284
639
638
544
509
640
640
618
601

m

341
523
405
502
602
2S8
581
531
665
250
291

609
425
444
489
548
435
435
260
288

391
660
28 1
589
432

■;2o
624
513
575
321
580
544
641
619
488

645
582

424
665
548
563
270
434

416
624
332
539

517

297
48 5
486
576
543
619
620

359

3S7

593


Prov. .\xvii. 19
xxviii. 6
XXX. 24-28
Eccles. i. I .

i. 2 .

i. 6 .

1.9 .

i. 9, 10

i. 14 .

vii. 23, 24

viii. II


Song of Sol. i. 3
i. 4


I. 4 . .
i. 7 . .
i. 10 . ,
i. 13, 14.
i. 19, 20 .
i. 19, 20 ,


20


2-4
3.4
• 24
.4 .


VI. 3

VI. 3
VI. 9


VIII. 8, 9.
viii. 8, 9.


IX. 2 . .
ix. 2 . .
ix. 6 . .
ix. 6 . .

X. 17 . ,
X. 17 . .
xi. 6, 7 .
xiv. 4
xiv. 12-22
XX. 3 . .
XXV. 8 .
xxvii. I .
xxvii. I .
XXXV. 5, 6
xxxviii. 19

Xli; 23, 23

xlii. 4 .
xiii. 5 .
xlv. 3 .
xlv. 6 .
xlv. 7
xlv. 7
xlv. 7

xlv. 12 .

xlvii. 14, 15
xlvii. 14, 15
xlvii. 14, 15
xlvii. 14, 15
xlviii. 9 . .
xlviii. 16 .


PAGE

594
620
536
264

^^'

588

501
342
264

375
659

329
331
283
488
492
462
462
389
287
305
599
601
392
558
273
296
462
462
623
462
462
604
462
414
581
253
376
433
41J
411
356
352
353
575
603
660
566
649
296
379
356
593
259
613
271
288
329
449
656

375
419

253
373
276
356
598
599
263
2S0
296
549
599
549
416


Jer.


Isa. xlix. 8, 9
xlix. 9 .
1. II . ,

I'i- 13-15
lui. 1-3 .
liii. 1-8 .
liii. 2, 3 .
liii. 7. .
liii. 9. .
liii. 12 .
liv. II, i:
liv. ii-i.^
Ix. I . .
Ix. 19 .
Ixiii. 17, 18
Ixiv. 4 . ,
Ixv. I . ,
Ixvi. I . ,
Ixvi. I .
Ixvi. 2 .
Ixvi. 16 .
Ixvi. 22 .
1.5. 6 .
1. 9 . .
i. 9, 10 .
i. 14 . .
vii. 17, 18
vii. 18 .
X. 24 . .
xiv. 22 .
XV. 14 .
xvi. 19 .
xvii. 21 .
xvii. 21-24
XX. 7 . .
XX. 7 . .
Jer. xxiii. 23, 24
xxiii. 24.
xxiii. 24.
xxiii. 24.
XXV. 15, 16
XXV. 28, 29
xxix. 22, 23
xxxi. 30.
xxxiv. 14
Lam. iii. 25 .

iii. 27, 28:

iii. 34 .

iii. 38 .

iv. 20 .

iv. 20 .
Ezek. i. . .

i. I . .


i. 28 .
ii. I

ii. 6 .
ii. 9, 10
iii. 2, 3
X. . .
xi. 19, 20
xi. 19, 20
xi. 19, 20
xvi. 55
xviii. 2-4
xviii. 3
.wiii. 4
xviii. 19,
xviii. 20
XX. 21 .
XX. 25 .
xxii. 18, :
xxvi. .
xxviii. 3
xxviii. 1 1-19
xxviii. 12


694

ORIGEN:

INDEX OF TEXTS.

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Ezek. xxviii. 15 . . 593

Matt. V. 22 . . . . 36S

Matt. xxii. 30 . .

509

Luke xii. 45, 46 . . 3S8

xxviii. 19

593

V. 28 .

io^

xxii. 31, 32 .

276

xiii. II .

660

xxix. 3 .

520

V. 28 .

xxii. 32 . .

641

xiii. 16 .

660

xxxii. 1-3

V. 28 .

368

xxii. 37, 39, 40

276

xiii. 26, 27

450

xxxii. 2

2 88

V. 34 .

269

xxiii. 12 . .

489

xiv. II .

313

xxxii. 5, C

5-0

V. 34 •

368

xxiii. 29-38 .

389

xiv. 34, 55

666

xliii., xliv

., X

Iv.

V. 34, 35

276

xxiii. 30 . .

389

XVII. 20, 21

254

xlvi.

392

v-39 •

305

xxiii. 34 . .

483

xviii. II .

489

xlviii. .

583

V.39 •

62 1

xxiv. 4, 5

59^

xviii. 13 .

489

Dan. i. 16.

613

V. 39, 40

635

xxiv. 12 . .

288

xviii. 14

313

ii. 21

66s

V. 44, 45

652

xxiv. 14 . .

350

xviii. 14

490

iv. 8.

252

V. 45 •

508

xxiv, 14 . .

437

xviii. 19

251

iv. 37

623

V. 45, 48

275

xxiv. 21 . .

342

xix. 14

278

vii. 10

502

V.48 .

381

xxiv. 23-27 .

450

xix. 17

668

vii. 10

652

V.48 .

509

xxiv. 27 . .

259

xix. 17, ig

297

vii. 26

451

vi. 9 .

-J^

xxiv. 35 • •

341

xix. 26

298

viii. 23

593

vi. 23 .

624

XXIV. 35 . .

553

XX. 36 .

377

viii. 23-

25

594

vi. 24 .

640

xxv. 4 . . ,

575

XX. 36 .

509

ix. 21;

353

vi. 25-28

620

XXV. 29 . .

298

xxi. 20

437

ix.27

595

vii. 14.

580

xxv. 34 . .

306

xxii. 25

620

X.

335

vii. 18.

280

XXV. 41 . ,

306

xxii. 27

432

xii. I, 2

3

547

vii. 22.

399

xxvi. 23 . .

441

xxiii. 21

65s

xii. 3

509

vii. 22, 23

350

xxvi. 29 . .

297

xxiii. 25

655

Hos. lii. 4

351

vii. 22, 23

351

xxvi. 38 . .

282

xxiii. 44, 4

5

445

X. 12

575

vii. 22, 23

450

xxvi. 38 . .

289

xxiii. 53

xiii. 14

271

vii. 24, 26

306

xxvi. 38 . .

378

XXIV. 15

456

xiii. 14

589

viii. 3 .

4'Z

xxvi. 38 . .

433

xxiv. 30, :

I

459

xiv. 9

482

ix. 12 .

488

xxvi. 39 . .

441

xxiv. 31

456

xiv. 9

520

ix. 37, 38

424

xxvi. 39 . .

442

John 1. I . .

553

Joel ii. 28.

285

X. 3 .

424

xxvi. 39 . .

633

i. I .

603

Amos iii. 6

356

X. 18 .

350

XXVI. 48 . .

457

i. I .

642

ix. 3

288

X. 18 .

436

xxvi. 52-54 .

435

i. I, 2

291

Mic. i. 12 .

356

X. 18 .

437

XXVI. 55 .

457

i- 1-3

262

i. 12 .

X. 23 .

425

XXVI. 59-63 .

395

1-3 •

240

i. 12, 13

598

X. 29 .

334

xxvi. 61 . .

434

'• 3 •

. 250

IV. 1-3

392

X. 29, 30

666

xxvii. 3-5

435

1-3 •

• 377

V. 2 .

IH

xi. 20 .

580

xxvii. 11-14.

395

1-3.4

• I^S

V. 2 .

xi. 27 .

245

xxvii. 17, 18

395

1-5 •

632

vi. 8.

305

xi. 27 .

277

xxvii. 19 . .

445

1.9 .

600

Hab. iii. 2

253

xi. 27 .

281

xxvii. 46-50.

477

1. 14

604

Zeph. iii. 7-1

3

667

XI. 27 .

581

xxvii. 51, 52

445

i. 18

245

Hagg. ii. 6

623

xi. 27 .

629

xxvii. 54 . .

446

i. 18

277

ii. 7

444

xi. 28 .

461

xxvii. 60 . .

459

i. 18

460

Zech. i. 14
iii. I

332
329

xi. 28 .
xi. 29 .

489
432

xxvii. 63 . .
xxviii. I, 2 .

m

i 18
i. 26

621

434

V. 7.

585

xii. 24.

434

xxviii. 9 . .

460

i. 26, 27

378

Mai. 111. 2.

502

xii. 32.

252

xxviii. 13, 14

419

i. 26, 27

548

iii. 2.

XH. 33 .

280

xxviii. 20. .

434

i- 32-34

417

iii. 2, 3

584

XH. 35.

280

xxviii. 20

548

1. 51 .

417

iii- 3-

296

xii. 42 .

334

Mark i. I, 2 . . .

43'

ii. 16 .

276

111. 6.

405

xiii. 5, 6

^y

iii. 18 . . .

424

ii. 19 .

fl

iii. 6.

£;

xiii. 9

iv. 12 . . .

307

11. 19, 21

. 646

iii. 6.

xiii. 44

373

iv. 12 . . .

3'7

iii. 8 .

253

Matt. i. 20

426

xiii. 54

580

vi. 2 . . .

580

iv. 20 .

243

i'^

411

XV. 1 1 .

650

vi. 3 • • •

589

iv. 21, 24

605

353
418

XV. 17-19

650

x. 8 ...

282

iv. 23, 24

243

ii. 6

XV. 19.

624

X. 18 . . .

548

iv. 24 .

242

ii. 13

426

XV. 24 .

371

X. 44 . . .

620

iv. 24

460

iii. 17

461

xvii. 9

417

XIII. 31 . .

553

V. 19

^J'

iv. 9, I

0

661

xviii. 10

26s

Luke i. 35 ...

252

V. 23

642

iv. 10

637

xviii. 10

591

1. 35 ...

284

V. 31

417

iv. 16

603

xviii. 10

652

V.8. . . .

424

v.39

369

iv. 19

424

xviii. 10

653

vi. 36 . . .

381

v.39

477

v-3-

275

xviii. 19

666

vi. 42 . . .

248

v.39

55°

V. 5.

. 275

xviii. 20

434

viii. 10 . .

307

V. 46, 4

7

%

v. 6.

297

xix. 4 .

341

ix.31 . . .

608

vii. 15

V. 8.

• 245

xix. 17

2S0

X. 4. . . .

367

vii. 42

419

V.8.

575

xix. 17

548

X. 18 . . .

259

viii. 40

426

V. 8.

624

xix. 23

. 620

X. 19 . . .

353

viii. 40

442

V. 8.

. 628

xix. 24

580

X. 19 . . .

634

viii. 40

617

v. 13

. 666

XX. 25 .

620

X. 19 . . .

639

viii. 46

283

V. 14

547

XX. 27 .

509

X. 22 . . .

253

viii. 58

^A

V. 14

632

xxi. 43

• 517

X. 22 . . .

460

ix. 39

626

V. 16

547

xxii. 12, 13

. 279

xi. 48 . . .

462

X. 8-10

639

V 22

• 305

xxii. 30

• 377

xi. 52 . . .

359

X. 18

2S2

ORIGEN :

INDEX OF TEXTS

695

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

John X. i8 . . . . 289

Acts XV. 28, 29 . . . 650

Rom. ix. 14 . . . . 264

I Cor. v. I . . .

610

^ X. 18 .

378

xvii. 28. .

269

ix. 16 . .

320

vi. 10

653

X. 18 .

438

xvii. 28. .

499

ix. 16 . .

321

vi. 10 .

tli

X. 18 .

477

xxi. 26 . .

430

ix. 16, 18.

307

vi. 17 .

X. 24 .

417

Rom. i. 1-4 .

276

ix. 18 . .

308

VI. 17 .

434

X. 30 .

643

i- 3. 4 • •

339

ix. 18 . .

3'5

vi. 17 .

595

xii. 24 .

655

i. 14 .

485

ix. 18-21 .

324

vi. 20

387

xii. 27 .

289

i. 18-23 •

574

ix. 20, 21.

308

vii. 18 .

367

xii. 27 .

378

i. 19 . .

483

x. ^8. .

254

vii. 31 .

262

xii. 31 .

617

i. 19 .

510

X. II, 12

610

vii. 31 .

273

xiii. 2 .

332

i. 20 .

600

xi. 4 . .

362

vii. 31 .

^■^o

xiii. 8 .

432

i. 20 .

625

xi- 33 •

375

viii. 4

648

xiii. 27 .

3-9

i. 20-22

483

xi. 36 . .

^^^3

viii. 31

273

xiv. 3 .

582

i. 21 .

483

xii. II .

288

viii. 5

641

xiv.6 .

239

i. 21-23

510

xii. 14.

i"

viii. 5, 6

509

xiv. 6 .

426

i. 21, 23, 2

4.

25

630

xiii. I, 2

664

viii. 8

^5°

xiv.6 .

604

i. 22, 23

493

xiii. 14

271

viii. II

648

xiv.6 .

643

i. 24 . .

557

xiv. I .

397

viii 13

649

xiv. 9 .

248

574

xiv. 9 .

458

ix. 8-10

431

xiv. 9 .

277

i. 26

557

xiv. 15

ix. 9 .

360

xiv. 9

628

i. 27, 28

xiv. 15

649

ix. 9 .

361

xiv. II .

643

i. 28 .

557

xiv. 21

649

IX. 9, 10

276

xiv. 23.

242

ii. 4, 5.

312

XV. 19.

619

ix. 9, 10

361

xiv. 23 .

646

ii. 4-10

306

xvi. 25, 26

431

ix. 9, 10

520

xiv. 26 .

253

ii. II .

264

xvi. 25, 26

488

ix. 26

632

xiv. 27. 28

644

ii. II .

266

I Cor. i. 10 . .

261

ix.27

565

xiv. 30 .

283

ii. 15, 16

295

i. 18 .

583

X. I, 2, 3

4

520

xiv. 30.

653

ii. 23 .

643

i. 21 .

550

X. 4 .

361

XV. 22 .

254

ii. 28, 29

370

i. 23, 24

402

X. II .

361

xvi. 1 1 .

617

ii. 29 .

620

i. 24 .

246

X. II .

5'7

xvi. 12, 13

253

V. 7 . .

509

i. 24 .

249

X. 13-

330

xvi. 12, 13

430

V.8. .

50S

i. 26 .

338

lli:

331

xvi. 25 . .

536

V. 14 .

5'6

i. 26 .

579

. 370

xvi. 33 .

333

vi. 4 .

459

i. 26-28

4S3

X. 23.

. 285

xvi. 33 .

600

vi. 9 .

438

i. 26-28,

29

352

X. 31 .

• 651

xvi. 33 .

666

vi. 10 .

459

i. 27 .

493

XI. 3 .

, 281

xvii. 10

250

vii. 9 .

489

1. 27 .

629

XI. 19

. 469

xvii. 16

273

vii. 12, 13

280

i. 27, 28,

29

574

xii. 3.
xii. 8.

• 252

xvii. 20, 21

261

vii. 12, 14

619

i. 29 .

313

. 483

xvii. 21

345

vii. 23 . .

338

i. 30 .

56.

xii. 8, 9

• 579

xvii. 21, 22

643

vii. 23 .

340

i.30 .

593

xiii. 10

• 582

xvii. 21, 22, 2

4

273

vii. 24 .

63'

ii. 2 .

. 378

xiii. 12

. 582

xvii. 22, 23

261

vii. 24 .

660

ii. 2 .

458

xiii. 12

. 626

xvii. 24

299

viii. 2 .

340

ii.4 .

355

xiii. 12

• 631

xvii. 24

345

viii. 7 .

340

ii. 4, s

424

xiv. 15

. 287

xvii. 25

28 1

viii. 8 .

626

ii. 4, 5

. 573

XV. 2 .

• 577

xviii. 4.

434

viii. 9 .

338

ii. 6 .

329

XV. 3-8

. 4^6

xviii. 36

423

viii. 9 .

629

ii. 6 .

355

XV. 9 .

• 26s

xix. 2 .

336

viii. 13

565

ii. 6 .

442

XV. 10

333

xix. 1 1 .

334

viii. 13

626

ii. 6 .

. 488

XV. 12

. 469

xix. 32, 33

438

viii. 13

■ 632

ii. 6, 7

359

XV. 22

. 5^6

xix. 34. 35

446

viii. 14

539

ii. 6, 7, 8

36.

XV. 22

• 589

XIX. 41 . .

459

viii. 14

605

ii. 6-8

• 334

XV. 25

. 260

XX. 22 .

252

viii. 15

421

ii. 6-8

335

XV. 25, 2

6

• 589

XX. 22 .

. 632

viii. 19, 20

641

ii. 6-8

471

XV. 28

• 343

XX. 26 .

• 456

viii. 19, 20, 2

I

264

ii. 7 .

488

XV. 28

. 347

XX. 26, 27

456

viii. 19-21

548

ii. 9 .

346

XV. 35

. 650

xxi. iS, 19

. 448

viii. 19, 21

549

ii. 10 .

• 253

XV. 35-38

• 55'

xxi. 25 .

. 2S1

viii. 19-21

637

ii. II .

510

XV. 39-42

• 294

Acts i. 3 . .

456

viii. 20

. 631

ii. 12, 13

^5f

XV. 40-42

. 547

i. 5 . .

. 632

viii. 20, 21

. 292

11. 14 .

606

XV. 41 .

. 290

IV. 32 .

643

viii. 20, 21

341

ii. 16 .

35^

XV. 41 .

• 523

V. 36. 37

• 578

viii. 20, 21

342

iii. 2, 3

. 458

XV. 41,42

• 509

V. 38. 39

421

viii. 21

345

iii. 2, 3

485

XV. 42, 43

. 24a

V. 41 .

449

viii. 22, 23

264

111. 6, 7

322

XV. 42-44

• 55'

vii. • .

. 276

viii. 32

655

iii. 9 .

497

XV. 44 .

• 293

vii. 22 .

• 4S3

viii. 35 .

312

iii. 12 .

295

XV. 44 .

• 523

vii. 42, 43

• 546

viii. 35-37

• 396

iii. 12 .

549

XV. 48, 49

• 55'

vii. 52 .

• 389

viii. 38, 39

• 333

iii. 12 .

. 60s

XV. 50, 51

• 551

viii. 10 .

. 578

viii. 38, 39

• 396

iii. 12-15

• 502

XV. 51, 52

• "«

viii. 18 .

. 252

ix. 6 . .

• 373

iii. 18, 19

401

XV. 52 .

• 158

ix. 15 .

• 333

ix. 6 .

• 374

iii. 19. .

. 578

XV. 53

. 623

x. 9-15.

■ 429

ix. 6,8.

■ H°

iii. 19. .

620

XV. 53-56

• 271

X. 14 .

■ 565

i.x. 8 .

iv. 12, 13

■ Si

^ ^^'-54 •

• 589

X.38 .

. 664

ix. II, 12

• 292

iv. 12, 13

2 Cor. 11. 15 .

4'7

696


ORIGEN: INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

2 Cor. iii. 5, 6 . . . 605

Gal. v. 19-21 ... 338

Col. iii. 3 284

Heb. i. 14 . .

. 652

iii. 6 . .

242

V. 25

632

iii. 3, 4 . .

378

ii. I . .

• 332

iii. 6, 7, 8

619

VI. 14

459

111. 5 . . .

565

iv. 12 . .

. 246

iii. IS .

569

Eph. 1. 4 .

342

in. s. . .

626

iv. 14 . .

. 652
, 283

iii. 15-17

242

ii. 2 .

299

iii. 8. . .

529

IV. 15 . . .

iii. 17

605

ii. 2.

632

iii. 17 . .

651

V. 12-14 • •

. 48s

iv. 4 , .

3S1

ii. 3.

529

iii. 18 . .

545

^•. '4 . .

• 579

iv. 6 . .

575

li. 7.

273

iv. 6 . . .

477

vi. 7, 8 ,

. 310

iv. 7 . .

355

ii. 20

646

iv. 6. . .

577

viii. 5 . .

. 284

iv. 10

626

iv. 10

411

I Tiiess. ii. 14, 15

389

viii. 5 . .

• 348

iv. 17, 18

582

iv. 13

261

iv. 13-15

458

viii. 5 . .

. 361

iv. 18 .

346

iv. 14

551

iv. 15, 16,

17

550

viii. s . .

. 362

iv. 18 .

600

iv. 27

332

iv. 17 .

299

viii. s . .

. 374

iv. 18-V. I

274

V. I .

602

v. 14 .

368

ix. 26 . .

• 273

v. I . .

346

V. 16

598

2 Thess. ii. 1-12

594

X. 29 . .

• a

V. I

623

v:3i, 3

2

520

ii. 2 .

469

XI. 24-26 .

V. 4

623

VI. 2, 3

277

ii. 3. 4.

451

xi. 37 . .

■ 388

V. 10

325

vi. 2, 3

368

11.3,4.
11. O-IO

594

xi. 37. 38 .

'. 6l8

V. 16

284

VI. II

661

451

x>. 37, 38 .

V. 16

604

vi. II

668

ii. 10-12

451

xii. 6 . .

• 312

V. 16

626

vi. II, I

2

652

I Tim. i. 15 . .

xii. 22 . . .

. 622

V. 20

640

vi. 12

332

ii. I, 2

xii. 22, 23

• 371

V. 21

428

vi. 12, I

3

329

111. 16

557

xii. 22, 23

. 641

V. 21

1:1

Pliil. i. 23

476

xii. 29 , .

. 605

vi. 16

i-23

298

iv. 1-3

28s

Jas. iv. 17 . .

• 254

viii. 16 .

332

ii. 5-9

503

IV. 1-3

571

I Pet. 1. 9 . .

. 287

X. 3. 4 .

630

ii. 6, 7

378

iv. 4, s

651

ii. 5 . •

. 646

X. 3-5 •

571

ii. 6, 7

503

iv. 10

508

ii.9 . .

• 547

X. 5 . .

332

ii. 6, 8

580

vi. 17. li

619

11. 22 . .

. 428

X. 5 . .

497

ii. 10, II

250

vi. 20

469

ii. 22 . .

. 503

X. 5 . .

543

ii. 10, II

662

2 Tim. i. 3 .

276

iii. 15. .

• 477

xi. 14 .

64.

ii. 13

307

13 .

570

iii. 15. .

. . 615

xi. 22 .

. 276

11. 13

323

1. 10 .

488

111. 18-21

. 279

xii. 2 . .

417

!i;i5

476

i. 16-18

324

V. 6 . .

- 489

xii. 4 . .

285

111. 10

459

ii. 5 .

V. 8 . .

. • 337

xii. 4 . .

575

iii. 21

631

!i: 5, •

661

I John i. I . .

. 417

xii. 4 . .

628

iv. 8, 9

279

!!1- 6. 7

584

i. I . .

. 624

xiii. 3 .

239

iv. 13

'M

iii. 8 .

520

i. 5 . .

. 242

xiii. 3 .

2S4

iv. 13

iy.7.

632

1. 5 • •

. 376

xiii. 3 .

377

Col. i. 15 .

245

li. 11 .

459

i. s . .

. . 460

xiii. 4 .

378

i.15.

246

ii. 15.

543

1. 5 - •

• 547

Gal.i. 4 . . .

598

i. 15 .

247

li. 20, 21

293

ii. I, 2 .

. 2S6

i. 19.

416

i. IS-

277

ii. 20, 21

325

ii. 2 . .

. 484

ii. 5 .

619

i. 15 .

ii. 20, 21

528

ii. 2 . . .

. 508

ii. 12

429

i. IS.

603

Tit. i. 9, 10 . .

483

ii. 2 . .

. 644

ii. 20

377

i. 15 .

621

i. 12 . .

481

ii. 6 . .

. 37S

iii. 3 •

253

i. 15, 16,

17

281

iii. 3-6 .

425

iii. 2 . .

. 344

iv. 10, II .

647

i. 16.

290

iii. 10 .

284

iii. 2 . .

• 509

iv. 21, 22, 24

430

i. 16-18

262

iii. 10, II

571

V. 19. .

• 259

iv. 21-24 •

361

i. 16-18

377

Heb. i. I . .

389

V. 19. .

■ 273

iv. 21-24 •

518

ii. 8 .

396

i. 3 . .

247

^.h: : :

. 458

iv. 26 . .

371

ii. 9 .

283

i. 3 . .

248

• 250

V. 2 .

lU

ii.15

420

i.3. •

376

V. 8 . . .

. 645

V. 8 .

n. 15
ii. 16

457

1. 3 . .

377

x. 4 . . .

• 576

V. 8 .

599

. 361

i.3. .

644

x. 9 . . .

• 575

V. 17.

330

ii. 16

362

i. 7 . •

288

xiv. 6 . .

• 375

V. 17.

338

ii. 16

648

i. 14 .

337

xxi. . . .

. 583

V. 17.

648

ii. 18, ig

546

i. 14 .

544

'i


1


BINOiMi.


University of Toronto
Library


DO NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme Library Card Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN CO. Limited
