A Son of the Forest: The Experience of William Apes (William Apess, 1829)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1829 first edition, published by the author (https://archive.org/details/sonofforestexper00inapes). The first published autobiography by a Native American — Pequot Methodist preacher William Apess on dispossession, conversion, and Indian rights.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ffiibrarg 
Intn^mtg  of  Ptttsburgtj 

Darlington  Memorial  Library 


■^t>e%/ 


3  1735  038  276  501 
9  ^(^^{K] 


A  SON  OF  THE  FOREST. 

THE 

EXPERIENCE 

OF 

WILLIAM  APES, 

A  NATIVE  OF  THE  FOREST. 

COMPRISING    A    NOTICE 
OF  THE 

PEQUOD  TRIBE  OF  INDIANS. 

WRITTEN  BY  HIMSELF. 


9 

NEW- YORK, 

PFBLISHED  BY  THE   AUTHOR, 


1R'2Q. 


Southern  District  of  New-York,  ss. 

T    t;  t2  ^  ''^  REMEirBERED,  That  on  the  twenty-fifth  dav  of 

^SlB  July,  A.  D.  1829,  in  the  fifty  tliird  yearofaie  hide^wnd- 

ence  of  the  United  States  of  America,  William    •^-pes,  of  the  said 

District,  hath  deposited  m  this  office  the  title  of  a  book,  the  right 

whereof  he  claims  as  author,  in  the  words  following,  to  wit ; 

"  A  Son  of  the  Forest.  The  Experience  of  William  Apes,  a  Native 
of  the  Forest  Comprising  a  uotice  of  the  Fequod  'i  ribe  of  Indiai^s. 
Written  by  himself." 

In  conformity  to  the  Act  of  Congress  of  the  United  States,  entitled 
"  An  Act  for  the  encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securing  the  copies 
ofilap?,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  authors  and  proprietors  of  such 
copies,  durmg  the  time  therein  mentioned."  And  also  to  an  Ac%  en- 
titled "  An  Act,  supplementary  toiui  Act,  entitled  an  Act  for  the  en- 
couragement of  Learning,  by  securing  the  copies  of  Maps,  Charts , 
and  Books,  to  the  autliors  and  proprietors  of  such  ••<>p)es,  during  the 
limes  therein  mentioned,  and  extending  the  benefits  thereof  to  the 
arts  of  designing,  engraving,  and  etching  historical  and  other  prints.  ^-■ 
FRED.  J.  BEXTS, 
Clerk  of  the  Sonthern  District  ot  New-York. 


TO  THE  READER* 

In  offering  to  the  public  this  little  volume, 
^  .Jntaining  the  leading  features  in  the  event- 
I  ful  life  of  a  Son  of  the  Forest,  the  author 
4  would  in  the  outset  bespeak  for  the  work  a 
favorable  reception.     It  was  written  under 
r,     many  disadvantages,  and  the  bare  acknow- 
^    ledgement  of  his  entire  want  of  a  common 
education,  will,  he  hopes,  be  a  sufficient  apo- 
^  losY  for  any  inaccuracies  that  may  occur. 

1 


A  SON  OF  THE  FOREST. 


CHAPTER   I. 


William  Apes,  tl^.e  author  of  the  follow- 
ing narrative  is  a  native  of  the  Anaerican 
soil,  and  a  descendant  of  one  of  the  princi- 
pal chiefs  of  the  Pequod  Tribe,  so  well 
known  in  that  part  of  American  history  call- 
ed King  Philip's  Wars,  This  tribe  inhabit- 
ed a  part  of  Connecticut,  and  lived  in  com- 
parative peace  on  the  river  Thames,  in  the 
town  of  Groton  or  Pacatonic,  and  was  com- 
manded.by  King  Philip.  As  the  story  of 
King  Philip  is  perhaps  generally  known,  it 
will  be  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  say  that 
he  was  overcome  by  treachery.  Betrayed 
to  their  avowed  enemies,  the  nation  was 
completely  routed  and  the  w^ay  thereby 
opened  for  the  whites  to  possess  themselves 
of  the  goodly  heritage  occupied  by  this  once 
peaceable  and  happy  tribe.  But  this  was 
not  the  only  act  of  injustice  which  this  op- 


A  SON   OF  THE   FOREST. 


pressed  nation  suffered  at  the  hands  of  their 
white  neighbors.  They  were  subject  to  a 
more  intense  and  heart  corroding  affliction — 
that  of  having  their  daugliters  claimed  by  the 
conquerors,  and  however  much  subsequent 
efforts  were  made  to  soothe  their  sorrows 
in  this  particular,  they  considered  the  glory 
of  their  nation  as  departed. 

My  grandfather  was  a  white,  and  married 
a  female  attached  to  the  royal  family  :  she 
was  fair  and  beau'ufal.  How  nearly  she  was 
connected  with  the  king  I  cannot  tell ;  but 
without  doubt  some  degree  of  affinity  sub- 
sisted between  them.  I  have  frequently 
heard  my  grandmother  talk  about  it,  and  as 
nearly  as  1  can  tell,  she  was  his  grand  or 
great-grand  daughter.  I  do  not  make  this 
statement  in  order  to  boast  of  my  origin,  or 
to  appear  great  in  the  estimation  of  others, 
when,  in  fact  of  myself,  I  am  nothing  but  a 
worm  of  the  earth,  but  with  the  simple  view 
of  giving  the  reader  the  truth  as  I  have  re- 
ceived it,  and  more  especially  as  I  must  ren- 
der an  account  to  the  Sovereign  Judge  of  all 
men  for  every  thing  contained  in  this  little 
book.  From  what  I  have  already  stated,  it 
will  appear  that  my  father  was  of  mixed 
blood — his  father  being  a  white  man,  and 
his  mother,  a  native  of  the  soil,  or  in  other 
words  a  red  woman  :  but  when  he  attained 


A   SOX   OF  THE   FOREST.  9 

sufficient  age  to  act  for  himself,  he  joined 
the  tribe  to  which  he  was  connected  mater- 
nally, shortly  after  which  he  married  a  fe- 
male of  the  tribe,  in  whose  veins,  not  a  sin- 
gle drop  of  the  white  man's  blood  had  ever 
flowed.  He  then  removed  to  the  back  set- 
tlements, directing  his  course  to  the  west 
and  afterwards  to  the  north-east,  and  pitched 
his  tent  in  the  woods  of  a  town  called  Cole-, 
reign,  near  the  Connecticut  river,  in  the 
state  of  Massachusetts,  where  he  continued 
for  some  time.  During  the  time  of  their  so- 
journing here  I  was  born — January  31st, 
1798.  Our  next  remove  was  to  Colchester 
Conn.,  near  the  sea-board  ;  where  my  father 
lived  between  two  and  three  years,  with  his 
little  family  in  comparative  comfort.  Cir- 
cumstances however  changed.  I  then  lived 
with  my  grand-father  and  his  family,  in 
which  dwelt  my  uncle.  My  grandfather  and 
his  companion  were  not  the  best  people  in 
the  world, — like  all  other  people  who  are 
wedded  to  the  beastly  vice  of  intemperance 
they  would  drink  to  intoxication  whenever 
they  could  procure  rum,  and  as  usual  in  such 
cases  when  under  the  influence  of  liquor, 
they  would  not  only  fight  and  quarrel  with 
each  other,  but  would  frequently  turn  upon 
their  unoffending  grand  children,  five  in  num- 
ber, and  beat  them  in  a  most  cruel  manner. 
a5 


10  A  SON   OF  THE  FOREST. 

My  two  brothers  and  two  sisters  also  lived 
with  them,  and  we  were  always  kept  in  con- 
tinual dread  or  tortneni.  My  father  and 
mother  nnade  baskets  which  they  would  sell 
to  the  whites,  or  exchange  for  those  articles 
only,  which  were  absolutely  necessar)  to 
keep  soul  and  body  in  a  state  of  unity.  Our 
fare  was  of  the  poorest  kind,  and  even  of  this 
we  had  not  enough,  aiid  our  clothing  also 
was  of  the  poorest  description,  literally 
speaking  we  were  clothed  with  rags,  so  far 
as  rags  would  suffice  to  cover  our  naked- 
ness. We  were  always  happy  to  get  a  cold 
potatoe  for  our  dinner,  and  many  a  night 
have  we  gone  supperless  to  rest,  if  stretch- 
ing our  wearied  limbs  on  a  bundle  of  straw 
without  any  covering  against  the  weather, 
may  be  called  rest.  We  were  in  a  most  dis- 
tressing situation.  Too  young  to  obtain  sub- 
sistence for  ourselves  by  the  labor  of  our 
hands,  and  our  wants  disregarded  by  those 
who  should  have  made  exertions  to  supply 
them.  Some  of  our  white  neighbors  how- 
ever taking  pity  on  us,  frequently  brought  us 
frozen  milk,  which  my  mother  would  make 
into  porridge,  and  we  would  all  lap  it  down 
like  so  many  hungry  dogs,  and  thought  our- 
selves well  off  when  the  calls  of  hunger  were 
thus  satisfied.  And  we  lived  in  this  way 
sufferins:  from  cold    and   hunger  for   some 


A  SON  OF  THE  FOREST.  11 

lime.  Once  in  particular,  1  remennber,  (hat 
when  it  rained  my  grandmother  put  us  all 
down  cellar,  and  when  we  complained  of  be- 
ing cold  and  hungry,  she  told  us  to  dance 
and  keep  ourselves  warm  :  but  we  had  no 
food  of  any  kind,  and  my  sister  almost  died 
of  hunger.  Poor  girl  she  was  quite  over- 
come. Think  not  dear  reader  that  I  have 
exagerated — 1  assure  you  that  1  have  iiot — 
I  merely  relate  this  circumstance  to  show 
you  how  intense  our  sufferings  were.  We 
did  not,  however,  continue  in  this  most  de- 
plorable situation  a  very  great  while.  Pro- 
vidence smiled  on  us — but  it  was  in  a  parti- 
cular way.  My  father  and  mother  fell  out, 
that  is,  they  quarrelled,  parted,  went  off  a 
great  distance,  leaving  us  with  grandfather 
and  mother  to  shift  for  ourselves.  We  hved 
at  this  time  in  an  old  house  divided  into  two 
aparments.  My  uncle  lived  in  one  part,  and 
the  old  folks  in  another. 

My  grandmother  went  out  one  day;  she  got 
too  much  rum  from  the  whites,  and  on  re- 
turning she  not  only  began  to  scold  me,  but 
to  beat  me  shamefully  with  a  club  :  (the  rea- 
son of  her  doing  so  1  never  could  tell.)  She 
asked  me  if  1  hated  her,  and  I  very  inno- 
cently said,  yes,  for  I  did  not  then  know 
what  the  word  hate  meant,  and  thought  I  was 
answering  aright.     And  so  she  kept  asking 


12  A  -.SON  OF  HIE  roREsr. 

me  the  same  question,  and  I  always  answered 
the  same  way,  and  then  she  would  com- 
mence beating  me  again,  and  so  she  con- 
tinued until  she  had  broken  my  arm  in  three 
places.  I  was  only  four  years  of  age,  and 
of  coarse  could  not  take  care  of  himself. 
But  my  uncle,  who  lived  in  the  other  part 
of  the  house,  came  down  to  take  me  away, 
when  my  grandfather  made  towards  him 
with  a  fire-brand  ;  but  he  succeeded  in 
rescuing  me,  and  thus  saved  my  life,  for  had 
he  not  come  at  the  time  he  did  to  my  relief, 
I  would  certainly  have  been  killed.  My 
grand-parents  v/ho  acted  so  were  by  my 
mother's  side,  those  by  my  father's  side  were 
Christians,  lived  and  died  happy  in  God, 
and  if  I  live  faithful  to  that  grace  with  which 
God  has  already  blessed  me,  I  expect  to 
meet  them  in  glory,  and  praise  Him  with 
them  to  all  eternity.  I  will  now  return: 
My  uncle  took  and  hid  me  away  from  them, 
and  secreted  me  until  the  next  day.  When 
they  found  me,  and  discovered  how  dan- 
gerously 1  had  been  injured,  they  were  com- 
pelled to  have  recourse  to  the  whites.  My 
uncle  went  to  the  person  who  had  often  sent 
us  milk,  and  as  soon  as  he  learned  what  had 
happened,  he  came  straight  off  to  see  me — 
and  when  he  reached  the  place  he  found  a 
poor  little  indian  boy,  all  buised  and  man- 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  13 

led  to  pieces.  He  was  anxious  that  some- 
thing should  be  done  for  us,  and  especially 
for  me.  He  therefore  applied  in  our  behalf 
to  the  selectnnen  of  the  town,  who  after  con- 
bidering  the  application,  adjudged  that  we 
should  be  taken  and  bound  out.  As  for  my 
part,  I  was  a  town  charge  for  about  a  year, 
as  the  wounds  inflicted  by  my  grandmother 
entirely  disabled  me  for  that  length  of  time. 
[  was  then  put  among  good  Christian  people, 
ailed  the  Close  Order,  who  used  me  as  ten- 
derly as  though  I  had  been  one  of  the  elect, 
or  one  of  their  sons.  The  surgeon  was  sent 
br,  who  called  in  another  doctor,  and  down 
hey  came  to  Mr.  Furman's  house,  where 
he  selectmen  had  ordered  me  to  be  carried, 
Sow  this  dear  man  and  family  were  sad  on 
ny  account.  Mrs.  Furman  was  a  tender- 
learted  lady,  and  nursed  me,  and  had  it  not 
jeen  that  they  took  the  best  possible  care 
)f  me,  1  think  I  should  have  died.  But  it 
)leased  God  to  support  me,  and  you  know 
ny  dear  reader,  from  what  I  have  related, 
;hat  my  situation  must  have  been  dreadful. 
[f  1  remember  right,  it  was  four  or  five  days 
Defore  the  doctor  set  my  arm,  which  was  con- 
equently  very  sore.  I  was  afterwards  told 
that  during  the  painful  operation  I  nevermur- 
mured.  I  attributed  this  to  the  improvement 
in  my  situation.     Before  this  I  was  almost 

B 


14  A    SON    OF    THE    Fv)RESt. 

naked,  cold,  and  hungry — now  I  was  com- 
fortable, (with  the  exception  of  my  wounds.) 
Before,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of 
nature,  I  would  frequently  run  away  to  the 
whites  and  beg  food,  who  invariably  sup- 
plied my  wants  in  that  respect,  as  they 
looked  upon  me  with  pity,  considering  me  a 
poor  helpless  and  neglected  child. 

I  recollect  that  on  one  occasion  f  ba«^|feeu 
out  beggingj  for  food,  and  in  rPviV^^Hg  home 
lost  my  way.  After  the  darkness  o(  hjg 
had  closed  upon  me,  I  came  to  is  large  br<^6k 
surrounded  by  woods,  where  I  sat  down  and 
began  to  cry :  at  last  some  perc{:pns  heard 
my  lamentations,  and  came  to  my  rtssistance. 
By  them  1  was  directed  in  the  right  way,  so 
that  1  reached  home  in  safety,  to  catch  a 
little  more  trouble,  that  is,  to  get  a  sound 
flagellation  for  begging  for  victuals  to  keep 
me  alive,  thence,  I  call  my  deliverance 
from  such  a  scene  of  sutfering,  the  Provi- 
<ience  of  God. 

I  suppose  that  the  reader  will  naturally 
say,  "  What  savage  creatures  my  grand- 
parents were  to  treat  unoffending  or  helpless 
children  in  this  manner."  But  this  treatment 
was  the  effect  of  some  cause.  I  attribute 
it  in  part  to  the  whites,  because  they  intro- 
duced among  my  countrymen  ardent  spirits  ; 
sediicetl  them  :into  a  love  for  it.  and  when 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  15 

uAder  its  baleful  influence,  wronged  them 
out  of  their  lawful  possessions — that  land 
where  reposed  the  ashes  of  their  sires — and 
not  only  so,  but  they  committed  violence  of 
the  most  revolting  and  basest  kind  upon  the 
perspns  of  the  female  portion  of  the  tribe, 
who  unul  the  arts,  and  vices,  and  debauchery 
o|;Che  whites  were  introduced  among  them, 
,* .  r  ..  happy,  and  peaceable,  and  cheerful, 
amed  over  their  goodly  possessions, 
J'*- aii;,  people  on  whom  the  sun  of  heaven 
hatb  ever  shone.  The  consequence  was, 
thai  Ihey  wtvr^^  scattered  abroad.  Now, 
many  f^(  th^^.f^-  were  seen  reeling  about  in- 
toxiOi  :ci  wiih  ii(!5^i0f>^,t:iv'?jrecting  to  provide 
for  tliemselves  or  families,  who  before  vrere 
assiduously  engaged  in  supplying  the  neces- 
sities of  those  depending  upon  them. 

But  to  return— After  1  had  been  nursed 
up  about  a  year,  I  had  so  far  recovered,  that 
it  was  thouglit  proper  to  bind  me  out,  until  I 
should  attain  the  age  of  twenty-one  years. 
As  I  was  then  only  five  years  old,  Mr.  Fur- 
man  thought  he  could  not  keep  me,  as  he 
was  a  poor  man,  and  obtained  his  living  by 
the  work  of  his  hands.  He  was  a  cooper  by 
trade,  and  employed  himself  in  his  business 
when  he  was  not  engaged  in  working  on  his 
farm.  They  had  become  very  fond  of  me, 
and  as  T  couid  not  be  satisfied  to  leave  tliem. 


16  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

as  I  loved  them  with  the  strength  of  fihal 
love,  he  at  last  concluded  to  keep  me  until  I 
was  of  age.  According  to  the  spirit  of  the 
indentures,  if  I  mistake  not,  I  was  to  have 
so  much  instruction  as  to  be  able  to  read  and 
write,  and  at  the  expiration  of  the  term  of 
my  apprenticeship  they  were  to  furnish  me 
with  two  suits  of  clothes.  They  used  me 
with  the  utmost  kindness — I  had  enough  to 
eat  and  to  wear — and  every  thing  in  short 
to  make  me  comfortable.  According  to  their 
agreement,  when  1  had  reached  my  sixth 
year,  they  sent  me  to  school — this  they  con- 
tinued to  do  for  six  successive  winters,  in 
which  time  I  learned  to  read  and  write,  so 
that  I  might  be  understood.  This  was  all 
the  instruction  of  the  kind  I  ever  received. 
But  I  desire  to  be  truly  thankful  to  God  for 
this — I  cannot  make  you  sensible  of  the 
amount  of  benefit  I  have  received  from  it. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Since  I  have  "  entered  upon  the  stage  of 
action,"  I  have  heard  much  said  about  in- 
fants feeling  as  it  were  the  operations  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,   or  convictions,  on  their  little 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  i' 

minds,  relative  to  a  future  state.     But  were 
I  called  upon  for  my  opinion  on  this,  I  shou  d 
say  in  the  first  place  that  it  is  owing  mainly 
i  to  the  manner  in  which  children  are  brought 
i  up.     If  proper  and  constant  means  are  used 
to  impress  upon  their  young  and  susceptible 
minds,  sentiments  of  truth,  virtue,  morality, 
and  religion,  and  these  efforts  are  sustained 
by  a  corresponding  practice  on  the  part  ot 
parents  or  those  who  essay  to  make  these 
early  impressions,  we  may  rationally  trust 
that  as  their  young  minds  espand,they  will  be 
led  to  act  upon  the  wholesome  principles 
they  have  received— and  that  at  a  very  early 
period  these  good  impressions  will  be  more 
indelibly  engraved  on  their  hearts  by  the 
co-operating  influences  of  that  Spirit,  who 
in  the  days  of  his  glorious  incarnation,  said, 
«  Suffer  httle  children  to  come  unto  me,  and 
forbid  them  not,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom 
of  heaven."  , 

But  to  my  experience,  and  the  reader 
knows  full  well  that  experience  is  the  best 
schoolmaster:  for,  what  we  have  expe- 
rienced, that  we  know,  and  all  the  world 
cannot  possibly  beat  it  out  of  us.  I  wel  re- 
member the  conversation  that  took  place 
between  Mrs.  Furman  and  myself  when  I 
was  about  six  years  of  age.  She  was  attached 
to  the  Baptist  church,  and  was  esteemed  as 


18  A    SON    OF    THE    FOKEfelV 

a  very  pious  woman.  Of  this  I  have  not  the 
shadow  of  a  doubt,  as  her  whole  course  of 
conduct  was  upright  and  exemplary.  On 
this  occasion  she  spoke  to  me  respecting  a 
future  state  of  existence,  and  told  me  that  I 
might  die,  and  enter  upon  it,  to  which  I 
repHed  that  1  was  too  young — that  old  people 
only  died.  But  she  assured  me  that  I  waS' 
not  too  young,  and  in  order  to  convince  me 
of  the  truth  of  the  observation,  she  referi-ed 
me  to  the  grave  yard,  where  many  younger 
and  smaller  persons  than  myself  were  laid 
to  moulder  in  the  earth.  1  had  of  course 
nothing  to  say — but,  notwithstanding,  1  could 
not  fully  comprehend  the  nature  of  death, 
the  meaning  of  a  future  state,  yet  1  felt  an 
indescribable  sensation  pass  through  my 
frame,  I  trembled  and  was  sore  afraid,  and 
for  sometime  endeavoured  to  hide  myself 
from  the  destroying  monster,  but  I  could  fmd 
no  place  of  refuge.  The  conversation  and 
pious  admonitions  of  this  godly  lady  made  a 
lasting  impression  on  my  mind.  At  times,  , 
however,  this  impression  appeared  to  be' 
wearing  away — then  again  I  would  become 
thoughtful,  make  serious  enquiries,  and  seem' 
anxious  to  know  something  more  certain  re- 
specting myself,  and  that  state  of  existence 
beyond  the  grave,  in  which  I  was  instructed 
to  believe.    About  this  time  I  was  taken  to 


A.    SON    OF    THE     FOREST.  19 

ill  order  to  hear  the  word  of  God,  and  receive 
instructiou  in  divine  things.  This  was  the 
first  time  I  had  ever  entered  a  house  of  wor- 
ship, and  instead  of  attending  to  what  the 
minister  said,!  was  employed  in  gazing  about 
the  house,  or  playing  with  the  unruly  boys, 
with  vt^hom  i  was  seated  in  the  gallery.  On 
my  return  home,  Mr.  Furman,  who  had  been 
apprised  of  my  conduct,  told  me  that  I  had 
acted  very  wrong.  He  did  not  however  stop 
here.  He  went  on  to  tell  me  how  1  ought 
to  behave  in  church,  and  to  this  very  day  I 
bless  God  for  such  wholesome  and  timely 
instruction,  and  the  man  who  taught  me 
these  things.  In  this  particular  I  was  not 
slow  to  learn,  as  I  do  not  remember  that 
I  have  from  that  day  to  this,  misbehaved  in 
the  house  of  God. 

It  may  not  be  improper  to  remark  in  this 
place,  that  a  vast  proportion  of  the  miscon- 
duct of  young  people  in  church,  is  chargea- 
ble to  their  parents  and  guardians.  It  is  to 
be  feared  that  there  are  too  many  professing 
christians  who  feel  satisfied  if  their  children 
or  those  under  their  care  enter  on  a  sabbath 
day  within  the  walls  of  the  sanctuary,  without 
reference  to  their  conduct  while  there.  I 
would  have  such  persons  seriously  ask  them- 
selves whether  they  think  they  discharge 
the  duties  obligatory  on  them  by  the  relation 


20  A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST. 

in  which  they  stand  to  their  Maker,  as  well 
as  those  committed  to  their  care,  by  so  much 
neghgence  on  their  part.  The  christian 
feels  it  a  duty  imposed  on  him  to  conduct  his 
children  to  the  house  of  God.  But  he  rests 
not  here.  He  must  have  an  eye  over  them, 
and  if  they  act  well,  approve  and  encourage 
them  ;  if  otherwise,  point  out  to  them  their 
error,  and  persuade  them  to  observe  a  dis- 
creet and  exemplary  course  of  conduct  while 
in  church. 

After  a  while  1  became  very  fond  of  at- 
tending on  the  word  of  God — then  again  I 
would  meet  the  enemy  of  my  soul,  who 
would  strive  to  lead  me  away,  and  in  many 
instances  he  was  but  too  successful,  and  to 
this  day  I  remember  that  nothing  scarcely 
grieved  me  so  m.uch,  when  my  mind  had 
been  thus  petted,  than  to  be  called  by  a 
nick  name.  If  1  was  spoken  to  in  the  spirit 
of  kindness,  I  would  be  instantly  disarmed 
of  my  stubbornness,  and  ready  to  perform 
any  thing  required  of  me.  I  know  of  nothing 
so  disgusting  to  a  child  as  to  be  repeatedly 
called  by  an  improper  name.  I  thought  it 
disgraceful  to  be  called  an  Indian ;  it  was 
considered  as  a  slur  upon  an  oppressed  and 
scattered  nation,  and  I  have  often  been  led 
^  inquire  where  the  whites  received  this 
>vo,rd,  which  they  so  often  threw  as  an  op- 


A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST., 


pTobrious  epithet  at  the  sons  of  the  forest. 
I  couM  not  find  it  in  the  bible,  and  therefore 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  a  word 
imported  for  the  special  purpose  of  degrading 
us.  At  other  times  I  thought  it  was  derived 
from  the  term  in-genuity.  The  proper  term 
whicli  ought  to  be  applied  to  our  nation,  to 
distinguish  it  from  the  rest  of  the  human 
family,  is  that  of  "  Natives'''' — and  I  humbly 
conceive  that  the  native?  of  this  country  are 
the  only  people  under  heaven  who  have  a 
just  title  to  the  name,  inasmuch  as  we  are 
tlie  only  people  who  retain  the  original  com- 
plexion of  our  father  Adam.  Notwith- 
standing my  thoughts  on  this  matter,  so 
completely  was  I  weaned  from  the  interests 
and  affections  of  my  brethren,  that  a  mere 
threat  of  being  sent  away  among  the  indians 
into  the  dreary  woods,  had  a  much  better 
effect  in  making  ma  obedient  to  the  com- 
mands of  my  superiors,  than  any  corporeal 
punishment  that  they  ever  inflicted.  I  had 
received  a  lesson  in  the  unnatural  treatment 
of  my  own  relations,  which  could  not  be 
effaced  ;  and  I  thought  that  if  those  who 
should  have  loved  and  protected  me,  treated 
me  with  such  unkindness,  surely  I  had  no 
reason  to  expect  mercy  or  favour  at  the 
hands  of  those  who  knew  me  in  no  other  re- 
lation than  that  of  a  cast  off  member  of  the 


23  A    SON    OF    THE    TOREST. 

tribe.  A  threat,  of  tho  kind  alluded  to, 
invariably  produced  obedience  on  my  part, 
so  far  as  I  understood  the  nature  of  the 
command. 

I  cannot  perhaps  give  a  belter  idea  of  the 
dread  which  prevaded  my  mind  on  seeing 
any  of  my  brethren  of  the  forest,  than  by  re- 
lating the  following  occurrence.  One  day 
several  of  the  family  went  into  the  woods  to 
gather  berries,  taking  me  with  them.  We 
had  not  been  out  long  before  we  fell  in  with 
a  company  of  females,  on  the  same  errand — 
their  complexion  was,  to  say  the  least,  as 
dark  as  that  of  th©  natives.  This  circum- 
stance filled  my  mind  with  terror,  and  I 
broke  from  the  party  wi-th  my  utmost  speed, 
and  I  could  not  muster  courage  enough  to 
look  back  until  I  had  reached  home.  By 
this  time  my  imagination  had  pictured  out  a 
tale  of  blood,  and  as  soon  as  1  regained 
breath  sufficient  to  answer  the  questions 
which  my  master  asked,  I  informed  him  that 
we  had  met  a  body  of  the  natives  in  the 
woods,  but  what  had  become  of  the  party  I 
could  not  tell.  Notv/ithstandingthe  manifest 
incredibility  of  my  tale  of  terror,  BIr.  Fur- 
man  was  agitated  ;  my  very  appearance  was 
sufficient  to  convince  him  that  I  had  been 
terrified  by  something,  and  summoning  the 
remainder  of  the  family,  we  sallied  out  m 


A    SON^  OF    THE    FOREST.  23 

quest  of  the  absent  party,  whom  we  found 
searching  for  me  among  the  bushes.  The 
whole  mystery  was  soon  unravelled.  It 
may  be  proper  for  me  here  to  remark,  that 
the  great  fear  I  entertained  of  my  brethren, 
was  occasioned  by  the  many  stories  I  had 
heard  of  their  cruelty  towards  the  whites — 
how  they  were  in  the  habit  of  killing  and 
scalping  men,  women  and  children.  But  the 
whites  did  not  tell  me  that  they  were  in  a 
great  majority  of  instances  the  aggressors — 
that  they  had  imbrued  their  hands  in  the  life 
blood  of  my  brethren,  driven  them  from  their 
once  peaceful  and  happy  homes— that  they 
introduced  among  them  the  fatal  and  exter- 
minating diseases  of  civilized  life.  If  the 
whites  had  told  me  how  cruel  they  had  been 
to  the  "  poor  indian,"  1  should  have  appre- 
hended as  much  harm  from  them. 

Shortly  after  this  occurrence  I  relapsed 
into  my  former  bad  habits — was  fond  of  the 
company  of  the  boys,  and  in  a  short  time 
lost  in  a  great  measure  that  spirit  of  obedi- 
ence which  had  made  me  the  favourite  of 
my  mistress.  I  was  easily  led  astray,  and 
once  in  particular,  I  was  induced  by  a  boy, 
(my  senior  by  five  or  six  years)  to  assist 
him  in  his  depredations  on  a  water  melon 
patch  belonging  to  one  of  the  neighbors. 
But  we  were  found  out,  and  my  companion 
B   3 


^  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREIT. 

in  wickedness  led  me  deeper  in  sin,  by  per- 
suading me  to  deny  the  crime  laid  to  our 
charge.  I  obeyed  him  to  the  very  letter, 
and  when  accused,  flatly  denied  knowing 
any  thing  of  the  matter.  The  boasted  cour- 
age of  the  boy,  however,  began  to  fail  as 
soon  as  he  saw  danger  thicken,  and  he  con- 
fessed it  as  strongly  as  he  had  denied  it. 
The  man  from  whom  we  had  pillaged  the 
melons  threatened  to  send  us  to  Newgate, 
but  he  relented.  The  story  shortly  after- 
ward reached  the  ears  of  the  good  Mrs. 
Furman,  who  talked  seriously  to  me  about 
it.  She  told  me  that  I  could  be  sent  to 
prison  for  it — that  I  had  done  wrong,  and 
gave  me  a  great  deal  of  wholesome  advice. 
This  had  a  much  better  effect  than  forty 
floggings — it  sunk  so  deep  into  my  mind  that 
the  impression  can  never  be  effaced. 

I  now  went  on  without  difficulty  for  a  few 
months,  when  I  was  assailed  by  fresh  and  un- 
expected troubles.  One  of  the  girls  belong- 
ing to  the  house  had  taken  some  offence  at 
me,  and  declared  she  would  be  revenged. 
The  better  to  effect  this  end,  she  told  Mr. 
Furman  that  I  had  not  only  threatened  to 
kill  her,  but  had  actually  pursued  her  with 
a  knife,  whereupon  he  came  to  the  place 
where  1  was  working  and  began  to  whip  me 
severely.     I  could  not  tell  for  what.     I  told 


A    iiOii    OF    THE    FORES'R-.'  x?D 

him  I  had  done  no  harm,  to  which  he  re- 
plied, "  I  will  learn  you,  you  Indian  dog, 
how  to  chase  people  with  a  knife."  I  told 
him  1  had  not,  but  he  would  not  believe  me, 
as  he  knew  that  I  had  denied  taking  the 
melons,  and  continued  to  whip  me  for  a  long 
while.  But  the  poor  man  soon  found  out 
his  error,  as  after  he  had  flogged  me,  he  un- 
dertook to  investigate  the  matter,  when  to 
his  amazement  he  discovered  it  was  nothing 
but  fiction,  as  all  the  children  assured  him 
that  I  did  no  such  thing.  He  regretted  be- 
ing so  hast)* — bat  i  saw  wherein  the  great 
difficulty  consisted,  if  I  had  not  denied  the 
melon  affair,  he  would  have  believed  raCj 
but  as  I  had  uttered  an  untruth  about  that,  it 
was  natural  for  him  to  think  that  the  person 
who  will  tell  one  lie,  will  not  scruple  at  two. 
For  a  long  while  after  this  circumstance 
transpired,  I  did  not  associate  with  my  com- 
panions. 

About  this  time  the  Christians  came  in 
our  neighbourhood,  and  as  their  hearts  were 
warm  in  the  cause  of  God,  they  v»^ould  sing 
the  songs  of  Zion,  and  pray  earnestly  fox  one 
another.  I  felt  great  delight  in  attending 
their  meeting,  which  I  did  as  often  as  possi- 
"ble.  I  had  not  attended  these  meetings  a 
great  while  before  I  became  somewhat  seri^ 
ous.  1  listened  with  great  attention  to  the 
B   4 


26  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

word  ot'God,  and  though  only  eight  years  of 
age  I  was  resolved  to  become  tetter.  1  was 
encouraged  by  many  of  the  people — they 
did  every  thing  they  could  to  cheer  me. 
This  had  so  good  an  effect  upon  me,  that  I 
felt  determined  to  get  about  the  work  of  re- 
pentance. I  had  very  strange  feelings  for  a 
child  of  my  age.  One  day  the  preacher  se- 
lected for  the  foundation  of  his  sermon  a 
text  relating  to  the  future  state  of  mankind. 
He  spoke  much  on  the  eternal  happiness  of 
the  righteous,  and  the  everlasting  misery  of 
the  ungodly,  and  his  observations  sunk  with 
awful  weight  upon  my  mind,  and  I  was  led' 
to  make  many  serious  enquiries  about  the 
way  of  salvation.  In  these  days  of  young 
desires  and  youthful  aspirations,  I  found  Mrs. 
FiM'man  ever  ready  to  give  me  good  advice. 
My  mind  was  intent  upon  learning  the  lesson 
of  righteousness,  in  order  that  I  might  learn 
to  walk  in  the  good  way,  and  cease  to  do 
evil.  My  mind  for  one  so  young  was  great- 
ly drawn  out  to  seek  the  Lord.  This  spirit 
was  manifested  in  my  daily  walk  ;  and  the 
friends  of  Christ  noticed  my  afflictions;  they 
knew  that  1  was  sincere  because  m.y  spirits 
were  depressed.  When  I  was  in  church  I 
could  not  at  times  avoid  giving  vent  to  my 
feelings,  and  often  have  I  wept  sorely  before 
the  Lord  and   his  people.     The  people  in 


A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST.  4/ 

the  neighbourhood,  of  course,  observed  this 
change  in  my  conduct — they  knew  I  had 
been  a  rude  child,  and  that  efforts  were  made 
to  bring  me  up  in  a  proper  manner,  but  the 
change  in  my  deportment  they  did  not  as- 
cribe to  the  influence  of  divine  grace,  in- 
asmuch as  they  all  considered  me  too  young 
to  be  impressed  with  a  sense  of  divine  things. 
They  were  tilled  with  unbelief.  1  need  not 
describe  the  peculiar  feelings  of  my  soul. 

I  became  very  fond  of  attending  meetings ; 
so  much  so  that  Mr.  Furman  forbid  me.  He 
supposed  that  I  only  went  for  the  purpose  of 
seeing  the  boys  and  playing  with  them.  This 
thing  caused  me  a  great  deal  of  grief;  I 
went  for  many  days  with  my  head  and  heart 
bowed  down.  No  one  had  any  idea  of  the 
naental  agony  I  suffered,  and  perhaps  the 
mind  of  no  untutored  child  of  my  age  was 
ever  more  seriously  exercised.  Sometimes 
I  was  tried  and  tempted — then  I  would 
be  overcome  by  the  fear  of  death.  By  day 
and  by  night  I  was  in  a  continual  ferment. 
To  add  to  my  fears  about  this  time,  death 
entered  the  family  of  Mr,  Furman  and  re- 
moved his  mother-in-law.  I  was  much  af- 
fected, as  the  old  lady  was  the  first  corpse  1 
had  ever  seen.  I  was  much  concerned  for 
the  family  and  mourned  witi^i  them.  She  had 
always  been  so  kind  to  me  that  I  misssed  her 
B   5 


2y  A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST. 

quite   as  much  as  her  children.     The  old 
lady  had  allowed  me  to  call  her  mother. 

Shortly  after  this  occurrence  I  was  taken 
ill.  1  then  thought  1  should  surely  die.  The 
distress  of  body  and  the  anxiety  of  mind 
wore  me  down.  Now  1  think  that  the  dis- 
ease with  which  I  was  afflicted  was  a  very 
curious  one.  The  physician  could  not  ac- 
count for  it,  and  how  should  I  be  able  to  do 
it,  and  neither  had  those  who  were  about 
me  ever  witnessed  any  disorder  of  the  kind. 
Whenever  I  would  try  to  lay  down,  it  would 
seem  as  if  something  was  choking  me  to 
death,  and  if  I  attempted  to  sit  up,  the  wind 
would  rise  in  my  throat  and  nearly  strangle 
me.  1  felt  continually  as  if  I  was  about  be- 
ing suffocated.  I  was  consequently  a  great 
deal  of  trouble  to  the  family,  as  some  one 
had  to  be  with  me.  One  day  Mr.  Furman 
thought  he  would  frighten  the  disease  out  of 
me.  Accordingly  lie  told  me  that  all  that 
ailed  me  was  this — that  the  devil  had  taken 
complete  possession  of  me,  and  that  he  was 
determined  to  flog  him  out.  This  threat  had 
not  the  desired  efect.  One  night,  however, 
I  got  up,  and  went  out,  although  I  was 
afraid  to  be  alone,  and  continued  out  by  the 
door  until  after  the  family  had  retired  to 
bed.  After  a  while  Mr.  F.  got  up  and  gave 
me  a  dreadful  whipping.     He  really  thought, 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  29 

i  believe  that  the  devil  was  in  me,  and  sup- 
posed that  the  birch  was  the  best  mode  of 
ejecting  him.  But  the  flogging  was  as  fruit- 
less as  the  preceding  threat  in  the  accom- 
plishment of  his  object,  and  he  poor  man 
found  out  his  mistake,  like  many  others  who 
act  without  discretion. 

One  morning  after  this  I  went  out  in  the 
yard  to  assist  Mrs.  Furman  milk  the  cows. 
We  had  not  been  out  long  before  1  felt  very 
singular,  and  began  to  make  a  strange  noise. 
I  believed  that  I  was  going  to  die,  and  ran 
up  to  the  house  ;  she  followed  me  immedi- 
ately, expecting  me  to  breathe  my  last. 
Every  effort  to  breathe  was  accompanied  by 
this  strange  noise,  which  was  so  loud  as  to 
be  heard  fifteen  or  twenty  rods  off.  After  a 
while,  however,  contrary  to  all  expectation 
1  began  to  revive,  and  from  that  very  day 
my  disorder  began  to  abate,  and  I  gradually 
regained  my  former  health. 

Soon  after  1  recovered  from  my  sickness, 
I  went  astray,  associated  again  with  my  old 
school  fellows,  and  on  some  occasions  pro- 
faned the  sabbath  day.  1  did  not  do  so  with- 
out warning,  as  conscience  would  speak  to 
me  when  I  did  wrong.  Nothing  very  extra- 
ordinary occurred  until  I  had  reached  the 
age  of  eleven  years.  At  this  time  it  was 
fashionable  for  boys  to  run  away,  and  the 


30  A    SON    01;'    THE    FOREST. 

devil  put  it  into  the  head  of  the  oldest  boy 
on  the  farm  to  persuade  me  to  follow  the- 
fashion.  He  told  me  that  I  could  take  care 
of  myself,  and  get  my  own  living.  1  thought 
it  was  a  very  pretty  notion  to  be  a  man — to 
do  business  for  myself  and  become  rich. 
Like  a  fool  1  concluded  to  make  the  experi- 
ment, and  accordingly  began  to  pack  up  my 
clothes  as  deliberately  as  could  be.  in  which 
my  adviser  assisted.  I  had  been  once  or 
twice  at  New  London,  where  I  saw,  as  I 
thought,  every  thing  wonderful :  thither  I 
determined  to  bend  my  course,  as  I  expect- 
ed, that  on  reaching  the  town  I  should  be 
metamorphosed  into  a  person  of  conse- 
quence; 1  had  the  world  and  every  thing 
Bciy  little  heart  could  desire  in  a  string,  when 
behold,  my  companion  who  had  persuaded 
me  to  act  thus,  informed  my  masier  that  I 
was  going  to  run  off.  At  first  he  would  not 
believe  the  boy,  but  my  clothing  already 
packed  up  was  ample  evidence  of  my  inten- 
tion. On  being  questioned  I  acknowiedged 
the  fact.  I  did  not  wish  to  leave  them — told 
Mr.  Furman  so  ;  he  believed  me,  but  thought 
best  that  for  a  while  T  should  have  another 
master.  He  accordingly  agreed  to  transfer 
my  indentures  to  Judge  Hillhouse  for  the 
sum  of  tvs^enty  dollars.  Of  coarse  after  the 
bargain  was  made,  my  consent  was  to  be  ob- 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  31 

tained,  but  I  was  as  unwilling  to  go  now,  as 
[  had  been  anxious  to  run  away  before.  Af- 
ter some  persuasion,  I  agreed  to  try  it  for  a 
fortnight,  on  condition  that  I  should  take  my 
dog  with  me,  and  my  request  being  granted, 
I  was  soon  under  the  old  man's  roof,  as  he 
only  lived  about  six  miles  off.  Here  every 
thing  was  done  to  make  me  contented,  be- 
cause they  thought  to  promote  their  own  in- 
terests by  securing  my  services.  They  fed 
me  with  nicknacks,  and  soon  after  I  went 
among  them,  I  had  a  jack  knife  presented  to 
me,  which  was  the  first  one  I  had  ever  seen. 
Like  other  boys,  I  spent  my  time  in  whittling 
and  playing  with  my  dog,  and  was  withal 
very  happy.  But  I  was  home  sick  at  heart, 
and  as  soon  as  my  fortnight  had  expired,  I 
went  home  without  ceremony.  Mr.  Far- 
man's  family  were  surprized  to  see  me,  but 
that  surprise  was  mutual  joy,  in  which  my 
faithful  dog  appeared  to  participate. 

The  joy  I  felt  on  returning  home  as  I 
hoped,  was  turned  to  sorrow  on  being  in- 
formed that  I  had  been  sold  to  the  judge, 
and  must  instantly  return.  This  I  was  com- 
pelled to  do.  And  reader,  all  this  sorrow 
was  in  consequence  of  being  led  away  by  a 
bad  boy  :  if  I  had  not  listened  to  him  I  should 
not  have  lost  my  home.  Such  treatment  I 
conceive  to  be  the  best  means  to  accomplish 


32  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST 


the  ruin  of  a  child,  as  the  reader  will  see  ir 
the  sequel.  I  was  sold  to  the  judge  at  a  time 
when  age  had  rendered  him  totally  unfit  tc| 
manage  an  unruly  lad.  If  he  undertook  tc 
correct  me,  v^hich  he  did  at  times,  I  did  nol 
regard  it  as  I  knew  that  I  could  run  off  from 
hita  if  he  was  too  severe,  and  besides  I  could 
do  what  I  pleased  in  defiance  of  his  authority. 
Now  the  old  gentleman  was  a  member  oJ 
the  Presbyterian  church,  and  withal  a  very, 
strict  one.  He  never  neglected  family  prayer, 
and  he  always  insisted  on  my  being  present. 
I  did  not  believe,  or  rather  had  no  faith  in 
his  prayers,  because  it  was  the  same  thing 
from  day  to  day,  and  I  had  heard  it  repeated 
so  often,  that  I  knew  it  as  well  as  he.  Al- 
though I  was  so  young,  I  did  not  believe  that 
Christians  ought  to  learn  their  prayers,  and 
knowing  that  he  repeated  the  same  thing 
from  day  to  day,  is,  I  think,  the  very  reason 
why  his  petitions  did  me  no  good.  I  could 
fix  no  value  on  his  prayers. 

After  a  little  v/hile  the  conduct  of  my  new 
guardians  was  changed  towards  me.  Once 
secured,  I  was  no  longer  the  favourite.  The 
few  clothes  I  had  were  not  taken  care  of,  by 
which  I  mean,  no  pains  were  taken  to  keep 
them  clean  and  whole,  and  the  consequence 
was  that  in  a  little  time  they  were  all  "  tat- 
tered and  torn,"  and  I  was  nM  fit  to  be  seen 


A     SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  33 

|in  decent  company.  I  had  not  the  oppoftu- 
nity  of  attending  meeting  as  before.  Yet  as 
the  divine  and,  reclaiming  impression  had 
not  been  entirely  defaced,  I  would  frequent-. 
\y  retire  behind  the  barn,  and  attempt 
to  pray  in  my  weak  manner.  I  now  became 
quite  anxious  to  attend  evening  meetings  a 
few  miies  oif:  I  asked  the  judge  if  I  should 
go  and  take  one  of  the  horses,  to  which  he 
consented.  This  promise  greatly  delighted 
me^ — but  when  it  was  time  for  me  to  go,  all 
my  hopes  were  dashed  at  once,  as  the  judge 
had  changed  his  inind.  I  was  not  to  be  foil- 
ed so  easily  ;  I  watched  the  (irst  opportunity 
and  slipped  off  with  one  of  the  horses, 
reached  the  meeting,  and  returned  in  safety. 
Here  I  was  to  blame;  if  he  acted  wrong,  it 
did  not  justify  me  in  doing  so  ;  but  being  suc- 
cessful in  one  grand  act  of  disobedience,  I 
was  encouraged  to  make  another  similar  at- 
tempt, whenever  my  unsanctified  disposi- 
tions prompted';  for  the  very  next  time  I 
wished  to  go  to  meeting,  I  thought  I  would 
take  the  horse  again,  and  in  the  same  manner 
too,  without  the  knowledge  of  my  master. 
As  he  v/as  by  some  mear.s  apprized  of  my 
intention,  he  prevented  my  doing  so,  and  had 
the  horses  locked  up  in  the  stable.  He  then 
commanded  me  to  give  him  the  bridle  ;  I 
was  obstinate  for  a  time,  then  threw  it  at 


^4  A    SON    OF    THK    FOREST. 

the  old  gentleman,  and  run  off.  I  did  not 
return  nntil  the  next  day,  when  I  received 
a  flogging  for  my  bad  conduct,  which  de- 
termined me  to  run  away.  Now  the  judge 
was  partly  to  blame  for  all  this.  He  had  in 
th'^  first  place  treated  me  with  the  utmost 
kindness  until  he  had  made  sure  of  me. 
Then  the  whole  coui*se  of  his  conduct 
changed,  and  I  believed  he  fulfilled  only  one 
item  of  the  transferred  indentures,  and  that 
was  work.  Of  this  there  was  no  lack.  To 
be  sure,  I  had  enough  to  eat,  such  as  it  was, 
but  he  did  not  send  me  to  school  as  he 
promised. 

A  few  days  found  me  on  my  way  to  New 
London,  where  I  staid  awhile.  I  then 
pushed  on  to  Waterford,  and  as  my  father 
lived  about  twenty  miles  off,  I  concluded  to 
go  and  see  him.  1  got  there  safely,  and  told 
him  I  had  come  on  a  visit,  and  that  I  should 
stay  one  week.  At  the  expiratioii  of  the 
week  he  bid  me  go  home,  and  I  obeyed  him. 
On  my  return  I  was  treated  rather  coolly, 
and  this  not  suiting  my  disposition,  I  run  off 
again,  but  returned  in  a  few  days.  Now,  as 
the  judge  found  he  could  not  controul  me, 
he  got  heartily  tired  of  me,  and  wished  to 
hand  me  over  to  some  one  else,  so  he  ob- 
tained a  place  for  me  in  New  London.  I 
knew  nothing  of  it,  and  I  was  greatly  mor 


A    SON    OP    THE    FOREST.  35 

tificd  to  think  that  I  was  sold  in  this  way. 
If  my  consent  had  been  solicited  as  a  matter 
of  form,  I  should  not  have  felt  so  bad.  But 
to  be  sold  to,  and  treated  unkindly,  by  those 
who  had  got  our  father's  lands  for  nothing, 
was  too  much  to  bear.  When  all  things 
were  ready,  the  judge  told  me  that  he  wanted 
me  to  go  to  New  London  with  a  neighbour, 
to  purchase  salt.  I  was  delighted,  and  went 
with  the  man,  expecting  to  return  that  night. 
When  I  reached  the  place  I  found  my  mis- 
take. The  name  of  the  person  to  whom  I 
was  transferred  this  time,  was  Gen.  William 
Williams,  and  as  my  treatment  at  the  Judge's 
was  none  of  the  best,  I  went  home  with  him 
contentedly.  Indeed^I  felt  glad  that  1  had 
changed  masters,  and  more  especially  that  1 
was  to  reside  in  the  city.  The  finery  and 
show  caught  my  eye,  and  captivated  my 
heart.  I  can  truly  say  that  my  situation  was 
better  now  than  it  had  been  previously  to 
my  residence  in  New  London.  In  a  little 
time  I  was  furnished  with  good  new  clothes. 
I  had  enough  to  eat,  both  as  it  respects 
quality  and  quantity,  and  my  work  was  light. 
The  whole  family  treated  me  kindly,  and 
the  only  difficulty  of  moment  was  that  they 
all  wished  to  be  masters.  But  1  would  not 
obey  all  of  them.  There  was  a  French  boy 
in  the  family,  who  one  day  told  Mr.  Williams 


36  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

a  wilfal  lie  about  me,  which  he  believed, 
and  gave  me  a  horse-whipping,  without  ask- 
ing me  a  single  question  about  it.  Now  1  do 
not  suppose  that  he  whipped  me  so  much  on 
account  of  what  the  boy  told  him  as  he  did 
from  the  influence  of  the  Judge's  directions.. 
He  tised  the  falsehood  as  a  pretext  fori 
flogging  me,  as  from  what  he  said  he  was 
determined  to  make  a  good  boy  of  me  at' 
once — as  if  stripes  were  calculated  lo  effect 
that  which  love,  kindness  and  instruction 
can  only  successfully  accomplish.  He  told 
me  ti:iat  if  I  ever  run  away  from  him  he 
would  follow  me  to  the  uttermost  parts  of 
the  earth.  I  knew  from  this  observation  that 
the  Judge  had  told  him  I  was  a  runaway. 
However  cruel  this  treatment  appeared,  for 
the  acccsation  was  false,  yet  it  did  me  much 
good,  as  i  was  always  ready  to  obey  the 
general  and  his  lady  at  all  times.  But  I 
could  not  and  would  not  obey  any  but  my 
superiors.  In  short,  I  got  on  very  smoothly 
for  a  season. 

The  general  attended  the  Presbyterian 
church,  and  was  exact  in  having  all  his  family 
with  him  in  the  house  of  God.  I  of  course 
formed  one  of  the  number.  Though  1  did 
not  profess  religion,  I  observed  and  felt  that 
their  ways  were  not  like  the  ways  of  the 
Christians.     It  appeared  inconsistent  to  mc 


A    SON    OF    THE    I'OKEST.  31 

ibi-  a  minister  to  read  his  sermon— to  turn 
over  leaf  after  leaf,  and  at  the  conclusion  say 
Amen,  seemed  to  me  like  an  "  empty  sound 
and  a  tinkling  cymbal."  1  was  not  benefitted 
by  his  reading.  It  did  not  arouse  me  to  a 
sense  of  my  danger-and  i  am  of  the  opinion 
that  it  had  no  better  effect  on  the  people  of 
his  charge.  1  liked  to  attend  church,  as  I 
had  been  taught  in  my  younger  years  to 
venerate  the  Sabbath  day;  and  although 
young  1  could  plainly  perceive  the  difference 
betvvlen  the  preachers  I  »»='<"'"?7' f '^^ 
and  the  minister  at  whose  church  I  attended 
I  thought,  as  near  as  I  can  remember,  that 
he  Clu-istians  depended  on  the  Holy  Spire's 
influence  entirely,  .vbile  this  mimser  de- 
pended as  much  upon  his  learning.  1  would 
Lt  be  understood  as  saying  -»>  f  ^'"S/^'"^^ 
knowled<re  ;  in  its  place  it  ,s  good,  and  highly 
necessar^to  a  faithful  preacher  of  righteous- 
"ess.  V^Miat  I  obiect  to  is,  placing  too  much 
reliance  in  it,  making  a  god  o/it,  &c. 

&ery  thing  went  on  ^'""""''J- '^"•^  7°  "Z 
Shi  ee  years.  About  this  fime  the  Methodists 
WaVto  hold  meetings  m  the  neighbour- 
hood, and  consequently  a  storm  of  persecu- 
ion  gathered ;  th.  Pharisee  and  the  worldling 
u^ed  heartily  in  abusing  them.  'Ihe  gall 
Ld  wormwood  of  sectarian  malice  were 
emitted,  and  every  evil  report  prejudicial  to 
(his  oious  people  was  freely  circulated.   And 


3^  A    SON    OF    THE    i'OREsT.     ' 

it  was  openly  said  that  the  character  of  u 
respectable  man  would  receive  a  stain,  and 
a  deep  one  too,  by  attending  one  of  their 
meetings.  Indeed  the  stories  circulated  about 
them  were  bad  enough  to  deter  people  of 
Character  !"  from  attending  the  Methodist 
ministry  But  it  had  no  effect  on  me.  I 
bought  I  had  no  character  to  lose  in  the  es- 
toation  of  those  who  were  accounted  great. 
But  what  cared  they  for  me.  They  had 
possession  of  jhe  red  man's  inheritance,  and 
had  deprived  me  of  liberty;  w.th  this  they 
were  satisfied  and  could  do  as  they  pleased  ; 
therefore  I  thought  1  would  do  as  1  pleased 

noisy  Methodist.    \^  ben  J  reached  the  house 
I  found  a  clever  company.     They  did  not 
appear  to  differ  much  from  '' respectable'^ 
people.     They  were  clever,  neatly  and  de- 
cently clothed,  and  1  could  not  see  that  they 
differed  from  other  people  except  in  their 
behaviour  wLuh  was  more  kind  and  gentle- 
manly.     Their  counteiiance  was  heavenlv 
their  songs  were  like   sweetest   music-^in 
their  manners  they  were  plain.     Their  Ian 
guage  was  not  fashioned  after  the  wisdom  of 
men.     When    the    minisior    preached    he 
spoke  as  one  having  authoritv.     The  excr 
cises  were  accompanied  by'  the  power  of 
Uod.     His  people  shouted  for  ioy— while 
sinners  wept.     This  being  the  first  time  I 


A    SON      OF    THE    FOREST.  39 

?  had  ever  attended  Methodist  meeting,  all 
things  of  course  appeared  new  to  nne.  I 
was  very  far  from  forming  the  opinion  that 
most  of  the  neighbourhood  entertained  about 
P  them.  From  this  time  i  became  more 
serious,  and  soon  went  to  hear  the  Metho- 
dists .ay;ain,  and  I  was  constrained  to  believe 
that  they  were  the  true  people  of  God.  One 
person  a§ked  me  how  I  knew  it  ?  I  rephed 
that  I  was  convinced  in  my  own  mind  that 
they  possessed  something  more  than  the 
power  of  the  devil. 

I  now  attended  Methodist  nieeting  con- 
stantly, and  although  I  was  a  sinner  before 
God,  yet  I  felt  no  disposition  to  laugh  or 
scoff.  I  make  this  ob  er  ation  because  so 
many  people  went  to  these  meetings  to  make 
fun.  This  was  a  common  thing,  and  1  often 
wondered  how  persons  who  professed  to  be. 
considered  great,  i.  e.  '"  ladies  and  gentle- 
men," would  so  far  disgrace  then^:'  :ves  as 
to  scoff  in  the  house  of  God,  and  al  iiis  holy 
services.  Such  persons  let  themselves  down 
below  the  heathen,  in  point  of  moral  con- 
duct— below  the  heathen,  yes,  and  below 
the  level  of  the  brute  creation,  who  answer 
the  end' for  which  they  were  made. 

But  notwithstanding  the  people  were  so 
bad,  yet  the  Lord  had  respect  unto  the  la- 
bours of  his  servants  ;  his  ear  was  open  to 
Iheir  daily  supplications^  and   in  answer  to 


40  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST, 

prayer  he  was  pleased  to  revive  his  work.. 
The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  moved  forth 
among  the  people— the  spirit's  influence  was 
felt  at  every  meetinjj— the  people  of  God 
were  built  up  in  the  faith — their  confidence 
in  the  Lord  of  hosts  gathered  strength, 
while  many  sinners  were  alarmed,  and  began 
to  cry  aloud  for  mercy,  hi  a  little  time  the 
work  rolled  onward  like  an  overwhelming 
flood.  1  attended  meeting  as  often  as  I 
could.  Now  the  Methodists  and  all  who 
attended  their  meetings  were  greatly  perse- 
cuted. All  deiiominations  were  up  in' arms 
against  the  Methodists,  because  the  Lord 
was  blessing  their  labours,  and  making  them 
(a  poor  despised  people)  his  instruments  in 
the  conversion  of  sinners.  But  all  oppo- 
sition had  no  other  etTect  than  of  cementing 
the  brethren  more  closely  together  ;  the 
Avork  went  on,  as  the  Lord  was  with  them 
of  a  truth,  and  signally  owned  and  blessed 
their  labours.  At  on(^  of  these  meetin<;S  I 
was  induced  to  laugh,  I  believe  it  must  have 
been  to  smother  my  conviction,  as  it  did 
not  come  from  my  heart.  My  heart  was. 
troubled  on  account  of  sin.  and  v^^hen  con- 
viction pressed  upon  me,  I  endeavoured  not 
only  to  be  cheerful,  but  to  laugh  ;  and  thus 
drive  away  all  appearance  of  being  wroui{ht 
upon.  Shortly  after  this  1  was  affected  even 
unto  tears.   This  the  people  of  (he  world,  oh- 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  41 

served  and  immediately  enquired  if  i  was 
lone  of  the  Lamb's  children.     Brother  Hill 
was  then    speaking    from    this   passage  of 
I  scripture — Behold   the    Lamb  of  God^    that 
faketh  azvay  the  sins  of  the  laorUL     He  spoke 
feehngly  of  his  sufferings  upon  the  cross — of 
the  precious  blood  that  iiowed  hke  a  puri- 
fying river  from  his  sjde — of  his  sustaining 
the   accumulated  weight   ot  the  sins   of  the 
whole  world,  and  dying  to  satisfy  the   de- 
mands of  that  justice  which  could  only  be 
appeased  by  an  infinite  atonement.     1  felt 
convinced  that  Christ  died  for  all  mankind — 
that  age,  sect,  colour,  country,  or  situation, 
made   no   difference.     I  felt  an    assurance 
that  1  was  included  in  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion with  all  my  brethren.    No  one  can  con- 
ceive with  what  joy  I  hailed  this  neiv  doc- 
trine as  it  was  called — It  removed  every  ex- 
cuse, and  1  freely  believed  that  all  I  had  to 
do  was  to  look  in  faith  upon  the   Lamb  of 
God  that  made  himself  a  free-will  offering 
for  my  unregenerate  and  wicked  soul  upon 
the  cross.     My  spirits  were  depressed — my 
crimes   were   arrayed   before   me,  and   no 
tongue  can  tell  the  anguish  of  soul  I  felt. 

After  meeting  I  returned  home  with  a 
heavy  heart,  determined  to  seek  the  salva- 
tion of  my  soul.  This  night  I  slept  but  little — * 
at  times  I  would  be  melted  down  to  tender- 
ness and  tears,  and  then  again  mv  heart 
c3 


42  A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST, 

would  seem  as  hard  as  adamant.  I  wa= 
greatly  tempted.  The  evil  one  would  try 
to  persuade  me  that  I  was  not  in  the  pale  of 
mercy.  I  fancied  that  evil  spirits  stood 
around  my  bed — my  condilioi}  was  deplora- 
bly awful — and  I  longed  for  the  day  to  break 
as  much  as  the  tempest  tost  mariner  who  ex- 
pects every  moment  to  be  washed  from  the 
wreck  to  which  he  fondly  ciings.  So  it  was 
with  me  upon  the  wreck  of. the  world— 
buffetted  by  temptations— assailed  by  the 
devil — sometimes  in  despair— then  believing, 
against  hope.  My  heart  seemed  at  times 
almost  ready  to  break,  while  the  tears  of- 
contrition  coursed  rapidly  down  my  cheeks. 
But  sin  was  the  cause  of  this,  and  no  won- 
der I  groaned  and  wept.  I  had  often  siniTed,^ 
and  my  accumulated  transgressions  had  piled 
^hemselves  as  a  rocky  mountain  on  my  heart, 
and  how  could  1  endure  it?  The  weight 
thereof  seemed  to  crush  me  down.  In  the 
night  season  1  had  frightful  visions,  and 
would  often  start  from  my  sleep  and  gaze 
round  the  room,  as  I  was  ever  in  -dread  of 
seeing  the  evil  one  ready  to  carry  me  off. 
I  continued  in  this  frame  of  mind  for  more 
that  seven  weeks. 

My  distress  finally  became  so  acute  that 
the  family  took  notice  of  it.  Some  of  them 
persecuted  me  because  I  was  serious  and 
fond  of  attending  meeting.     Now.  persecu- 


A    SON    Oi     THE    roREST.  43 

lion  raged  on  every  hand,  within  and  with- 
out, and  I  had  none  to  take  me  by  the  hand 
and  say,  "  go  with  us  and  we  will  do  thee 
good."  But  in  the  midst  of  difficulties  so 
great  to  one  only  ftfteen  years  of  age,  I 
ceased  not  to  pray  for  the  salvation  of  my 
sou^.  Very  often  my  exercises  w'ere  so 
great  that  sleep  departed  from  me — I  was 
fearful  that  I  should  wake  up  in  hell.  And 
one  night  when  I  was  in  bed,  mourning  like 
the  dove  for  her  absent  mate,  I  fell  into  a 
dose.  I  thought  I  saw  the  world  of  fire — it 
reseiribled  a  large  solid  bed  of  coals — red 
and  glowing  with  heat.  I  shall  never  forget 
the  impression  it  made  upon  my  mind.  No 
tongue  can  possibly  describe  the  agony  of 
my  soul,  for  now  I  was  greatly  in  fear  of 
proppir>g  into  that  awful  place,  the  smoke 
of  the  torment  of  which  ascendeth  up  fop 
ever  and  ever.  I  cried  earnestly  for  mercy. 
Then  I  was  carried  to  another  place,  where 
perfect  happiness  appeared  to  pervade  every 
part,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof.  O  how 
I  longed  to  be  among  that  happy  company. 
I  sighed  to  be  free  from  misery  and  pain.  I 
knew  that  nothing  but  the  attenuated  thread 
of  life  kept  me  from  falling  into  the  awful 
lake  I  beheld.  I  cannot  think  that  it  is  in 
the  power  of  human  language  to  describe 
the  feelings  that  rushed  upon  my  mind,  or 
thrilled  through  myveins.  Every  thing  ap- 
c4 


14  A    SON     OF    THE    FOREST. 

peared  to  bear  the  signet  of  reality  ;  when  1 
awoke  heartily  rejoiced  to  find  it  nothing 
but  a  dream. 

I  went'on  from  day  to,  day  with  my  head 
and  heart  bowed  down,  seeking  the  Saviour 
of  sinners,  but  without  success.  The  hea- 
vens appeared  to  be  brass ;  my  prayers 
wanted  the  wings  of  faith  to  waft  tiiem  to 
the  skies  ;  the  disease  of  my  heart  increased  ; 
the  heavenly  physician  had  not  stretched 
forth  his  hand  and  pourt'd  upon  my  soul 
the  panacea  of  the  go,<pel  ;  the  scales  had 
not  falljgn  from  my  eyes,  and  no  ray  of  celes- 
tial light  had  dispelled  the  darkness  that 
gathered  around  my  soul.  The  cheering 
sound  of  sincere  friendship  fell  not  upon  my 
ear.  It  seemed  as  if  T  were  friendless,  un- 
pitied,  and  unknown,  and  at  times  I  wished 
JsB  become  a  dweller  in  the  wilderness.  No 
wonder  then,  that  I  was  almost  desponding. 
Surrounded  by  difficulties  andapparent  dan- 
gers, I  was  resolved  to  seek  the  salvation  of 
my  soul  with  all  my  heart — to  trust  entirely 
to  the  Lord,  and  if  1  failed,  to  perish  plead- 
ing for  mercy  at  the  foot  of  the  throne.  I 
now  hung  all  my  hope  on  the  Redeemer, 
and  clung  with  indescribable  tenacity  to  the 
cross  on  which  he  purchased  salvation  for 
the  "vilest  of  the  vile."  The  result  was 
such  as  as  is  always  to  be  expected,  when  a 
lost  and  ruined  sinner  throws  himself  entire)  v 


A    SON    OF    THE    lOREifT.  40 

on  the  Lord — perfect  freedom.  On  the  fif- 
teenth day  of  March,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord, 
eighteen  hundred  and  thirteen,  I  heard  a 
voice  in  soft  and.  soothing  accents,  saying 
unto  me,  jJrise,  thy  sins  zchich  rcere  many 
all  forgiven  thee,  go  in  peace  and  sin  no 


are 
more 


There  was  nothing  very  singular,  (save 
the  fact  that  the  Lord  stooped  to  lift  me  up,) 
in  my  conversion.  1  had  been  sent  into  the 
garden  to  work,  and  while  there  I  lifted  up 
my  heart  to  God,  when  aH  at  once  my  bur- 
den and  fears  left  me — my  heart  melted 
into  tenderness — my  soul  was  tilled  with 
love — love  to  God,  and  love  to  all  mankind. 
Oh  how  my  poor  heart  swelled  with  joy — 
and  I  could  cry  from  my  very  soul,  Glorv 
to  God  in  the  highest! !  !  There  was  not 
only  a  change  in  my  heart  but  in  ever); 
thing  around  me.  'The  scene  was  entirely 
altered.  The  works  of  God  praised  Him, 
and  I  saw  him  in  every  thing  that  he  had 
made.  My  love  now  embraced  the  whole 
human  family.  The  children  of  God  I  loved 
most  affectionately.  Oh  hov/  I  longed  to 
be  with  them,  and  when  any  of  them  passed 
by  me,  1  could  gaze  at  them  until  they 
were  lost  in  the  distance.  \  could  have 
pressed  them  to  my  bosom,  as  they  were 
more  precious  to  me  than  gold,  and  1  was 
always  loth  to  part  with  them  whenever  we 
c;5 


46  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREhi.      - 

met  together.  The  change  too  was  visible 
in  my  very  countenance. 

1  enjoyed  great  peace  of  mind,  and  that 
peace  was  like  a  river  fu!!,  deep,  and  wide, 
and  flowing  contmually,  my  mind  was  em- 
ployed in  conteaiplating  the  wonderful  works 
of  God,  and  in  praising  his  holy  name,  dwelt 
so  continuailv  upon  his  mercy  and  goodness 
that  I  could  praise  him  aloud  even  in  my 
sleep.  I  continued  in  this  happy  frame  of 
mind  for  some  months.  It  was  very  plea- 
sant to  live  in  the  enjoyment  of  pure  xmd 
undetiled  religion. 

At  last  the  devil  became  dissatisfied  with 
my  uninterrupted  happiness,  for  my  peace 
flowed  as  a  river,  and  he  began  to  tempt  me. 
The  fire  of  persecution  was  rekindled. 
Some  members  of  the  family  endeavoured 
to  make  me  think  that  I  was  too  young  to 
be  religious — that  I  was  under  a  delusion, 
and  Mr.  Williams  thought  I  had  better  not 
attend  Methodist  meetings.  This  restric- 
tion was  the  more  galling,  as  I  had  joined 
the  class  and  was  extremely  fond  of  this 
means  of  grace.  I  generally  attended  once 
in  each  week,  so  when  the  time  come  round 
I  went  off  to  the  meeting,  without  permis-. 
sion.  When  I  returned,  Mrs.  Williams  pre- 
pared to  correct  me  for  acting  contrary  to 
my  orders  ;  in  the  first  place  however,  she 
asked  me  where   I  had  been,  I  frankly  told 


A  SON   OF  THE   FOREST.  47 

her  that  I  had  been  to  meeting  to  worship 
jGod.  This  rep!}'  completely  disarmed  her, 
and  saved  me  a  flogging  for  the  time.  But 
this  was  not  the  end  of  my  persecution  or 
my  troubles. 

The  devil  I  believe  was  in  the  chamber 
maid — she  was  in  truth  a  treacherous  wo- 
man, her  heart  appeared  to  me  to  be  filled 
with  deceit  and  guile,  and  she  persecuted 
me  with  as  much  bitterness  as  Paul  did  the 
disciples  of  old.  She  had  a  great  dislike  to- 
wards me,  and  would  not  hesitate  to  tell  a 
lie  in  order  to  have  me  whipped.  But  my 
mind  was  stayed  upon  God,  and  I  had  much 
comfort  in  reading  the  holy  Scriptures. 
One  day  after  she  had  procured  me  a  flog- 
ging, and  no  very  nild  one  either,  she  push- 
ed me  dow  a  lo.jg  flight  of  stairs.  In  the 
fall  I  was  greatly  injured,  especially  my 
head  :  in  consequence  of  this  I  was  disabled 
and  laid  up  for  a  long  time.  When  I  told 
Mr.  Williams  that  the  maid  had  pushed  me 
down  stairs,  she  denied  it,  but  I  succeeded 
in  making  them  believe  it.  In  ail  this  trouble, 
the  Lord  was  with  me  of  a  truth.  I  was 
happy  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  love.  The 
abuse  heaped  on  me  was  in  consequence  of 
my  being  a  Methodist. 

Sometimes  I  ^ould  get  permission  to  at- 
tend meetings  in  the  evening,  and  once  or 
twice  on  the  Sabbath.     And  oh,  how  thank- 


4"?  A  SON   OF  THE   FOREST. 

ful  I  felt  for  these  opportunities  for  hearing 
the  v/ord  of  God.  But  the  waves  of  perse- 
cution, and  affliction  and  sorrow,  rolled  on. 
and  gathered  strength  in  their  progress,  and 
for  a  season  overwhelmed  my  dispirited  soul. 
T  was  flogged  several  times  very  unjustly  for 
what  the  maid  said  respecting  me.  My_ 
treatment  in  this  respect  was  so  bad  that  I 
could  not  brook  it,  and  in  an  evil  hour  I  list- 
ened to  the  su^-^05tions  of  the  devil  wdio  was 
not  slow  in  prompting  mc  to  pursue  a  course 
directly  at  variance  with  the  gospel.  He 
put  it  into  my  head  to  abscond  from  my 
master,  and  I  made  arrangements  with  a 
boy  of  my  acquaintance  to  accompany  me. 
So  one  day  Mr.  Williams  had  gone  to  Ston- 
ington,  I  left  his  house,  notw^ithstanding  he 
had  previously  threatened  if  I  did  so,  to  fol- 
low me  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  While 
my  companion  was  getting  ready  L  hid  my 
clothes  in  a  barn,  and  went  to  buy  some 
bread  and  cheese,  and  w  hile  at  the  store, 
notwithstanding  I  had  about  four  dollars  in 
my  pocket,  I  so  far  forgot  myself,  as  to 
buy  a  pair  of  shoes  on  my  master's  account. 
Then  it  was  that  I  began  to  lose  sight  of  re- 
ligion and  of  God.  We  now  set  out  it  be- 
ing a  rainy  night,  we  bought  a  bottle  of  rum. 
of  which  poisonous  stuif  I  drank  heartily. 
Now  it  was  that  the  shadows  of  spiritual 
death,  bet^an  to  gather  around  mv  soul,     1( 


A    SQN    OF    THE    FOREST.  49 

was  lialf  past  nine  o'clock  at  night  when  we 
started,  and  to  keep  up  our  courage  we  took 
another  drink  of  the  liquor.  As  soon  as  we 
left  the  city,  that  is,  as  we  descended  the 
hill,  it  became  very  dark,  and  my  companion 
who  was  always  tierce  enough  by  da>hght, 
began  to  hang  back,  I  saw  that  his  courage 
was  faihng,  and  endeavoured  to  cheer  him 
up.  Sometimes  I  would  take  a  drink  of 
rum  to  drown  my  sorrows — but  in  vain,  it 
appears  to  me  now  as  if  my  sorrows  neutrali- 
sed the  effects  of  the  liquor. 

This  night  we  travelled  about  seven  miles, 
and  being  weary  and  wet  with  the  rain,  we 
crept  into  a  barn  by  the  way  side,  and  for 
fear  of  being  detected  in  the  morning,  if  we 
should  happen  to  sleep  too  long,  we  burrow- 
ed into  the  hay  a  considerable  depth.  We 
were  aroused  in  the  morning  by  the  people 
feeding  their  cattle  ;  we  laid  still  and  they 
did  not  discover  us.  After  they  had  left 
the  barn  we  crawled  out,  made  our  breakfast 
on  rum,  bread  and  cheese,  and  set  off  for 
Colchester  about  fourteen  miles  distant, 
which  we  reacb^.d  that  night.  Flere  we 
ventured  to  put  up  at  a  tavern.  The  nexrt 
moriiing  we  started  for  my  father's  about 
four  miles  off.  I  told  him  that  we  had  come 
to  stay  only  one  week,  and  when  that  week 
had  expired  he  wished  me  to  redeem  my 
promise  and   return  home.     So   I  had  to 


50  A   SOX    OP    THE    roKEsi/  j 

comply,  and  when  we  had  packed  up  ouf  1 
clothes,  he  said  he  would  accompany  us 
part  of  the  way,  and  when  we  parted  I 
thought  he  had  some , suspicions  of  my  in- 
tention to  take  another  direction,  as  he 
beug;ed  me  to  go  straight  home.  He  then 
sat  down  on  the  way  side  and  locked  after 
us  as  long  as  we  were  to  be  seen.  At  last 
we  descended  a  hill,  and  as  soon  as  ue  lost 
siglit  of  him,  we  struck  into  the  woods.  I 
did  not  see  my  father  again  for  eight  years. 
At  this  time.  I  felt  very  much  disturbed.  I 
was  just  going- to  step  out  on  the  broad 
theatre  of  the  world,  as  it  Avere  without 
father,  mother,  or  friends. 

After  travelling  some  distance  in  the 
woods,  we  shaped  our  course  towards  Hart- 
ford. We  w  ere  fearful  of  being  taken  up. 
and  my  companion  coined  a  story,  which  he 
thought  would  answ^er  very  well.  It  was- 
this,  to  represent  ourselves,  whenever  ques- 
tioned, as  having  belonged  to  a  privateer, 
which  was  captured  by  the  British,  who 
kindly  sent  us  on  shore  near  New-London ; 
that  our  parents  lived  in  the  city  of  New- 
York,  and  that  we  were  travelling  thitherto 
see  them. 

No.w  John  was  a  great  liar.  Fie  w^as  brought 
up  by  dissipated  parents,  and  accustomed  in 
the  way  of  the  world  to  all  kinds  of  company. 
He  had  a  good  memory,  and  having  bceri 


A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST.  51 

ivere  he  heard  war  songs  and  tales  of  blood 
and  carnage,  he  treasured  them  up.  He 
therefore  agreed  to  be  spokesman,  and  I 
assure  my  dear  reader  that  I  was  perfectly 
willing,  for  abandoned  as  I  was  I  could  not 
lie  without  feeling  my  conscience  smite  me. 
This  part  of  the  business  being  arranged,  it 
was  agreed  -that  I  should  sell  part  of  my 
clothing,  to  defray  our  expenses.  Our  heads 
were  full  of  schemes,  and  we  journeyed  on 
until  night  overtook  us.  We  then  went  into 
a  farmhouse  to  test  our  plan.  The  people 
soon  began  to  ask  us  questions,  and  John 
as  readily  answered  them.  He  gave  them 
a  great  account  of  our  having  been  captured 
by  the  enemy,  and  so  straight,  that  they  be- 
lieved the  whole  of  it.  After  supper  we 
went  to  bed,  and  in  the  morning  they  gave 
us  a  good  breakfast,  and  some  bread  and 
cheese,  and  vre  went  on  our  way,  satisfied 
with  our  exploits.  John  now  studied  to 
make  his  story  appear  as  correct  as  possible. 
The  people  pitied  us.  and  sometimes  we  had 
a  few  shillings  put  into  our  hands.  We  did 
not  suffer  for  the  want  of  food.  At  Hartford 
we  staid  some  time,  and  we  here  agreed  to 
work  our  passage  down  to  New- York  on 
board  of  a  brig — but  learning  that  the  British 
fleet  was  on  the  coast,  the  captain  declined 
going.  We  then  set  out  to  reach  New-York 
by  land.      We  thought  it   a   crood  way  to 


O'Z  A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST. 

walk.  We  went  by  way  of  New-Haven,  ex- 
pecting to  reach  the  citj  from  that  place  by 
water.  Agam  we  were  disappointed.  We 
fell  in  company  with  some  sailors  who  had 
been  exchanged,  and  we  listened  to  their 
story — it  was  an  affecting  one,  and  John 
concluded  to  incorporate  a  part  of  it  withi 
"his  own.  So  shortly  afterwards  he  told  some 
people  that  while  we  were  prisoners,  we 
had  to  eat  bread  mixed  with  pounded  glass. 
The  people  were  foolish  enough  to  believe 
us.  At  Kingsbridge  an  old  lady  gave  us 
several  articles  of  clothing.  Here  we  agreed! 
with  the  captain  of  a  vessel  to  work  our  way 
to  New-York.  When  we  got  under  weigh, 
John  undertook  to  relate  our'sufferinu;s  to 
the  crew.  They  appeared  to  believe  it  all, 
until  he  came  to  the  incredible  story  of  the 
"glass  bread."  This  convinced  the  captain 
that  all  he  said  was  false.  He  told  us  that 
he  knew  that  we  were  runaways,  and  pressed- 
us  to  tell  hirn,  but  we  declined.  At  lengths 
he  told  us  that  we  were  very  near  to  Hell-' 
gate,  (Hurl-gate)— that  when  we  reached  it- 
the  devil  would  come  on  board  in  a  stone- 
canoe,  with  an  iron  paddle,  and  make  a  ter-; 
rible  noise,  and  that  he  intended  to  give  us' 
to  him.  I  thought  all  he  said  was  so.  I  there- 
fore confessed  that  we  were  runaways — 
where,  and  with  whom  we  had  lived.  He 
-aid  he  would  take  me  back  to  New-London. 


A    fciUN    OF    THE    rOREtsT.  53- 

IS  my  master  was  rich  and  would  pay  him  a 
;ood  price.     Here  the  devil  prompted  me 

0  tell  a  lie,  and  i  replied  that  the  General 
lad  advertise^l  me  one  cent  reward.  He 
hen  said  that  he  would  do  nothing  with  me, 
urther  than  to  keep  my  clothes  until  we  paid 
lim.  When  the  vessel  reached  the  dock, 
fohn  slipped  off,  and  I  was  not  slow  to  fol- 
ow.  In  a  few  days  we  got  money  to  redeem 
)ur  clothing  ;  we  took  board  in  Cherry- 
itreet,  at  two  dollars  per  week  ;  we  soon 
)btained  work-  and  received  sixty-two  and 

1  half  cents  per  day.  While  this  continued, 
ve  had  no  difficulty  in  paying  our  board.  My 
nind  now  became  tolerably  calm,  but  in  the 
iiidst  of  this  I  was  greatly  alarmed;  as  I  was 
nformed  that  my  master  had  offered  fifteen 
lollars  reward  for  me,  aisd  that  the  captain 
)f  one  of  the  packets  was  looking  for  me.  I 
lared  not  go  back,  and  therefore  determined 
:o  go  to  Philadelphia  •,  to  this  John  objected, 
md  advised  me  to  go  to  sea,  but  I  could  find 
10  vessel.  He  entered  on  board  a  privateer, 
md  I  was  thus  left  entirely  alone  in  a  strange 
city.  Wandering  about,  I  fell  in  company 
with  a  sergeant  and  a  file  of  men  who  were 
enlisting  soldiers  for  the  United  States  army. 
They  thought  I  would  answer  their  purpose, 
but  how  to  get  me  was  the  thing.  Now  they 
began  to  talk  to  me,  then  treated  me  to 
soixie  spirits,  and  when  that  began  to  ope- 


54.  A    SQN    ©Jb     THE    iOREST. 

rate,  they  told  me  all  about  the  war,  and 
what  a  tine  thing  it  was  to  be  a  soldier,  j 
was  pleased  with  the  idea  of  being  a  soldier, 
took  Sonne  more  liquor,  and  some  money, 
had  a  cockade  fastened  on  my  hat,  and  went 
off  in  fine  spirits  for  ray  uniform.  Now  my 
enlistment  was  against  the  law,  but  I  did  not 
know  it  ;  but  I  could  not  think  why  I  should 
risk  my  life  and  limbs  in  fighting  for  the 
white  man,  who  had  cheated  my  forefathers 
out  of  their  land.  By  this  time  I  had  ac- 
quired many  bad  practices.  I  was  sent  over 
to  Governor's  Island,  opposite  the  city,  and 
here  I  remained  some  time.  Too  much 
liquor  was  dealt  out  to  the  soldiers,  who  got 
drunk  very  often.  Indeed  the  island  was 
like  a  hell  upon  earth,  in  consequence  of 
the  wickedness  of  the  soldiers.  I  have 
known  sober  men  to  enlist,  who  afterwards 
became  confirmed  drunkards,  and  appear 
like  fools  upon  the  earth.  So  it  was  among 
the  soldiers,  and  what  should  a  child  do.  who 
was  entangled  in  their  net.  Now,  although 
I  made  no  profession  of  religion,  yet  I  could 
not  bear  to  hear  sacred  things  spoken  of 
lightly,  or  the  sacred  name  of  God  blas- 
phemed ;  and  I  often  spoke  to  the  soldiers 
about  it,  and  in  general  they  listened  atten- 
tively to  what  I  had  to  say.  I  did  not  tell 
them  that  I  had  ever  made  a  profession  of 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  55 

religion.  In  a  little  time  I  became  almost 
as  bad  as  any  of  them  ;  could  drink  rum, 
play  cards,  and  act  as  wickedly  as  any  of 
them.  1  was  at  times  tormented  with  the 
thoughts  of  death,  but  God  had  mercy  on  me, 
and  spared  my  life,  and  for  this  I  feel  thank- 
ful to  the  present  day.  Some  people  are  of 
opinion  that  if  a  person  is  once  born  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  he  can  never  fall  away  entire- 
ly, and  because  1  acted  thus,  they  may  pre- 
tend to  say  that  1  had  not  been  converted  to 
the  faith.  I  believe  firmly,  that  if  ever 
Paul  was  born  again,  I  was ;  if  not,  from 
whence  did  I  derive  all  the  light  and  happi- 
ness I  had  heretofore  experienced  ?  To  be 
sure  it  was  not  to  be  compared  to  Paul's — 
but  the  change  I  felt  in  my  very  soul. 

I  felt  anxious  to  obtain  forgiveness  from 
every  person  1  had  injured  in  any  manner 
whatever.  Sometimes  I  thought  I  would 
write  to  my  old  friends  and  request  forgive- 
ness— then  I  thought  I  had  done  right.  I 
could  not  bear  to  hear  any  order  of  Chris- 
tians ridiculed,  especially  the  Methodists- 
it  grieved  me  to  the  heart.    But  to  proceed. 


56  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST,  ^    ' 

CHAPTER  III. 

After  I  had  been  some  time  on  the  island. 
I  took  much  comfort  in  beating  on  an  old 
drum  ;  this  was  my  business,  asl  was  enlist- 
ed for  a  drummer.  About  this  time  I  was 
greatly  alarmed  on  account  of  the  execution 
of  a  soldier,  who  was  shot  on  Governor's 
Island  for  mutiny.  I  cannot  tell  how  I  felt 
when  I  saw  the  soldiers  parade,  and  the  con- 
demned clothed  in  white  with  bibles  in  their 
hands,  come  forward.  The  band  then  struck 
up  the  dead  march,  and  the  procession  mov- 
ed with  a  mournful  and  measured  tread  to 
the  place  of  execution,  where  the  poor  crea- 
tures were  compelled  to  kneel  on  their  cof- 
fins, which  were  along  side  their  newly  dug 
graves.  While  in  this  position  the  chaplain 
went  forward  and  conversed  with  them — 
after  he  had  retired  a  soldier  went  up  and 
drew  their  caps  over  their  faces  ;  thus  blind- 
folded he  led  one  of  them  some  distance 
from  the  other.  An  officer  then  advanced, 
and  raised  his  handkerchief  as  a  signal  to  the 
platoon  to  prepare  to  fire — he  then  made 
another  for  them  to  aim  at  the  wretch  who 
bad  been  left  kneeling  on  his  coffin,  and  at 
a  third  signal  the  platoon  fired,  and  the  im- 
mortal essence  of  the  offender  in  an  instant 
wa«  in  the  spirit-land.     To  me  this  was  an 


A    SON    OF    THE    FORE&T.  oj 

wful  day — my  heart  seemed  to  leap  into 
by  throat.  Death  never  appeared  so  awful. 
3ut  what  must  have  been  the  feeHngs  of  the 
Imhappy  man,  who  had  so  narrowly  escaped 
jhe  grave  ?     He  was  completely  overcome, 

I^nd  wept  like  a  child,  and  it  was  found  neces- 
iary  to  help  him  back  to  his  quarters.  This 
spectacle  made  me  serious  ;  but  it  wore  oiF 
n  a  few  days. 

Shortly  after  this  we  were  ordered  to 
Staten  Island,  where  we  remained  about  two 
ponths. — Then  we  were  ordered  to  join  the 
army  destined  to  conquer  Canada.  As  the 
oldiers  were  tired  of  the  island,  this  news 
animated  them  very  much.  They  thought 
it  a  great  thing  to  march  through  the  country 
and  assist  in  taking  the  enemy's  land.  As 
soon  as  our  things  were  ready  we  embarked 
on  board  a  sloop  for  Albany,  and  then  went 
on  to  Greenbush,  where  we  were  quartered. 
In  the  mean  time  I  had  been  transferred  to 
the  ranks.  This  I  did  not  like ;  to  carry  a 
musket  was  too  fatiguing,  and  1  had  a  posi- 
tive objection  to  being  placed  on  the  guard, 
especially  at  night.  As  I  had  only  enlisted 
for  a  drummer,  I  thought  that  this  change 
by  the  officer  was  contrary  to  law,  and  as 
the  bond  was  broken,  liberty  was  granted 
me  ;  therefore  being  heartily  tired  of  a  sol- 
dier's life,  and  having  a  desire  to  see  my  fa- 
ther once  more,  T  wentofFvervdeliberatelv  : 
v2        ^ 


58  A    SON'    OF    THE    FOREST. 

I  had  no  idea  that  they  had  a  lawful  claim 
on  me,  and  was  greatly  surprised  as  well  as 
alarmed,  when  arrested  as  a  deserter  from 
the  army.  Well,  I  was  taken  up  and  carried 
hack  to  the  camp,  where  the  officers  put  me 
under  guard.  We  shortly  after  marched 
for  Canada,  and  during  this  dreary  march 
the  officers  tormented  me  by  telhng  me 
that  it  was  their  intention  to  make  a  fire  in 
the  woods,  stick  my  skin  full  of  pine  splinters, 
and  after  having  an  Indian  pow-v.ow  over 
me.  burn  me  to  death.  Thus  they  torment- 
ed me  day  after  day. 

We  halted  for  some  time  at  Burlington  : 
but  resumed  our  march  and  went  into  win- 
ter quarters  at  Plattsburgh.  All  this  time 
God  was  very  good  to  me,  as  I  had  not  a 
^ck  day.  I  had  by  this  time  become  very 
bad.  I  had  previously  learned  to  drink  rum, 
play  cards  and  commit  other  acts  of  wick- 
edness, but  it  was  here  that  I  first  took 
the  name  of  the  Lord  in  vain,  and  oh,  what 
a  sting  it  left  behind.  We  continued  here 
until  the  ensuing  fall,  when  we  received  or- 
ders to  join  the  main  army  under  Gen. 
Hampton.  Another  change  now  took  place, 
— -we  had  several  pieces  of  heavy  artillery 
with  us,  and  of  course  horses  were  necessa- 
ry to  drag  them,  and  I  was  taken  from  the 
ranks  and  ordered  to  take  charge  of  one 
team.     This  made  my  situation  rather  bet- 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  59 

ter.  I  now  had  the  privilege  of  riding.  The 
soldiers  were  badly  off,  as  the  officers  were 
very  cruel  to  them,  and  for  every  little 
offence  they  would  have  them  flogged.  One 
day  the  officer  of  our  company  got  angry 
at  me,  and  pricked  my  ear  with  the  poiri^of 
his  sword. 

We  soon  joined  the  main  army,  and  pitch- 
ed our  tents  with  them.  It  was  now  very 
icold,  and  we  had  nothing  but  straw  to  lay 
on.  There  was  also  a  scarcity  of  provisions, 
and  we  were  not  allowed  to  draw  our  full 
rations.  Money  would  not  procure  food — 
and  when  any  thing  was  to  be  obtained  the 
officers  had  always  the  preference,  and  they, 
poor  souls,  always  wanted  the  whole  for 
themselves.  The  people  generally,  have  no 
idea  of  the  extreme  sufferings  of  the  soldiers 
on  the  frontiers  during  the  last  war ;  they 
were  indescribable,  the  soldiers  eat  with  the 
utmost  greediness,  raw  corn  and  every  thing 
eatable  that  fell  in  their  way.  In  the  midst 
of  our  afflictions,  our  valiant  general  ordered 
us  to  march  forward  to  subdue  the  country 
in  a  trice.  The  pioneers  had  great  difficul- 
ty in  clearing  the  way — the  enemy  retreated 
hurning  every  thing  as  they  fled.  They  de- 
stroyed every  thing,  so  that  we  could  not 
find  forage  for  the  horses.  We  were  now 
cutting  our  way  through  a  wilderness,  and 
were  very  often  benumbed  with  the  cold. 
d3 


00  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

Our  sufferings  now  for  the  want  of  food  were 
extreme — the  officers  two  began  to  feel  it. 
and  one  of  them  offered  me  two  dollars  for 
a  little  flour,  but  I  did  not  take  his  money, 
and  he  did  not  get  my  flour;  I  would  not 
have  given  it  to  him  for  fifty  dollars.  The 
soldiers  united  their  flour  and  baked  unleav- 
ened bread,  of  this  we  made  a  delicious  re- 
past. 

After  we  had  proceeded  about  thirty  miles, 
we  fell  in  with  a  body  of  Canadians  and  In- 
dians— the  woods  fairly  resounded  with  their 
yells.  Our  "  brave  and  chivalrous"  general 
ordered  a  picked  troop  to  disperse  them  ; 
we  fired  but  one  cannon  and  a  retreat  was 
sounded  to  the  great  mortification  of  the 
soldiers,  who  were  ready  and  willing  to  fight. 
But  as  our  general  did  not  fancy  the  smell 
of  gunpowder,  he  thought  it  best  to  close  the 
campaign,  by  retreating  with  seven  thousand 
men,  before  a  "  host"  of  seven  hundred. 
Thus  were  many  a  poor  fellow's  hopes  of 
conquest  and  glory  blasted  by  the  timidity  of 
one  man.  This  little  brush  with  an  enemy 
that  we  could  have  crushed  in  a  single  mo- 
ment cost  us  several  men  in  killed  and 
wounded.  The  army  now  fell  back  on 
Plattsburgh,  where  we  remained  during  the 
winter  ;  we  suffered  greatly  for  the  want  of 
barracks,  having  to  encamp  in  the  open 
^elds  a  good  part  of  the  time.     My  health. 


A  sJOxN   OF  THE  FOREST.  6  I 

through  the  goodness  of  God,  was  preserved, 
notwithstanding  many  of  the  poor  soldiers 
sickened  and  died.  So  fast  did  they  go  off, 
that  it  appeared  to  me  as  if  the  plague  was 
raging  among  them. 

When  the  spring  opened,  we  were  em- 
ployed in  building  forts.  We  erected  three 
in  a  very  short  time.  We  soon  received 
orders  to  march,  and  joined  the  army  under 
Gen.  Wilkinson,  to  reduce  Montreal.  We 
marched  to  Odletown  in  great  splendor, 
"  Heads  up  and  eyes  right,"  with  a  noble 
commander  at  our  head,  and  the  splendid 
city  of  Montreal  in  our  view.  The  city  no 
doubt  presented  a  scene  of  the  wildest 
uproar  and  confusion ;  the  people  were 
greatly  alarmed  as  we  moved  on  with  all 
the  pomp  and  glory  of  an  army  flushed  with 
many  victories.  But  when  we  reached 
Odletown,  John  Bull  met  us  with  a  picked 
troop.  They  soon  retreated,  and  some  took 
refuge  in  an  old  fortified  mill,  which  we 
pelted  with  a  goodly  number  of  cannon  balls. 
It  appeared  as  if  we  were  determined  to 
sweep  every  thing  before  us.  It  was  really 
amusing  to  see  our  feminine  general  with 
his  night-cap  on  his  head,  and  a  dishcloth 
tied  round  his  precious  body,  crying  out  to 
his  men  "  Come  on,  my  brave  boys,  we  will 
give  John  Bull  a  bloody  nose."  W^e  did 
not  succeed  in  taking  the  mill,  and  the 
•        d4 


^y'-i  A  SUx\   OI    Tilt  iOKEST. 

British  kept  up  an  incessant  cannonade  from 
the  fort.  Some  of  the  balls  cut  down  the 
trees,  so  that  we  had  frequently  to  spring  out 
of  their  way  when  falling.  I  thought  it  was 
a  hard  time,  and  1  had  reason  too,  as  1  was 
in  the  front  of  the  battle,  assisting  in  working 
a  twelve  pounder,  and  the  British  aimed 
directly  at  us.  Their  balls  whistled  around 
us,  and  hurried  a  good  many  oC  the  soldiers 
into  the  eternal  world,  while  others  were 
most  horribly  mangled.  Indeed  they  were 
so  hot  upon  us,  that  we  had  not  time  to  re- 
move the  dead  as  they  fell.  The  horribly 
disfigured  bodies  of  the  dead — the  piercing 
groans  of  the  wounded  and  the  d_ying — the 
cries  of  help  and  succour  from  those  who 
could  not  help  themselves — were  most  ap- 
palling.  I  can  never  forget  it.  We  con- 
tinued fighting  until  near  sundown,  when 
a  retreat  was  sounded  along  our  line,  and 
instead  of  marching  forward  to  Montreal,  we 
wheeled  about,  and  having  once  set  our 
faces  towards  Plattsburgh,  and  turned  our 
backs  ingloriously  on  the  enemy,  we  hurried 
off  with  all  possible  speed.  We  carried  our 
dead  and  wounded  with  us.  Oh,  it  was  a 
dreadful  sight  to  behold  so  many  brave  men 
sacrificed  in  this  manner.  In  this  way  our 
campaign  closed.  During  the  whole  of  this 
time  the  Lord  was  merciful  to  me,  as  I  was 
Jiot  snifered  to  be  hurt.     "^Ve  once  mor^ 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  03 

reached  Plattsburgh,  and  pitched  our  tents 
in  the  neighbourhood.  While  here,  intelli- 
gence of  the  capture  of  Washington  was  re- 
ceived. Now,  says  the  orderly  sergeant,  the 
British  have  burnt  up  all  the  papers  at  W^asli- 
ington,  and  our  enlistment  for  the  war  among 
them,  we  had  better  give  in  our  names  as 
having  enlisted  for  five  years. 

We  were  again  under  marching  orders,  as 
the  enemy  it  was  thought  contemplated  an 
attack  on  Plattsburgh.  Thither  we  moved 
without  delay,  and  were  posted  in  one  of 
the  forts.  By  the  time  we  were  ready  for 
them,  the  enemy  made  his  appearance  on 
Lake  Cham  plain,  with  his  vessels  of  war. 
It  was  a  fine  thing  to  see  their  noble  vessels 
moving  like  things  of  life  upon  this  mimic 
sea,  with  their  streamers  floating  in  the  wind. 
This  armament  was  intended  to  co-operate 
with  the  army,  which  numbered  fourteen 
thousand  men,  under  the  command  of  the 
captain  general  of  Canada,  and  at  that  very 
time  in  view  of  our  troops.  They  pre- 
sented a  very  imposing  aspect.  Their  red 
uniform,  and  the  instruments  of  death  which 
Ihey  bore  in  their  hands,  glittered  in  the  sun 
beams  of  heaven,  like  so  many  sparkling 
diamonds.  Very  fortunately  for  us  and  for 
the  country,  a  brave  and  noble  commander 
had  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  army. 
It  was  not  an  easy  task  to  frighten  him. 
d5 


6J:  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST  I. 

For  notwithstanding  his  men  were  inferior  in 
point  of  number  to  those  of  the  enemy,  say 
as  one  to  seven,  yet  relying  on  the  bravery 
of  his  men,  he  determined  to  fight  to  the  last 
extremity.  The  enemy  in  all  the  pomp  and 
pride  of  war,  had  sat  down  before  the  town 
and  its  slender  fortifications,  and  he  com- 
menced a  cannonade,  which  we  returned 
without  much  ceremony.  Congreve  rockets, 
bomb  shells,  and  cannon  balls,  poured  upon 
us  like  a  hail  storm.  There  was  scarcely 
any  intermission,  and  for  six  days  and  nights 
we  did  not  leave  our  guns,  and  during  that 
time  the  work  of  death  paused  not,  as  every 
day  some  shot  took  effect.  During  the  en- 
gagement, I  had  charge  of  a  small  magazine. 
All  this  time  our  fleet,  under  the  command 
of  the  gallant  M'Donough,  was  lying  on  the 
peaceful  waters  of  Chaniplain.  But  this  little 
fleet  was  to  be  taken,  or  destroyed  :  it  was 
necessary,  in  the  accomplishment  of  their 
plans.  Accordingly  the  British  commander 
bore  down  on  our  vessels  in  gallant  style. 
As  soon  as  the  enemy  showed  fight,  our  men 
flew  to  their  guns.  Then  the  work  of  death 
and  carnage  commenced.  The  adjacent 
shores  resounded  with  the  alternate  shouts 
of  the  sons  of  liberty,  and  the  groans  of  their 
parting  spirits.  A  cloud  of  smoke  mantled 
the  heavens,  shutting  out  the  light  of  day — 
while  the  continual  roar  of  artillery,  added 


A    SON    Of    THE    FOREST.  '  t  (55 

to  the  sublime  horrors  of  the  scene.  At 
length  the  boasted  valour  of  the  haughty 
Britons  failed  them — they  quailed  before  the 
incessant  and  well  directed  fire  of  our  brave 
and  hardy  tars,  and  after  a  hard  fought  battle, 
surrendered  to  that  foe  they  had  been  sent 
to  crush.  On  land  the  battle  raged  pretty 
fiercely.  On  onr  side  the  Green  mountain 
boys  behaved  with  the  greatest  bravery.  As 
soon  as  the  British  commander  had  seen  the 
fleet  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Americans,  his 
boasted  courage  forsook  him,  and  he  ordered 
his  army  of  heroes,  fourteen  thousand  strong- 
to  retreat  before  a  handful  of  militia. 

This  was  indeed  a  proud  day  for  our  coun- 
try. We  had  met  a  superior  force  on  the 
Lake,  and  "  they  were  ours."  On  land  we 
had  compelled  the  enemy  to. seek  safety  in 
flight.  Our  army  did  not  lose  many  men, 
but  on  the  lake  many  a  brave  man  fell — fell 
in  the  defence  of  his  country's  rights.  The 
British  moved  off  about  sundown. 

We  remained  in  Plattsburgh  until  the 
peace.  As  soon  as  it  was  known  that  the 
war  had  terminated,  and  the  army  disbanded, 
the  soldiers  were  clamerous  for  their  dis- 
charge, but  it  was  concluded  to  retain  our 
company  in  the  service — I,  however,  ob- 
tained my  release.  Now,  according  to  the 
act  of  enlistment,  I  was  entitled  to  forty 
dollars  bounty  money,  and  one  hundred  and 


(3(3  A     SON     OF    THE    rOREST. 

sixty  acres  of  land.  The  government  also 
owed  me  for  fifteen  montlis  pay.  1  have  not 
seen  any  thing  of  bounty  money,  land,  or 
arrearages,  from  that  day  to  this.  I  am  not, 
however,  alone  in  this — hundreds  were 
served  in  the  same  manner.  But  I  could 
never  think  that  the  government  acted  right 
towards  the  "  Natives,''''  not  merely  in  re- 
fusing to  pay  us,  but  in  claiming  our  services 
incases  of  perilous  emergency,  and  still  deny 
us  the  right  of  citizenship ;  and  as  long  as 
our  nation  is  debarred  the  privilege  of  voting 
for  civil  officers,  I  shall  believe  that  the 
government  has  no  claim  on  our  services. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

I  BELIEVE  that  there  are  many  good  peo- 
ple in  the  United  States,  who  would  not 
trample  upon  the  rights  of  the  poor,  but 
there  are  many  others  who  are  willing  to  roll 
in  their  coaches  upon  the  tears  and  blood  of 
the  poor  and  unoffending  natives — who  are 
ready  at  all  times  to  speculate  on  the  indians 
and  cheat  them  out  of  their  rightful  posses- 
sions. Let  the  poor  indian  attempt  to  resist 
the  encroachments  of  his  white  neighbours, 
what  a  hue  and  cry  is  instantly  raised  against. 


A    SO>i    OF    THE    FOREST.  (57 

bim.  It  has  been  considered  as  a  trifling 
thing  for  the  whites  to  make  war  on  the 
indians  for  the  purpose  of  driving  them  from 
their  country,  and  taking  possession  thereof. 
This  was,  in  their  estimation,  all  right,  as  it 
helped  to  extend  the  territory,  and  enriched 
some  individuals.  But  let  the  thing  be 
changed.  Suppose  an  overwhelming  army 
should  march  into  the  United  States,  for  the 
purpose  of  subduing  it,  and  enslaving  the 
citizens.  How  quick  would  they  fly  to  arrasj 
gather  in  multitudes  around  the  tree  of 
liberty,  and  contend  for  their  rights  with  the 
last  drop  of  their  blood.  And  should  the 
enemy  succeed,  would  they  not  eventually 
rise  and  endeavour  to  regain  liberty  ?  And 
who  would  blame  them  for  it  ? 

When  I  left  the  army,  I  had  not  a  shilling 
in  my  pocket.  I  depended  upon  the  pre- 
carious bounty  of  the  inhabitants,  until  I 
reached  the  place  where  some  of  my  breth- 
ren dwelt.  I  tarried  with  them  but  a  short 
time,  and  then  set  off  for  Montreal.  I  was 
anxious,  in  some  degree,  to  become  steady, 
and  went  to  learn  the  business  of  a  baker. 
My  bad  habits  now  overcome  my  good  in- 
tentions. I  was  addicted  to  drinking  rum, 
and  would  sometimes  get  quite  intoxicated. 
As  it  was  my  place  to  carry  out  the  bread,  I 
frequently  fell  in  company,  and  one  day, 
being  in  liquor,  I  met  one  of  the  king's  sol- 


68  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  ' 

diers,  and  after  abusing  him  with  my  tongue, 
T  gave  him  a  sound  flogging.  In  the  course 
of  the  affair  I  broke  a  pitcher  which  the 
soldier  had,  and  as  1  had  to  pay  for  it,  I  was 
wicked  enough  to  take  my  master's  money, 
without  his  knowledge,  for  that  purpose. 
My  master  liked  me,  but  he  thought  if  I 
acted  so  once,  I  would  a  second  time,  and 
he  therefore  discharged  me.  1  was  now 
placed  in  a  bad  situation — by  my  miscon- 
duct, I  had  lost  a  good  home  !  I  went  and 
hired  myself  to  a  farmer,  for  four  dollars  per 
month.  After  serving  him  two  months,  he 
paid  me,  and  with  the  money  i  bought  some 
decent  clothes.  By  spells,  I  was  hired  as  a 
servant,  but  this  kind  of  a  life  did  not  suit 
me,  and  I  wished  to  return  to  my  brethren. 
My  mind  changed,  and  I  went  up  the  St. 
Lawrance  to  Kingston,  where  1  obtained  a 
situation  on  board  of  a  sloop,  in  the  capacity 
of  a  cook,  at  twelve  dollars  per  month,  I 
was  on  board  the  vessel  some  time,  and  when 
we  settled,  the  captain  cheated  me  out  of 
twelve  dollars.  My  next  move  was  in  the 
country  ;  I  agreed  to  serve  a  merchant  faith- 
fully, and  he  promised  to  give  me  twelve 
dollars  a  month.  Every  thing  went  on 
smooth  for  a  season  ;  at  last  I  became  negli- 
gent and  careless,  in  consequence  of  his 
giving  me  a  pint  of  rum  every  day,  which 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  69 

was  the  allowance  he  made  for  each  person 
in  his  employment. 

,  While  at  this  place,  I  attended  a  Metho- 
dist meeting — at  the  time  1  felt  verj  much 
affected,  as  it  brought  up  before  my  mind 
the  great  and  indiscribable  enjoyments  I  had 
found  in  the  house  of  prayer,  when  I  was 
endeavouring  to  serve  the  Lord.  It  soon 
wore  off,  and  1  relapsed  into  my  former  bad 
habits. 

I  now  went  aj^ain  into  the  country,  and 
staid  with  a  farmer,  for  one  month;  he  paid 
me  five  dollars.  Then  I  shifted  my  quar- 
ters to  another  place  and  agreed  with  a 
Dutch  farmer  to  stay  with  him  all  winter  at 
five  dollars  a  month.  With  this  situation  I 
was  much  pleased.  My  work  was  light — I 
had  very  little  to  do  except  procuring  fire- 
wood. I  often  went  with  them  on  hunting 
excursions,  besides,  my  brethren  were  all 
around  me,  and  it  therefore  seemed  like 
home.  I  was  now  in  the  bay  of  Quinty, 
the  scenery  was  diversified.  There  were 
also  some  natural  curiosities.  On  the  very 
top  of  a  high  mountain  in  the  neighbourhood 
there  was  a  large  pond  of  water,  to  which 
there  was  no  visible  outlet ; — this  pond  was 
unfathomable.  It  was  very  surprising  to 
me  that  so  great  a  body  of  water  should  be 
found  so  far  above  the  common  level  of  the 
earth.     There  was  also  in  the  neighbour- 


70  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

hood  a  rock,  that  had  the  appearance  of 
being  hollowed  out  by  the  hand  of  a  skilful 
artificer ;  through  this  rock  wound  a  narrow 
stream  of  water  :  it  had  a  most  beautiful  and 
romantic  appearance,  and  I  could  not  but 
admire  the  wisdom  of  God  in  the  order,  re- 
gularity and  beauty  of  creation ;  I  then 
turned  my  eyes  to  the  forest  and  it  appeared 
alive  with  its  sons  and  daughters.  There 
appeared  to  be  the  utmost  order  and  regula- 
rity in  their  encampment  and  they  held  all 
things  in  common. 

Oh  what  a  pity  that  this  state  of  things 
should  change.  How  much  better  would  it 
be  if  the  whites  would  act  like  a  civilized 
people,  and  instead  of  giving  my  brethren  of 
the  woods  "  rum  !"  in  exchange  for  their 
furs,  give  them  food  and  clothing  for  them- 
selves and  children.  If  this  course  were 
pursued,  1  believe  that  God  would  bless  both 
the  whites  and  natives  three  fold.  I  am 
bold  to  aver  that  the  minds  of  the  natives 
were  turned  against  the  gospel  and  soured  to- 
wards the  whites  because  some  of  the  mis- 
sionaries have  joined  the  unholy  brethren  in 
speculations  to  the  advantage  of  themselvesj 
regardless  of  the  rights,  feelings  and  interests 
of  the  untutored  sons  of  the  forest.  If  a 
good  missionary  goes  amongst  them,  and 
preaches  the  pure  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  he 
must  necessarilv  tell   them  that  thev  must 


A    SON    Ot'    THE    FOREST.  71 

*•  love  God  and  their  neighbour  as  themselves 
—to  love  men,  deal  justly,  and  walk  hum- 
bly." They  would  naturally  reply,  your 
doctrine  is  very  good,  but  the  whole  course 
of  your  conduct  is  decidedly  at  variance 
with  your  profession — we  think  the  whites 
need  fully  as  much  religious  instruction  as 
we  do.  In  this  way  many  a  good  man's 
path  is  hedged  up,  and  he  is  prevented  from 
being  useful  among  the  natives,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  badconduct  of  those  who  are, 
properly  speaking  only  "  wolves  in  sheep's 
clothing."  '  However,  the  natives  are  on  the 
whole  willing  to  receive  the  gospel,  and  of 
late,  through  the  instrumentality  of  pious 
missionaries^  much  good  has  been  done — 
many  of  them  have  been  reclaimed  from  the 
most  abandoned  and  degrading  practices, 
and  brought  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus ! 


CHAPTER  V. 

By  many  persons  great  objections  have 
been  raised  against  efforts  to  civilize  the  na- 
tives— they  alledge  that  they  have  tried  the 
experiment  and  failed.  But  how  did  they 
make  the  experiment,  and  why  did  they  fail  ? 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST- 


We  may  with  perfect  safety  say  that  these 
persons  were  prompted  to  the  efforts  they 
made,  by  sinister  motives,  and  they  failed, 
because  they  undertook  that  in  their  own 
strength,  which  nothing  short  of  the  power 
of  God  could  effect.  A  most  sweeping 
charge  has  been  brought  against  the  natives  ' 
—a  charge  which  has  no  foundation  in  truth. 
It  is  this,  that  they  are  not  susceptible  of  im- 
provement ;  now  subsequent  facts  have 
proved  that  this  assertion  is  false.  Let  us 
look  around  us  and  what  do  we  behold  ? 
The  forests  of  Canada  and  the  west  are  vo- 
cal with  the  praises  of  God,  as  they  ascend 
from  the  happy  wigwams  of  the  natives. —  j 
We  see  them  flocking  to  the  standard  of 
Emmanuel.  Many  of  them  have  been  con- 
verted to  God,  and  have  died  in  the  triumphs 
of  faith.  Our  religious  papers  have,  from 
time  to  timCj  recorded  the  blessed  eirecls  of 
the  divine  spint — of  the  strong  faith  of  the 
expiring  Indian.  The  hopes  of  the  Chris- 
tian have  been  elevated,  and  there  is  every 
thing  to  cheer  and  encourage  the  followers 
of  the  Lamb  in  so  good  and  noble  a  cause. 

Some  people  make  this  charge  against  the 
natives,  who  never  knew  any  thing  about 
religion,  and  1  fancy  that  it  would  be  as  diffi-  * 
cult  for  any  man  who  lives  in  a  state  of 
voluptuousness,  to  get  to  heaven  by  his  own 
'Strength,  as  it  would  be  for  a  native,     Tlie 

I 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOR  EST.  73 

Methodists  have  perhaps  done  more  towards 
iMilightening  the  poor  natives,  and  bringing 
them  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  than  all 
other  societies  together.  I  do  not  say  that 
they  did  it  of  their  own  strength ;  but  that 
they  were  the  happy  instruments  in  the 
bands  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  accomplishing 
that  which  others  have  failed  in  performing, 
as  they  (the  Methodists)  relyed  altogether 
on  the  blessing  of  God.  They  preached  not 
themselves,  but  Christ  Jesus,- — and  him 
crucified.  And  while  tliey  were  doing  this, 
they  sought  not  their  own  advancement. 
And  no  wonder  that  they  succeeded — the 
natives  were  melted  down  into  tenderness 
and  love,  and  they  became  as  kind  and  oblig- 
ng  as  any  people  could  be. 

It  is  my  opinion  that  our  nation  retains 
the  original  complexion  of  our  common  fa- 
ther Adam.  This  is  strongly  impressed  on 
my  mind.  I  think  it  is  very  reasonable,  and 
in  this  opinion  I  am  not  singular,  as  some  of 
the  best  writers  of  the  age,  among  whom  we 
find  a  Boudinot,  a  West,  and  a  Hinds,  have 
expressed  their  sentiments  in  its  favour. 
But  to  return. 

In  the  spring  the  old  gentleman  set  us  to 
making  maple  sugar.  This  took  us  into  the 
woods,  which  were  vocal  with  the  songs  of 
the  birds,  all  nature  seemed  to  smile  and  re= 
ioice  in  the  freshness  and  beauty  of  spring. 


74  A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREsiT, 

Mj  brethren  appeared  very  cheerful  on  ac- 
count of  its  return,  and  enjoyed  themselves 
in  hunting,  fishing,  basket  making,  (fee. 
After  we  had  done  making  sugar,  I  told  the 
old  gentleman  I  wished  to  go  and  see  my 
friends  in  the  east,  as  I  had  been  absent 
about  three  years ;  he  agreed  though  he 
wished  me  to  tarry  longer  with  him.  1  then 
went  to  Kingston,  where  I  fell  into  bad  com- 
pany, with  drunkards,  they  were  friends  as 
long  as  my  money  held  out.  But  when  that 
failed,  their  friendship  turned  to  enmity. 
Thus  all  my  money  was  gone  and  I  was  alone 
and  destitute  in  a  strange  place.  I  went  to  live 
with  a  man  for  a  while,  and  had  not  been 
with  him  but  a  few  days  before  1  found  much 
trouble  in  the  wigwam.  The  lady  of  the 
house  was  a  lady  indeed  ;  when  she  went  to 
bed  she  could  not  get  up  without  assistance. 
and  very  often  her  husband  would  mourn 
over  her  and  say  what  a  wretch  he  had  been 
ever  since  he  had  married  her  She  was 
very  intemperate,  and  here  i  saw  the  evil 
of  ardent  spirits.  They  soon  after  broke 
up  housekeeping,  and  I  of  course  lost  my 
place.  I  had  not  refrained  from  my  evil 
practices,  and  some  of  my  wicked  compa- 
nions advised  me  to  steal  for  a  living,  but  as 
I  had  no  inclination  to  rob  any  one,  I  had 
prudence  and  firmness  to  resist  the  tempta- 
tion*   Those  who  advised  me  to  do  soVere 


A  SON  OF  THfi  FOREST.  75 

not  my  brethren,  but  whites.  My  eyes 
were  now  opened  to  see  my  pretended 
friends  in  their  true  light,  1  concluded  that 
such  friends  were  not  useful  to  me,  and  I 
was  awakened  to  reflection,  and  determined 
to  leave  their  society. 

One  Sabbath  as  1  was  passingby  a  chapel, 
I  heard  a  good  man  of  God  giving  good  ad- 
;  vice  to  his  people.  He  earnestly  exhorted 
thetn  to  faithfulness  and  prayer.  1  went  in, 
and  while  listening  to  his  fervent  discourse, 
all  my  promises  of  reformation  rose  up  be- 
fore me.  I  was  very  much  affected — my 
spirit  was  troubled,  and  I  began  to  think 
seriously  about  my  situation.  The  next 
day  I  sat  down  in  the  sun  to  sun  myself, 
and  to  consider  as  to  my  future  course,  as  I 
found  I  was  friendless,  with  out  money,  and 
withotjt  work.  The  desire  of  my  heart  was 
to  get  home  ;  while  reflecting  on  this  to  me 
important  subject,  it  appeared  as  if  God  was 
working  for  me,  as  four  boatmen  about  go- 
ing on  a  hunting  and  fishing  excursion,  came 
to  purchase  stores.  I  asked  them  if  I  should 
go  with  them — they  wished  to  know  where 
I  was  going,  and  I  told  them  I  was  willing 
to  go  any  where.  One  of  them  hired  me 
to  fish,  and  I  went  with  them ;  the  time 
passed  rapidly  on,  and  I  felt  as  happy  as  a 
king.  We  had  very  little  rum,  and  that  lit- 
tle we  found  abundantly  sufiieient.     By  de- 


A     SON    OF    THE    FOKj 


grecs  I  recovered  my  appetite,  J  was  witli 
these  good  men  upwards  of  a  month,  part  of 
which  time  we  spent  in  fishing,  and  part  in 
hunting  deer.  Thej  then  returned  to  see 
their  famihes,  taking  me  with  them.  The 
one  who  had  hired  me  to  fish,  when  1  told 
him  that  1  wished  to  go  home,  acted  like  a 
gentleman,  and  paid  me  my  wages.  After 
purchasing  a  pair  of  shoes,  I  had  only  one 
shilling  left.  1  now  started  for  home  a  dis- 
tance of  three  hundred  miles.  This  was  a 
long  journey  for  me  to  perform  alone,  and 
on  foot.  But  thank  God  1  found  friends — ■ 
many  who  were  willing  to  supply  me  with 
food,  and  render  me  assistance.  I  had  no 
difficulty  until  I  reached  Utica,  where  I  lost 
my  shilling. — I  was  now  pennyless.  Fortu- 
nately I  agreed  with  the  captain  of  a  boat  to 
work  my  passage  down  the  Mohawk  river* 
In  this  way  I  got  along  some  distance.  When 
I  left  the  boat  I  had  to  beg  or  work,  as  an- 
swered my  purpose  best,  as  I  was  extremely 
anxious  to  get  home,  therefore  I  preferred 
the  shortest  method.  But  nevertheless  I 
refused  not  to  work :  but  unfortunutely  the 
people  in  this  part  of  the  country,  seeing  1 
was  an  Indian,  took  no  notice  of  me.  I  was 
also  exposed  to  some  temptations,  as  I  met 
often  in  the  road  the  veriest  wretches  that 
defile  the  earth — such  as  would  forget  the 
dignity  of  human  nature  so  far  as  to  black- 


A    Sun    of    the    FOREsT,  /4 

uard  me  because  I  was  an  Indian.  It  ap- 
peared to  me  as  if  they  had  not  the  sense 
and  wisdom  of  the  brute  creation.  A  son  of 
the  forest  would  never  stoop  so  low  as  to 
offer  such  an  insult  to  a  stranger  who  hap- 
pened to  be  amongst  them.  I  was  much 
mortified,  and  believing  that  they  ought  to 
be  corrected  for  so  fragrant  a  breach  of  good 
manners  and  "  civilization,"  I  thought  seri- 
ously in  one  or  two  instances  of  inflicting 
summary  punishment ;  but  this  feeling  gave 
way  to  that  of  pity. 

When  I  reached  Albany,  the  bells  were 
tolling.  The  solemn  sound  entered  into  the 
deepest  recesses  of  my  soul,  pressed  down 
as  it  were  with  a  multitude  of  sorrows.  It 
appeared  to  be  a  very  solemn  time.  They 
were  engaged  in  depositing  the  mortal  re- 
mains of  a  man  in  the  narrow  and  darksome 
grave,  who  had  been  killed  the  day  before 
by  a  stroke  of  lightning.  O,  how  thankful 
I  felt  that  I  had  not  been  taken  off  instead  of 
that  man.  I  immediately  went  to  Hoosack, 
passing  through  the  pleasant  town  of  Troy. 
I  was  now  about  one  hundred  miles  from 
home,  and  not  having  clothes  suitable  for 
the  season,  I  concluded  to  go  to  work  in 
order  to  get  such  as  would  answer  to  make 
my  appearance  in  at  home.  So  I  began  to 
make  enquiries  for  work,  and  come  across 
one  Esquire  Haviland,  who  engaged  me  to 
e3 


/8  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

help  him  the  'remainder  of  the  season,  at 
eight  dollars  per  month.  He  treated  me 
with  the  utmost  kindness ;  he  took  me  to 
church  to  hear  the  word  of  God,  dressed  me 
up  in  good  clothes,  and  took  the  best  care 
of  me  while  I  remained  with  them.  When 
I  left  them,  instead  of  going  home,  as  I  in- 
tended, I  steered  my  course  for  Old  Hart- 
ford, where  I  fell  in  with  some  of  the  ruff 
people  of  the  world,  and  made  a  halt.  I 
again  listened  to  the  advice  of  the  wicked, 
and  turned  aside  from  the  path  of  virtue.  1 
soon  agreed  to  go  (o  sea  with  one  of  my  new 
comrades,  but  we  could  not  ship  ourselves. 
I  now  got  to  drinking  too  much  of  the  ac- 
cursed liquor  again.  As  we  failed  in  our 
project  at  Hartford,  we  started  for  New- 
Haven,  and  the  first  thing  I  knew  I  found 
myself  in  a  dance  house.  This  did  not  suit 
me.  I  abandoned  the  notion  of  going  to  sea, 
and  went  to  work,  and  all  I  got  for  two 
months  labour  was  a  pair  of  pantaloons.  I 
thought  surely,  that  these  were  hard  times. 
Winter  was  now  coming  on  apace,  and  as  I 
had  very  little  clothing,  I  had  to  do  the  best 
I  could.  I  saw  the  impropriety  of  keeping 
bad  company,  and  I  must  in  this  respect  ac- 
knowledge that  I  was  a  very  fool,  and  only 
a  half-witted  indian — the  Lord  had  often 
warned  me  of  my  danger,  and  I  was  advised 


A  SON  OF  THE  FOREST.  79 

by  those  who  I  believe  were  concerned  for 
my  welfare  here  and  hereafter. 

In  the  spring  1  had  good  clothes,  and  withal 
looked  very  decent,  so  I  thought  that  I  would 
make  another  effort  to  reach  my  home.     In 
my  journey,   being  in    the   land  of  steady 
habits,  1  found  the  people  very  benevolent 
and    kind.     I    experienced   but    very  little 
difficulty  on  the  way.     At  last  I  arrived  in 
safety  at  the  home  of  my  chiidhooii.     At 
tirst  my  people  looked  upon  me  as  one  risen 
from  the  dead.     Not  having  heard  from  me 
since  I  left  home,  being  more  than  four  years, 
they  thought  1  must  certainly  have  died,  and 
the  days  of  mourning  had  almost  passed. 
They  were  rejoiced  to  see  me  once  more  in 
the  land  of  the  living,  and  I  was  equally  re- 
joiced to  find  all  my  folks  alive.  The  whites 
with  whom  I  had  been  acquainted  were  also 
very  glad  to  see  me.    After  I  had  spent  some 
time  v/ith  my  relations  in  Groton,  and  visited 
all  my  old  friends,  I  concluded  to  go  to  work 
and  be  steady.     Accordingly  I  hired  myself 
to  a  Mr.  Geers,  for  a  month  or  two.  I  served 
him   faithfully,  but  when  I  v/anted  my  pay, 
he  undertook   to  cheat  me  out  of  it,  and 
thinking  to  treat  me  as  he  would  a  degraded 
African  slave,  he  took  a  cart-stake  in  order 
to  pay  me  ;  but  he  soon  found  out  his  mis- 
take, as  1  made  him  put  it  down  as  quick  as 
he  had  taken  it  up.     I  had  been  cheated  so 
e4 


^U  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

often  that  I  determined  to  have   my  rights 
this  time,  and  forever  after. 

1  was  now  about  nineteen  years  of  age, 
and  had  become  quite  steady.  I  attended 
meetings  again  quite  often,  and  my  mind 
was  powerfully  wrought  upon.  At  this  time 
my  heart  was  susceptible  of  good  impres-  • 
sions.  I  would  think  upon  the  varied  scenes  ; 
of  my  life — how  often  the  Lord  had  called  j 
me,  and  how  for  a  season  1  attended  to  that  "J 
call — of  the  bleosed  and  happy  times  1  had 
experienced  in  the  house  of  God,  and  in 
secret  devotion ;  and  the  days  of  darkness 
and  nights  of  sorrowful  anguish,  since  those 
days  when  the  spirit  of  God  breathed  upon 
my  soul.  Then,  I  enjoyed  happiness  in  a 
pre-eminent  degree  !  J^ow,  I  was  miserable. 
*I  had  offended  God — violated  his  laws — - 
abused  his  goodness — trampled  his  mercy 
under  foot,  and  disregarded  his  admonitions. 
But  still  he  called  me  back  to  the  path  of 
duty  and  of  peace.  1  was  pressed  down  by 
a  load  of  shame,  and  a  weight  of  guilt  too 
intolerable  to  be  borne.  Hour  after  hour, 
and  day  after  day.  did  1  endevour  to  lift  my 
heart  to  God,  to  implore  forgiveness  of  my 
sins,  and  grace  to  enable  me  to  lay  hold  of 
the  promise  to  the  vilest  of  the  vile,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  But  the  Holy  Spirit 
flew  not  to  my  relief.  I  then  thought  that  I 
must  die  and  go  to  hell. 


I 

/.     S0\    Ol     THE    FOKEST.  fei 

My  convictions  were  so  powerful  that  I 
eould  scarcely  eat.  I  had  no  rehsh  for  food. 
The  anguish  of  nriysoul  afflicled  my  hody  to 
such  a  degree  that  1  was  almost  too  weak  to 
perform  my  labour.  Sleep  seldom  visited 
my  eyelids.  My  employer  found  out  that 
the  Lord  was  teaching  me,  but  he  made  light 
of  it,  and  said  he  was  going  to  heaven  across 
the  lots.  I  thought  he  might  go  that  way, 
but  for  my  part,  1  must  take  anotlier  course. 
May  the  Lord  forgive  him,  and  teach  him 
the  good  and  the  right  way.  By  this  time 
my  employer  had  become  good  to  me,  and 
as  I  wished  to  engage  elsewhere  for  six 
months,  my  time  being  out  with  him,  he  gave 
me  a  recommendation. 

One  of  the  neighbours  wished  me  to  join 
with  him  six  months,  so  we  agreed.  They 
treated  me  as  a  brother.  But  my  sins 
troubled  me  so  much  that  T  had  no  comfort. 
My  soul  was  weighed  down  on  account  of 
my  many  transgressions,  and  I  was  tempted 
hy  the  enemy  of  souls  to  believe  that  1  had 
committed  the  unpardonable  sin — but  he 
was  a  liar,  as  the  sequel  proved,  for  after 
many  prayers,  and  groans,  and  tears,  and 
sighs,  I  found  some  relief.  This,  at  the  time, 
astonished  me,  as  I  was  one  of  the  vilest  sin- 
ners on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Now  I  think 
the  devil  took  advantage  of  me  in  this  man- 
ner. I  have  heretofore  stated  that  J  asso- 
e5 


b2  A    SUN    OF    THE    rOREs'l . 

ciated  with  bad  company,  with  such  persons 
as  often  profaned  the  holy  nanne  of  God.  I 
always  disliked  to  hear  any  one  swear,  but 
one  day  when  I  was  angry,  I  swore  a  horrid 
oath,  and  the  very  instant  that  it  passed  my 
lips,  my  heart  beat  like  the  pendulum  of  a 
clock,  my  conscience  roared  despair  and 
horror  like  thunder,  and  I  thought  I  was 
going  to  be  damned  right  otf.  I  gave  utter- 
ance to  the  word  without  thinking  what  I 
was  doing  ;  it  could  not  be  recalled,  and 
afterwards  I  thought  I  would  not  have  said 
it  for  all  the  world.  This  was  the  first  and 
the  last  time  that  I  ever  used  so  awful  an 
expression,  and  I  thought  this  of  itself  suffi- 
cient to  sink  nay  soul  to  the  shades  of  ever- 
lasting night.  Now  the  way  in  which  the 
devil  took  the  advantage  of  me  was  this. 
Whenever  I  became  fervent  in  my  supplica- 
tions at  the  throne  of  mercy  for  pardon  on 
my  guilty  soul,  he  would  try  to  pursuade  me 
that  I  had  in  uttering  the  oath  referred  to, 
forever  closed  the  door  of  hope. 


CHAPTER  VL 

I   STILL    continued  to   pray   and   attend 
meetings,  notwithstanding  the  work  was  very 


A    SON    OF    THE    I'OREST,  ^3 

hard,  and  the  meeting  seven  miles  off;  but 
I  did  not  neglect  attending  it  a  single  sab- 
bath durin-;  the  summer.  I  generally  re- 
turned as  I  went,  with  a  heavy  heart.  I 
now  attended  a  camp  meeting,  but  did  not 
experience  that  depth  of  enjoyment  which  i 
desired.  Being  determined  to  persevere  in 
the  way  of  well-doing,  I  united  with  the 
Methodist  Society,  that  is,  on  trial,  for  six 
months.  I  had  never  been  at  a  camp-meet- 
ing, and  of  course,  knew  nothing  about  it. 
It  far  exceeded  my  expectations.  I  never 
witnessed  so  great  a  body  of  christians  as- 
sembled together  before — I  was  also  aston- 
ished with  their  proceedings — I  was  affected 
by  their  prayers — charmed  by  their  songs  of 
praise,  and  stood  gazing  at  them  like  a  brain- 
less clown.  However,  I  soon  solicited  the 
prayers  of  this  body  of  christians,  for  my 
poor  soul  was  greatly  troubled.  But  behold, 
one  of  the  brethren  called  on  me  to  pray. 
I  began  to  make  excuse,  but  nothing  would 
do  ;  he  said,  pray,  and  I  thought  I  must.  I 
trembled  through  fear,  and  began  to  wish 
myself  at  home  ;  I  soon  got  on  my  knees, 
and  of  all  the  prayers  that  man  ever  heard, 
this  attempt  must  have  exceeded — I  feared 
man  more  than  my  creator  God.  While  en- 
deavouring to  pray,  it  appeared  as  if  my 
words  would  choak  me — the  cold  chills  run 
over  my  body — my  feelings  were  indiscri- 


A    ftUX    OF    THE    iORES'I', 


bably  awful.  This,  however,  had  a  very 
good  effect  upon  me,  as  it  learned  me  not 
to  please  man  so  much  as  God.  The  camp 
meeting  was  a  very  happy  one,  1  found  some 
comfort,  and  enjoyed  myself  tolerably  well. 
The  parting  scene  was  very  affecting — 
serious  thoughts  passed  through  my  mind, 
as  I  gazed  on  this  large  number  of  respec- 
table and  hapi>y  people,  who  were  about  to 
separate,  and  meet  not  together  again  till  the 
blast  of  the  archangel's  trump  shall  bring 
them  in  a  twinkling  to  the  judgm.ent  seat  of 
Christ.  And  so  it  was,  for  we  have  never 
met  altogether  again — some  have  taken 
their  everlasting  flight. 

When  I  returned  home,  I  began  to  tell  the 
family  all  about  the  camp  meeting,  what  a 
blessed  time  we  had,  vS:c.  but  they  ridiculed 
me,  saying,  we  were  only  deluded.  I  at- 
tempted to  exhort  them  to  seek  an  interest 
in  the  sinner's  friend,  but  to  no  purpose,  as 
they  only  laughed  at  me. 
,  When  the  time  for  which  I  engaged  had 
expired,  I  went  among  my  tribe  at  Groton. 
I  lived  this  winter  with  my  aunt,  who  was 
comfortably  situated.  She  was  the  hand- 
maid of  the  Lord,  and  being  a  widow,  she 
rented  her  lands  to  the  whites,  and  it  brought 
her  in  enough  to  live  on.  While  here  we 
had  some  very  good  times.  Once  in  four 
weeks  we  had  meeting,  which  was  attended 


A    SON    OF    THE    F«REST.  85 

bj  people  from  Rhode  Island,  Stonington, 
and  other  places,  and  generally  lasted  three 
days.  These  seasons  were  glorious.  We 
observed  particular  forms,  although  we  knew 
nothing  about  the  dead  languages,  except 
that  the  knowledge  thereof  was  not  neces- 
sary for  us  to  serve  God.  We  had  no  house 
of  divine  worship,  and  beHeving 

"  That  the  groves  were  God's  first  temples,"' 

thither  we  would  repair  when  the  weather 
permitted.  The  Lord  often  met  with  us, 
and  we  were  happy  in  spite  of  the  devil. 
Whenever  we  separated  it  was  in  perfect 
love  and  friendship. 

My  aunt  could  not  read,  but  she  could 
almost  preach,  and  in  her  feeble  manner, 
endea>^our  to  give  me  much  instruction. 
Poor  dear  woman,  her  body  slumbers  in  the 
grave,  but  her  soul  is  in  the  paradise  of 
Qod — she  has  escaped  from  a  world  of 
trouble.  The  whites  were  anxious  to  have 
the  honourof  burying  her;  she  was  interred 
very  decently,  the  whites  being  as  numerous 
as  the  natives.  Indeed,  all  who  knew  her 
wished  to  show  the  veneration  in  which  they 
held  her,  by  following  her  remains  to  their 
last  earthly  resting  place.  Her  name  was 
Sally  George,  and  she  was  deservedly  es- 
teemed for  her  piety.     In.  hej  sphere,  she 


<^ft  A    iJOK    OP    THE    l'OR£Si^ 

was  a  very  useful  woman,  and  greatly  be 
loved  by  all  who  knew  her.  She  was  very 
attentive  to  the  sick,  kind  to  the  unfortunate, 
good  and  benevolent  to  the  poor  and  the 
fatherless.  She  would  often  pour  into  the 
ear  of  the  sin-sick  soul,  the  graciously  reviv- 
ing proiuises  of  the  gospel.  Whrle  she  lay 
sick,  she  expressed  a  desire  to  go  and  see 
her  brethren,  who  lived  about  eight  miles 
off;  she  said  the  Lord  would  give  her 
strength,  and  so  he  did.  She  then  vistited 
her  friends,  and  after  enjoying  some  religi- 
ous conversation,  she  returned  home  to  die. 
The  fear  of  death  was  now  taken  away,  and 
she  exhof  ted  all  around  her  to  be  faithful, 
and  serve  the  Lord.  She  died  m  the  full 
triumphs  of  the  faith,  on  the  6th  of  May, 
18^4,  aged  45  years.  In  her  death,  happy 
as  it  was,  the  church  has  sustained  an  almost 
irreparable  loss.    But 

She  bathes  her  weary  soul, 
In  seas  of  heavenly  rest. 
Where  not  a  wave  of  trouble  rolls, 
Across  her  peaceful  breast." 

The  next  season  I  engaged  with  a  Mr. 
Wright  in  the  same  neighbourhood,  and  con- 
tinued with  him  some  time.  While  there  I 
did  wrong,  as  I  got  angry  at  the  mistress  of 
the  house,  who  by  the  bye,  was  an  extremely 
passionate  woman,  and   uttered  some   un* 


A    S<ON    OF    THE    FOREST,  87 

guarded  expressions.  I  found  I  had  done 
wrong,  and  instantly  nnade  my  humble  con- 
fession to  Almighty  God,  and  also  to  my 
brethren,  and  obtained  forgiveness.  I  con- 
tinued to  attend  meeting,  and  had  many 
blessed  times.  The  spirit  of  the  Lord  moved 
upon  my  heart,  and  I  thought  it  to  be  my 
duty  to  call  sinners  to  repentance.  It  was 
determined  to  have  another  camp  meeting 
this  season,  and  brother  Hyde  preached  a 
preparatory  sermon  from  this  portion  of  di- 
vine truth — '"'By  nighty  on  my  bed,  I  sought 
him  whom  my  soul  loveth  :  I  sought  him,  hut 
I  found  him  not.  I  will  rise  now,  and  go 
about  the  city  ;  in  the  streets,  and  in  the  broad 
ways,  I  will  seek  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  :  I 
sought  him  but  1  found  him  not.  The  watch- 
men that  go  about  the  city  found  me  :  to  whom 
I  said,  saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  ?  It 
was  but  a  little  that  I  passed  from  them,  but  I 
found  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  :  I  held  him 
and  would  not  let  him  go,  until  1  had  brought 
him  to  my  mother'' s  house,  and  unto  the  cham- 
ber of  her  that  had  conceived  me.  I  charge 
you,  0  ye  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  by  the  roes 
and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field,  that  ye  stir  not 
up,  nor  awake  my  love  till  he  pleasej''^ — Solo- 
mons Songs,  iii,  1.  5. 

After  brother  Hyde  had  coucluded  his 
sermon,  I  felt  moved  to  rise  and  speak.  I 
trembled  at  the  thought ;  but  believincc  it  a 


SS  A    SON    OF    THE    FOKErfT. 

duty  required  of  me  by  my  heavenly  Father. 
I  could  not  disobey,  and  in  rising  to  discharge 
this  sacred  obligation,  I  found  all  impediment 
of  speech  removed  ;  my  heart  was  enlarged  : 
my  soul  glowed  with  holy  fervor,  and  the 
blessing  of  the  Almighty  sanctified  this  my  first 
public  attempt  to  warn  sinners  of  their  danger 
and  invite  them  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the 
Lamb.  I  wa*  now  in  my  proper  element, 
just  harnessed  for  the  work,  with  the  fire  of, 
divine  love  burning  on  my  heart.  In  this 
frame  of  mind  I  went  to  camp  meeting,  and 
here  the  presence  of  the  Lord  was  made 
manifest — his  gracious  spirit  was  poured  out 
upon  the  people,  and  while  he  was  present 
to  cheer  and  bless  his  followers,  his  awaken- 
ing power  sought  out  the  sinner,  and  nailed 
conviction  on  his  heart.  Oh,  it  was  a  joyful 
scene.  Here  were  the  followers  of  the  Lord 
praising  him  in  strains  of  the  liveliest  joy — 
there  the  broken  hearted  mourner  shedding 
tears  of  penitential  sorrow  over  the  long 
black  catalogue  of  his  offences.  Many  a 
gracious  shower  of  divine  mercy  fell  on  the 
encampment — many  a  drooping  plant  revi- 
ved, and  many  a  desolate  and  ruiiicd  heart, 
was  made  the  home  of  new,  and  happy,  and 
lieavenly  feelings.  I  have  reason  to  believe' 
that  at  least  one  hundred  sinners  were  re- 
claimed at  this  meeting,  and  many  went 
away  with  their  heads  bowed  down  under  a 


A    SON    OF    THE    F«REST.  89 

sense  of  their  numerous  transgressions. 
Shortly  after  this  meeting,  I  felt  it  my  duty 
to  observe  the  ordinance  of  baptism  by 
immersion,  believing  it  as  a  scriptural  doc- 
trine. There  were  three  other  candidates 
for  this  ordinance  ;  which  was  administered 
by  Rev.  Mr.  Barnes,  at  a  place  called Bozra, 
.in  the  month  of  December,  1818.  It  was  a 
very  solemn,  affecting,  and  profitable  time ; 
the  Lord  in  truth  was  present  to  bless. 

Shortly  after  this  I  felt  a  desire  to  see  my 
family  connexions  again,  and  therefore  left 
this  part  of  the  country,  after  obtaining  a 
certificate  of  my  standing  in  society,  &c,  as 
is  generally  done  by  Methodists  when  they 
remove  from  one  place  to  another.  Nothing 
worthy  of  special  notice  occurred  during  my 
journey,  except  losing  my  way  one  night ;  it 
happened  in  this  manner; — having  reached 
the  neighbourhood  of  my  father's  residence 
about  sun  down,  and  being  extremely 
anxious  to  complete  my  journey,!  concluded 
to  continue  on,  as  1  expected  to  reach  his 
house  by  two  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Un- 
fortunately I  took  the  wrongroad  and  was  led 
into  a  swamp.  I  thought  1  was  not  far  from 
the  main  road  as  I  fancied  that  I  heard  teams 
passing  the  other  side  of  the  swamp;  and 
not  being  aware  of  the  dangerous  situation 
in  which  I  was  placed,  I  penetrated  into  the 
labarynth  of  darkness  with  the  hope  of  gain- 


90  A    SON    OF    THE    lOREST, 

ing  the  main  road.  At  every  step  I  became 
more  and  more  entangled— the  thickness  of 
the  branches  above  me  shut  out  the  little 
light  atTorded  bj  the  stars,  and  to  my  horror 
1  found  that  the  further  1  went  the  deeper 
the  mire  ;  at  last  I  was  brought  to  a  dead 
stand.  I  had  found  it  necessary  to  feel  my 
way  with  a  stick — now  it  failed  in  striking 
on  solid  ground ;  fortunately  in  groping  about 
I  found  a  pole,  which  I  suppose  must  have 
been  twelve  or  fifteen  feet  long,  and  thrust- 
ing it  in,  met  with  no  better  success.  I 
was  now  amazed ;  what  to  do  I  knew  not ; 
shut  out  from  the  light  of  heaven — surround- 
ed by  appalling  darkness — standing  on  un- 
certain ground — and  having  proceeded  so 
far,  that  to  return,  ifpossible,  were  as  "dan- 
gerous as  to  go  over."  This  was  the  hour 
of  peril — I  could  not  call  for  assistance  on 
my  fellow  creatures ;  there  was  no  mortal 
ear  to  listen  to  my  cry.  I  was  shut  out  from 
the  world,  and  did  not  know  but  that  I  should 
perish  there,  and  my  fate  forever  remain  a 
mystery  to  my  friends.  I  raised  my  heart 
in  humble  prayer  and  supplication  to  the  fa- 
ther of  mercies,  and  behold  he  stretched 
forth  his  hand  and  delivered  me  from  this 
place  of  danger.  Shortly  after  I  had  prayed 
the  Lord  to  set  me  free,  I  found  a  small 
piece  of  solid  earth,  and  then  another,  so 
that  after  much  difficulty,  I  succeeded  in 


A  tfON  Oe  THE  FOREST.  91 

once  more  placing  my  {eet  upon  dry  ground. 
I  then  fell  upon  my  knees  and  thanked  my 
blessed  master  for  this  singular  interposition 
of  his  providence  and  mercy.  As  this  cir- 
cumstance occasioned  so  much  delay,  and 
withall  fatigued  me  so  much  that  I  did  not 
reach  home  until  daylight.  I  found  my  fa- 
ther well,  and  all  the  family  rejoiced  to  see 
me.  On  this  occasion  I  had  an  opportunity 
of  making  some  remarks  to  the  friends  who 
came  to  see  me.  My  father  who  was  a 
member  of  the  Baptist  church,  was  much 
pleased,  and  what  was  far  better,  we  had  a 
a  time  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord.  I  now  agreed  with  my  father  to  tar- 
ry with  him  all  winter,  and  he  agreed  to 
learn  me  how  to  make  shoes. — In  this  new- 
business  I  made  some  progress. 

I  was  now  very  constant  in  attending 
meetings — in  the  neighbourhood  there  was  a 
small  class  of  Methodists,  firmly  united  to 
each  other ;  I  cast  my  lot  with  this  little 
band,  and  had  many  precious  seasons.  They 
agreed  in  all  points  of  doctrine  but  one,  and 
that  related  to  perfect  love — some  said  it  was 
inconsistent,  and  another  said  it  was  not.  I 
could  not  see  wherein  this  inconsistency 
manifested  itself,  as  we  were  commanded  to 
love  God  with  all  our  hearts^  and  contend/or 
that  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 

While  in  Colreign  the  Lord  moved  upon 


1^*^  A    S«N    OF    THE    FOREST. 

my  heart  in  a  peculiarly  powerful  manner, 
and  by  it  I  was  led  to  believe  that  I  was  cal- 
led to  preach  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  present  day,  a 
great  variety  of  opinion  prevails  respecting 
the  holy  work.  We  read  in  the  bible  that  in 
former  days,  holy  men  spoke  as  they  were 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  think  this  is 
right,  and  believe  more  in  the  validity  of 
such  a  call  than  in  all  the  calls  that  ever  is- 
sued from  any  body  of  men  united.  My  ex- 
ercises were  great— my  soul  was  pained 
when  the  Lord  placed  before  me  the  depra- 
vity of  human  nature. — I  commenced  search- 
ing the  scriptures  more  diligently,  and  the 
more  I  read,  the  more  they  opened  to  my 
understanding ;  and  something  said  to  me, 
''go  now  and  warn  the  people  to  flee  from 
the  wrath  to  come!"  and  I  began  immedi- 
ately to  confer  with  flesh  and  blood,  and  be- 
an to  excuse  myself,  saying.  Lord  I  cannot, 
was  nothing  but  a  poor  ignorant  Indian, 
and  thought  the  people  would  not  hear  me. 
But  my  mind  was  more  distressed,  and  I  be- 
gan to  pray  more  frequently  to  God  to  let 
this  "  cup  pass  from  me."  In  this  manner 
was  I  exercised  day  by  day ;  but  in  the  eve- 
ning I  would  tind  myself  in  our  little  meet- 
ings exhorting  sinners  to  repentance,  and 
comforting  the  saints.  On  these  occasions  I 
had  the  greatest  liberty.     Now  1  did  not  ac- 


f 


^   SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  Sl^ 

quaint  my  brethren  with  my  feehngs  or  exer- 
cises, for  the  devil  tempted  me  to  believe 
that  they  wonld  take  no  notice  oi  it.  At 
length  the  spell  that  bound  me  was  broken. 
I  dreamt  one  night  that  1  was  about  taking  a^ 
journey,  that  my  road  lay  through  a  mirey 
place,  in  a  dark  and  dreary  way.  It  was 
with  no  little  difficulty  that  I  desended  the 
steep.  Then  1  beheld  at  some  distance  be- 
fore me  a  large  plain,  on  w^hich  the  sun 
shone  with  perfect  brightness,  and  when  I 
succeeded  in  reaching  this  plain,  all  at  once 
an  angel  of  the  blessed  Lord  stood  in  my 
way.  After  having  addressed  me,  he  read 
some  extracts  from  St.  John's  gospel,  res- 
pecting the  preaching  of  tlie  word  of  life. 
This  dream  was  the  means  of  troubling  Hie 
still  more. 

I  now  requested,  if  the  Lord  had  called 
me  to  this  holy  work,  that  he  would  make  it 
manifestly  a  sign.  So  one  day,  after  prayer, 
I  went  to  a  friend,  and  told  him  if  he  was 
willing  to  give  out  an  appointment  for  meet- 
ing at  his  house,  I  would  try  and  exhort. 
He  assented,  and  in  giving  out  the  appoint- 
ment he  made  a  mistake  as  he  informed  the 
people  that  there  would  be  a  sermon  instead 
of  an  exhortation,  and  when  I  attended,  in- 
stead of  finding  a  few  persons  at  my  friend's 
house,  I  found  a  large  congregation  assem- 
bled at  the  school-house.  I  now  thought  ! 
t2 


94  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

was  in  a  sad  predicament — I  had  never 
preached ;  but  I  called  mightly  upon  God  for 
assistance.  When  I  went  in,  every  eye  was 
fixed  on  me,  and  when  I  was  commencing 
the  meeting,  it  appeared  as  if  my  confidence 
in  God  was  gone,  my  lips  quivered,  my  voice,  j 
trembled,  my  knees  smote  together,  and  in 
short  I  quaked  as  it  were  with  fear.  But  the 
Lord  blessed  me.  Some  of  the  people 
were  pleased,  and  a  few  displeased.  Soon 
after  this,  I  received  an  invitation  to  hold  a 
meeting  in  the  same  place  again.  I  accord- 
ingly went,  and  I  found  a  great  concourse 
of  people  who  had  come  out  to  hear  the  in- 
dian  preach,  and  as  soon  as  I  had  commen- 
ced, the  sons  of  the  devil  began  to  show 
their  front — and  I  was  treated  not  with  the 
greatest  loving  kindness,  as  one  of  them 
threw  an  old  hat  in  my  face,  and  this  exam- 
ple was  followed  by  others,  who  threw  sticks 
at  me.  But  in  the  midst  I  went  on  with  my 
sermon,  and  spoke  from  2  Pet.  ii.  9.  The 
Lord  knoweth  hozo  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of 
temptations^  and  to  reserve  the  unjust  until  the 
day  of  judgment^  to  be  punished.  The  Lord 
laid  too  his  helping  hand  ;  the  sons  of  night 
were  confused.  Now  I  can  truly  say  that  a 
native  of  the  forest  cannot  be  found  in  all 
our  country,  who  would  not  blush  at  the  bad 
conduct  of  many  who  enjoy  in  a  pre-emi- 
nent degree  the  light  of  the  gospel.  But  so  it  - 
is,  that  in  the  very  certre  of  gospel  light  and  ' 


A    SQJ\-    OF    THE    FOREST.  95 

influence,  thousands  of  immortal  souls  are 
setting  in  darkness,  or  walking  in  the  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death  !  It  is  the  truth,  and 
a  melancholy  truth  indeed  ! 

I  had  an  invitation  to  speak  at  another 
place  about  nine  miles  distant.  Still,  I  was 
not  satisfied  ;  and  1  made  it  a  subject  of  con- 
stant and  serious  prayer— T  implored  the 
Lord  all  the  way,  that  if  I  was  truly  called 
to  preach  the  everlasting  gospel,  I  might 
have  some  token  of  his  favour.  I  found  the 
congregation  large  and  respectful,  and  I 
spoke  from  Jeremiah,  vi.  14.  We  had  a 
good  time,  but  nothing  special  occurred. 
The  -congregation  in  the  afternoon  was  much 
larger  than  in  the  morning,  and  it  was  im- 
pressed upon  my  mind  to  speak  from  this 
portion  of  the  holy  scriptures— TTic  Lord 
knozoeth  how  to  deliver  the  godlt/  out  of  temp- 
tation^ and  reserve  the  unjust  to  the  day  of 
judgment  to  be  punisihed.  The  Lord  gave 
me  strength,  and  we  had  a  most  gracious 
and  glorious  exhibition  of  his  presiding 
presence,  as  many  wept  bitterly  on  account 
of  their  sins,  while  the  saints  of  the  most 
.high  rejoiced  in  the  prospect  of  a  complete 
and  triumphant  deliverance  from  the  power 
of  their  cruel  and  eternal  foe.  Now  I  was 
assured  that  my  call  was  of  God.  I  then 
returned  home  praising  God.  Shortly  after 
this,  mv  father  began  to  oppose  me — per- 


96  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

haps  he  thought,  with  some  of  the  whites, 
there  were  eaough  preachers  in  the  land 
already.  Be  this  as  it  may,  1  continued  to 
exercise  my  gift,  and  preached  wherever 
the  door  was  opened,  and  with  some  success. 
It  was  now  nearly  time  for  the  Conference 
to  commence  its  session,  and  one  of  our 
circuit  preachers  very  kindly  told  me  that  I 
had  better  desist  until  I  should  have  ob- 
tained a  licence,  if  I  did  not,  I  would  break 
the  rules  of  the  church — but  I  had  already 
violated  these.  Considering  my  youth  and 
good  intentions,  he  overlooked  this  con- 
ceived error,  and  informed  me  that  if  I 
waited  patiently.  I  should  have  a  license  to 
exercise  my  gift  by  way  of  exhortation,  and 
that  if  the  preacher  who  was  to  succeed  him 
v/ould  think  it  wrong  if  he  found  me  holding 
meetings  without  authority /rom  my  brethren, 
and  I  partly  consented.  But  the  time  was 
so  long  before  the  matter  could  be  friendly 
regulated,  that  1  could  not  sheath  my  sword, 
and  having  on  the  armour,  I  took  the  field, 
and  preached  till  the  new  elder  come  among 
us  ;  and  when  he  found  me  preaching,  what 
do  you   think  he  did  ?  why,  he  placed  me 

under  censure.     Now  his  name  was  M 

and  he  wanted  me  to  confess  that  I  was 
in  error;  but  I  was  such  a  blind  indian 
that  I  could  not  see  how  I  was  in  error  in 
preaching  Christ  Jesus,  and  Him  crucified^ 


A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST.  97 

and  of  course  could  not  conscientiously  con- 
fess as  erroneous  that  which  I  believed  to 
be  right.  He  told  me  that  if  I  zvas  right  not, 
to  confess,  but  as  1  did  not  confess  he  cast 
me  out  of  the  church,  showing  plainly  that 
he  believed  that  no  person  is  called  of  God 
to  preach  his  word  unless  ordained  of  man  ! 
No  comment  is  necessary  on  this  fact — my 
candid  reader  can  place  a  proper  estimate 
on  such  procedures. 

This  unkind  treatment  from  a  minister  of 
the  Gospel,  had  nearly  proved  the  ruin  of 
my  soul ;  and  1  have  i^o  doubt  but  that  many 

souls  r»re  lost  by  having  the  s placed 

on  them  by  t^ —  ministers.   The  waters 

of  affliction  had  well  nigh  overwhelmed  my 
soul — my  hopes  were  drowned,  and  having 
been  excluded  from  the  pales  of  the  church, 
I  viewed  myself  as  an  outcast  from  society. 
Now  the  ejiemy  sought  to  prevail  against 
me,  and  for  a  season  overcome  me.  I  gave 
way  for  a  little  season,  but  soon  returned  to 
my  frst  love.  I  went  then  to  my  native 
tribe  were  meetings  were  still  kept  up — I 
tarried  here  but  a  short  time,  and  then  went 
to  old  Saybrook  ;  here  1  found  a  few  Metho- 
dists, but  they  were  too  feeble  to  form  a 
Society,  as  persecution  was  at  its  height. 
There  was  also  a  few  coloured  people  who 
met  ref^ularly  for  religious  worship,  with 
these  !  sometimes  assembled. 
f4 


98  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

About  this  time  I  met  with  a  woman  of 
wearly  the  same  colour  as  myself — she  bore 
a  pious  and  exemplary  character.  After  a 
short  acquaintance,  we  were  united  in  the 
sacred  bonds  of  marriage  ;  and  now  I  was. 
going  on  swimmingly,  and  indeed  we  did  for 
a  zohile.  but  at  last  a  calamity  fell  upon  me, 
which  nearly  crushed  me  to  the  dust.  A 
man  exacted  work  of  me,  for  a  debt  that  I 
did  not  honestly  owe,  and  while  making  his 
shoes,  1  concluded  to  pay  myself,  which  I 
did — immediately  my  conscience  smote  me, 
but  I  could  not  replace  it  in  time,  so  I  made 
ample  restitution,  and  a  frank  confession 
before  all  my  brethren — and  the  Lord  was 
good,  for  he  wiped  out  the  blot,  and  restored 
me  to  his  favour.  I  then  went  to  Middle-, 
town,  and  remained  a  short  time,  when  I  got 
out  of  business,  crossed  over  the  river,  and' 
agreed  to  serve  a  tavern-keeper  for  one 
month.  I  now  sought  every  opportunity  to 
be  alone,  and  when  my  month  was  up,  I  re- 
ceived my  wages  and  sent  it  to  my  wife.  I 
had  now  to  seek  another  place,  and  as  1  went 
along,  1  prayed  that  my  family  might  not 
suffer,  as  I  knew  that  they  were  innocent, 
and  my  little  ones  too  small  to  help  them- 
selves. After  a  little  while,  the  Lord  opened 
the  way,  and  I  obtained  a  situation  with  a 
Mr.  Hail,  in  Gloucester,  for  two  months,  at 
twelve  dollars  a  month.     It  beinsj   havest 


A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST.  99 

time,  my  employer  allowed  each  of  his  hands 
a  half  pint  of  spirits  every  day.  I  told  him 
I  did  not  want  my  portion,  so  he  agreed  to 
pay  me  a  little  more.  I  abstained  entirely, 
and  found  that  I  could  not  only  stand  labour 
as  well,  but  perform  more  than  those  who 
drank  the  spirits.  All  the  hands  exclaimed 
against  me,  and  said  that  I  would  soon  give 
out  ;  but  I  was  determined  that  touch  not, 
taste  7iot,  handle  not,  should  be  my  motto  ; 
God  supported  me,  and  I  can  truly  say,  that 
my  health  was  better,  my  appetite  improved, 
and  my  mind  was  calm.  My  general  drink 
was  molasses  or  milk  and  water.  Some 
persons  say,  that  thei/  cannot  do  without 
spirituous  liquors,  but  I  say  it  is  a  curse  to 
individuals,  to  families,  to  communities,  to 
the  nation,  and  to  the  world  at  Var^e,  I 
could  enlarge  on  this  momentous  subject — 
I  could  speak  from  experience,  as  I  have  too 
often  felt  its  baneful  effects,  but  as  1  intend, 
if  the  Lord  spares  me,  to  pubHsh  an  Essay 
on  Intemperance,  I  leave  it  for  the  present* 
When  my  time  was  out,  Mr.  Hail  paid  me 
like  a  gentleman,  and  also  gave  me  three 
dollars  and  twenty  five  cents,  in  lieu  of  the 
spirits — a  sum  sufficient  to  buy  my  poor 
dear  children  some  clothes.  The  family 
were  loth  to  part  with  me,  as  I  had  endea- 
voured to  live  a  godly  life — I  held  a  prayer 


iOO  A    SON    OF    THE    roUEtiT. 

meeting  with  them,  and  departed  with  tearjr 
in  my  eyes. 

I  now  bent  my  course  for  Hartford,  and 
engaged  labour  work  at  twenty  dollars  a 
month — then  I  went  liome,  and  staid  one 
week  with  my  dear  family,  and  according  to 
my  engagemc^nts,  returned  to  Hartford,  but 
my  place  was  taken  up,  and  I  did  not  know 
what  to  do.  While  in  this  extremity,  a 
thought  struck  me — I  remembered  that  I 
had  a  sister  living  in  Providence.  Thither 
I  went,  and  soon  found  my  sister,  who  was 
\ery  kind  to  me.  I  liad  no  difficulty  in  pro- 
curing work.  The  spirit  of  the  Lord  now 
fell  afresh  upon  me,  and  I  at  once  entered 
in  the  work  without  conferring  with  flesh 
and  blood.  I  appointed  meeting  for  ex- 
hortation and  prayer — the  Lord  blessed  my 
feeble  efforts,  and  souls  were  converted  and 
added  to  the  church.  I  continued  here  five 
months,  and  then  taking  a  letter  of  recom- 
mendation, returned  to  my  family  ;  and 
when  I  had  concluded  to  remove  to  Provi- 
dence, as  the  place  of  my  future  residence, 
the  society  gave  me  a  certificate  to  the 
church  in  Providence — I  there  joined,  and 
was  shortly  appointed  to  the  office  of  class- 
leader,  which  office  I  filled  for  two  years. 
I  now  obtained  a  verbal  permission  to  ap- 
point meetings,  from  Brother  Webb,  the 
preacher  in    charge.     Brother    Kent   sue- 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  lOi 

ceeded  him.  After  this  change  I  applied 
for  a  Hcense  to  exhort — but  I  was  opposed 
by  two  or  three  persons  on  account  of  not 
having  hved  long  enough  in  the  place.  The 
rest  of  the  class,  about  thirty  in  number, 
were  anxious  that  I  should  have  a  license, 
and  a  division  had  like  to  have  been  the 
consequence  of  withholding  it  from  me.  In 
a  month  or  two  after,  the  affair  was  settled 
to  mutual  satisfaction,  and  it  was  agreed  that 
I  should  have  license  to  exhort.  I  now  went 
from  place  to  place,  improving  my  gift,  and 
the  Lord  blessed  my  labours.  I  now  felt  it 
more  strongly  my  duty,  and  an  inward  satis- 
faction in  preaching  the  "  word."  Some- 
times, however,  the  evil  one  would  tempt 
ine  to  give  it  up,  but  instantly  my  conscience 
would  reprove  me.  Many  a  severe  combat 
have  I  had  with  the  enemy  respecting  my 
competency,  and  I  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  if  I  could  not  give  "  rejined  r''  instruc- 
tion, and  neglected  to  discharge  my  duty  to 
God  and  my  fellow  men  on  that  account,  I 
,  could  not  enjoy  his  smiles.  So  I  was  de- 
termined in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  to  go 
on  in  the  way  wherein  I  was  called. 
I^My  mind  was  now  exercised  about  en- 
tering the  work  as  a  missionary.  I  prayed 
to  the  Lord,  if  it  was  his  will  to  open  the 
way,  as  I  was  poor,  and  had  a  family  to 
maintain,  and  did  not  wish  to  depend  upoii 


102  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

public  charity.  My  desire  was  to  do  some- 
thing at  the  same  ti nie  that  would  enable  me 
to  keep  my  family.  Now  a  gentleman 
wished  me  to  take  out  some  religious  books, 
and  sell  them.  I  did  so,  and  went  praying 
to  God  all  the  way  to  bless  me — and  so  he 
did,  and  his  blessing  attended  my  labours 
wherever  I  went.  I  had  also  some  success 
in  selhng  my  books,  and  made  enough  to 
support  my  little  family,  and  defray  my 
necessary  travelling  expenses.  So  1  con- 
cluded to  travel,  and  the  Lord  went  with 
me.  Being  a  native,  the  people  were  wil- 
ling to  receive  me.  In  one  of  these  excur- 
sions, I  went  over  on  Long  Island,  and  from 
thence  to  IN ew- York,  where  my  bodily 
strength  was  reduced  by  a  fever  and  ague. 
Here  in  the  hour  of  sickness  the  Lord  was 
with  me — I  experienced  his  comforting 
presence,  the  kindness  of  friends,  and  the 
quiet  of  a  peaceful  conscience.  It  was  a 
sore  trial  for  me  to  be  absent,  in  such  a 
situation,  from  my  family,  but  it  "  was  good 
to  be  afflicted" — and  how  beautiful  was  this 
passage  of  scripture  fulfilled  wlJich  says, 
Seek  jirst  the  kingdom  of  heaven^  and  all 
things  else  shall  be  added.  How  beautful 
and  numerous  are  his  promises,  and  how 
strikingly  fulfilled.  I  have  seen  all  these 
promises  verified.  Blessings  unnumbered 
and  undeserved  showered  upon  me. 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  103 

From  New-York  1  went  to  Albany,  stop- 
ping at  the  different  villages,  and  exhorting 
the  people  to  repentance,  and  the  Lord 
seconded  my  efforts.  I  was  very  sick  for 
about  one  month,  and  the  friends  thought  I 
would  not  recover  ;  but  although  I  was  very 
much  reduced,  I  did  not  think  my  sands  had 
yet  run  their  course — I  believed  that  God 
would  spare  me  to  preach  his  Gospel ;  and 
according  to  my  faith  it  was,  for  I  speedily 
recovered,  and  commenced  my  labour  of 
love.  On  Arbour  Hill  the  Lord  poured  out 
his  spirit  in  a  powerful  manner.  Here  a 
class  of  about  thirty  members  was  organized, 
and  at  a  number  of  places  were  I  laboured 
several  were  added,  but  how  many  in  the 
whole  I  cannot  say  preceisely  ;  let  it  suffice 
that  through  my  instrumentality  some  souls 
were  brought  from  a  state  of  sin  and  dark- 
ness to  the  light  and  favour  of  God — to  whom 
be  all  the  glory  ascribed. 

1  now  returned  home,  after  having  been 
absent  six  months  and  found  my  dear  family 
and  friends  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  usual 
health.  After  remaining  at  home  about  a 
fortnighi^j  1  went  to  Boston.  Here  the  Lord 
blessed  my  labours  among  the  friends  of 
the  cross.  While  in  Boston  I  met  with  a 
professed  infidel,  who  wished  to  draw  me 
into  an  argument,  by  hooting  at  me  for  be- 
^'eving  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  fallen 


104  A    SOX    OF    THE    FOREST. 

men.  I  spoke  to  him  about  being  a  good 
gentleman,  and  he  replyed  that  1  in  common 
with  my  brethren  believed  no  man  was  a 
gentleman  unless  he  was  under  the  influence 
of  priestcraft ;  and  I  told  him,  that  1  con- 
sidered every  man  a  gentleman  who  acted 
in  a  becoming  manner.  He  then  asked  by 
what  authority  I  believed  in  Jesus  Christ  as 
my  Saviour  ;  I  answered,  by  an  internal 
witness  in  my  soul,  and  the  enjoyment  of 
that  peace  emanating  from  this  Saviour, 
which  the  "  world  can  neither  give  or  take 
away."  This  stirred  his  passions,  and  he 
said,  I  suppose  you  think  I  am  an  Atheist, 
to  which  I  replied  in  the  negative,  and  as- 
sured him  that  he  was  an  infidel.  I  then 
spoke  to  him  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  Apos- 
tles •,  and  he  replied,  that  they  were  all  fools 
together,  and  1  was  as  great  a  one  as  any. 
He  turned  pale,  and  looked  as  if  he  would 
have  swallowed  me  up  alive — and  I  gave 
him  an  exhortation,  and  went  away.  After 
spending  about  two  months  in  Boston,  I  re- 
turned home  ;  then  1  visited  New-Bedford 
Martha's  Vineyard,  and  Nanivicket,  preach- 
ing the  word  wherever  a  door  was  opened 

and  the  Lord  was  not  unmindful  of  me,  his 
presence  accompanied  me,  and  I  believe 
that  much  good  was  done.  Again  I  visited 
my  family,  and  then  went  to  Salem,  and  I 
found  many  precious  souls.   We  held  several 


A    S©N    OF    THE    FOREST.  105 

laeetings,  and  the  Lord  came  forth  in  the 
galleries  of  his  grace,  and  my  labour  of  love 
proved  very  profitable  to  the  dear  people, 
and  when  I  left  them  the  parting  scene  was 
very  affecting.  I  how  visited  the  different 
towns,  preaching  as  I  went  along,  until  I 
reached  Newberryporr,  and  having  taken 
letters  of  recommendation  from  the  various 
preachers,  I  was  kindly  received,  and  re- 
porting myself  to  Brother  Bartholomew 
Otheman  the  preacher  in  charge,  he  pro- 
vided lodging;?  for  me.  It  so  happened  that 
Brother  John  Foster,  his  colleague-,  was  sick, 
and  they  needed  some  help,  and  1  thought 
the  brethren  were  glad  (hat  I  had  come 
among  them.  At  ni^ht  I  preached  for 
Brother  Otheman,  and  the  next  evening  in 
the  church  where  Brother  Foster  officiated, 
and  an  appointment  was  given  out  for  me  to 
preach  in  the  course  of  the  next  Sunday  at 
the  same  church,  but  having  an  intercourse 
in  the  mean  time  with  Brother  Foster,  and 
finding  him  highly  tinctured  with  Calvinism, 
I  thought  I  would  converse  freely  with  him 
on  the  subject.  This  course  soured  his 
mind  against  me,  and  he  gave  out  my  future 
appointments  in  such  a  way  that  1  thought 
best  to  preach  the  word  in  the  dwelling 
houses  of  the  inhabitants  ;  and  I  had  as  many 
hearers  as  I  could  have  wished,  and  I  bless 
the  Lord  that  much  good  was  done  in  his 


106  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

name.     I  made  several  attempts  towards  a 
reconciliation — he   could  hear  no  proposals   V 
— I  could  make  no  concessions,  as  I  had  not  II 
injured  or  given   him  any  cause  of  offence,^ 
and  he  went  on  to  persecute  me,  notwith- 
standing the  remonstrances  of  his  brethren. 
My  motives  were  pure,  and  I  bless  the  Lord 
thabaday  will  come  when  the  secrets  of  all 
hearts  shall  be  revealed.     I  forgive  the  poor 
man  for  all  the  injury  he  attempted  to  do 
me,  and  1  hope  the  righteous  judge  of  all , 
men,  will  also  forgive  him. 

From  Newburyport  I  went  to  Portland,  [ 
Maine,  where  I  had  some  gracious  times, 
and  laboured  with  success,  and  then  return- 
ed to  my  abiding  place  at  Providence,  R.  I. 
with  a  recommendation.  I  reported  myself 
to  the  preacher  in  charge,  and  asked  for 
a  certificate  ;  he  said  that  my  recommen- 
dationwas  "  genuine,"  but  he  had  heard 
evil  reports  respecting  me,  and  preferred  ^ 
enquiring  into  the  matter  before  he  granted 
my  request.  I  felt  glad  that  the  brother 
had  promised  to  make  enquiry,  as  I  knew 
that  I  should  come  out  well.  As  this 
would  take  some  time  1  .crossed  over  to 
Long  Island,  preached  at  Sag  Harbour  and 
other  places  with  success,  and  then  went  to 
New-York,  where  I  remained  but  a  short 
lime,  and  then  proceeded  to  Albany.  Here 
I  was  known,  and  was  received  in  a  friendly 


A   50N    OF    %iiE    FOREST.  107' 

way,  and  continued  to  preach  wherever  an 
opportunity  offered  ;  ^^h\\e  here  a  certificate 
^t  u,^  ^.pmbership  was  *  ogived  from  the 
church  in  Proviatr.<..,  and  ou.j,^.  ^^.^e  of  it 
1  entered  the  church.  I  now  -jphed  for 
license  to  preach,  and  was  recomme.4ed  to 
the  quarterly  conference  as  a  suitable  candi- 
date, but  the  conference  th^ight  difftrentlv  • 
so  after  improving  my  gift  ^ree  months! 
made  another  application.  K,^  before  I 
proceed  to  narrate  the  doings  otj^g  confe- 
rence, I  will  inform  the  reader  u-^^^  ^^^ 
Lord  did  for  me  in  the  mean  time. 

1  had  been  requested  by  the  preachev^  to 
improve  on  Watervliet  circuit  in  order  t^^ 
they  might  have  an  opportuhity  to  form  aK 
estimate  of  my  talents  and  usefulness,  and 
this  was  right.  I  accordingly  went  forward 
with  fear  and  trembling,  but  the  Lord  ena- 
bled me  to  take  up  the  cross,  and  stood  by 
me  at  this  time.  Several,  I  trust,  through 
my  instrumentality,  passed  from  death  unto 
life.  I  held  several  meetings  in  Albany, 
and  crowds  flocked  out,  some  to  hear  the 
truth,  and  others  to  5/-  the  "  Indian."  The 
worth  of  souls  lay  near  my  heart,  and  the 
Lord  was  pleased  to  own  the  labours  of  his 
feeble  servant.  From  Albany  I  went  to 
Bath,  where  the  power  of  the  Almighty 
was  felt  ia  a  wonderful  manner,  it  appeared 
as  though  all  the  inhabitants  were  engaged 


10»  A  SON  OF  THK    FORES'l . 

"seeking  the  salvation  of  ^eir  souls — many 
wept  bitterly  and  c»*^^  aloud  for  merc^ 
and  seven  oreiirb^^^he  jud^mpn^-f-2.di]tv 

passed  from  d-^  ^^\  ''<''„/ /*'^"  K  ^ 
on  to  rnv-*l^P°^"^'^^"^  Watervliet,  and 
here  tf^  Lord  was  present  to  awaken  sin- 
ners and  reclaim  backsliders. 

My  wife  and  mj   little    son    had    taken 
board  with  or-^  ^^  ^^^  brethren.     About  this  - 
time  I  left  <^he  circuit  for  a  spell,  as  I  had 
some   b'^*"^^^    ^^  Hudson  which  I  had  to 
transa'^  in  person,  and  I  felt  no  uneasiness  i 
aboi^  my  family,  presuming  that  they  would 
Ijp  made    comfortable  as    I  paid  for  their 
K>ard.     On  my    return,   I    found    my  wife 
quite  unwell — and    I    pretty   soon    learned 
that  the  treatment  she  received   was  very 
unkind,  if  not  cruel — not  fit  for  a  dog,  and 
what  surprised  me  was  that  the  woman  of 
the  house  where  my  poor  wife  boarded,  and 
who  treated  her  so  bad,  professed  to  be  a 
Methodist.     She  was  even  so  cruel  as  to  re- 
fuse a  light  in  her  room,   and  when   medi- 
cines were  ordered,  she  had  to  take   them 
without  sweetening,  or  any  thing  w^hatsoever 
to  make  them  palatable.   No  wonder,  there- 
fore, that  on  my  return,  I  found  my  wife  dis- 
satisfied with  her  situation  and  anxious  for  a 
change,  but  she  was  unw^ell,  and    I  endea- 
voured to  pacify  her,  believing  it  improper 
to  remove  her  at  that  season,  on  account  o\ 


A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST.  109 

the  deep  snow  and  intense  cold.  So  we 
concluded  to  stay  a  little  longer  and  I  pur- 
chased some  few  necessaries  for  my  wife. 
However,  we  soon  moved  to  Troy,  in  order 
to  get  out  of  such  an  unlucky  dilemma; 
my  wife  was  extremely  rejoiced  to  get  outof 
their  fangs.  At  Troy  I  found  a  number  of 
good  Christian  friends,  with  whom  I  had  se- 
veral very  good  meetings,  and  the  power  of 
the  Lord  was  made  manifest.  One  evening 
as  I  was  preaching  to  some  coloured  people, 
in  a  school  house,  the  power  of  the  Lord 
moved  on  the  congregat^'on,  both  white  and 
coloured — hard  hearfe  began  to  melt,  and 
inquire  vfhat  they  csust  do  to  be  saved.  We 
had  a  very  refrpdhuig-  season  from  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Lrd. 

I  now  weiit  into  all  the  surrounding  villa- 
ges preai^hing  ihe  word  of  eternal  life, 
and  exliortingainners  to  repentance.  Be- 
fore 'lie  quarterly  meeting,  1  took  a  tour  to 
(he  west,  as  far  as  Utica,  holding  meetings 
by  the  way,  and  1  found  God  as  precious  as 
ever,  and  being  absent  three  weeks,  1  return- 
ed in  order  to  attend  the  conference,  which 
was  to  be  held  on  the  1 1th  of  April. 

At  the  time  appointed  the  meeting  was 
held.  A  preparatory  sermon  was  preached 
by  the  presiding  elder — the  conference  was 
called,  and  the  business  of  the  circuit  was 
attended  to.     My  case  came  up  in  coursCi^ 

G 


Y 

\ 

n 


110  A    SON    or    TIlK    FOKEc'l. 

and  the  president  (the  P.    E.)  asked  me  il  j 
1  thought  the  Lord  had  called  me  to  preach.  J 
to  which  1   answered  in  the  affirmative.     T 
was  then  questioned  as  to  m}-   faith   in  the 
doctrine  and  discipline  of  the  church,  and 
whether  I  would  conform  to  the  same,   to 
which  I  assented.     An  opportunity  was  now 
given  to  the  brethren  to  ask  me  any  ques 
tions   the)   thought    proper';    one  only  wa 
asked,  and  tViat   was,  how  long  I  had   been^ 
converted.     1  then  withdrew  from  the  room' 
to    give   them  an  opportunity  to  decide  on 
my   application.     lAy    rnind    was    perfectly 
easy.     After  I  was  o^t  about  half  an  hour 
Brother  Strong  came  out  to  inform  me  that 
the   conference  would  rafi>^r  that  I   shoul 
take  an  exhorter-s  license  agaVi,as  they  knew 
nothing  of  my   character,  but  ijl  the^  while 
the)  knew  nothing  againsi  me.     Now  let  it 
be  observed  that  I  had  not  ohiy  pres>5nted  a 
certificate  of  my  good   standing,  but  also  a 
number  of  recommendations    of  character J 
and    usefulness,    from    several  well   knowh^ 
itinerant  ministers  of  the  connexion,  and  asl 
the>  could  find  nothing  against  me,  it  appear-^ 
ed  singular  to  me,  that  men  who  had  thrown 
open  their  doors  to  the  poor  Indian,  and  had' 
often  sat    with  apparent   profit    under    his; 
ministry,    could  thus   oppose    me,   and   cry" 
out  "  We  do  not  know  you."     I  told  the 
brother  who  gave  me  this  information  that 


A  S©N  OF  THE  FOREST.  Ill 

they  did  not  comply,  that  they  v/ould  hin- 
ier  my  doing  that  work  which  the  Lord  re- 
ijuired  of  me.  He  then  returned,  and  after 
ieliberating  about  fifteen  minutes,  I  was 
:alled  in,  when  the  presiding  elder  (Stratton) 
said,  "  This  cojiference  do  not  see  fit  to 
^rant  your  request — are  you  wilhng  to  re- 
ceive an  exhorter's  liscenre  again  ?"  To 
ivhich  I  hastily  rephed  in  the  negative.  Af- 
er  rongidering  the  sijb;ect  a  little,  1  spoke 
to  Brother  Covel,  the  preacher  in  charge, 
Ind  he  advised  me  to  take  an  exhorter's  re- 
lation :  a  licence  icas  readily  granted  mt  to 
ixhort.  Now,  one  single  question  which  I 
m\\  leave  with  the  reader  to  answer,  viz  : 
As  this  conference  refused  me  a  licence  to 
preach,  on  the  ground  that  its  members  did 
aot  know  enouijh  of  my  character,  had  they 
any  right  to  grant  a  licence  to  exhort,  at  the 
same  lime  that  they  refused  one  to  preach? 

Shortly  after,  I  met  Brother  Covel,  and 
his  colleague  in  Albany  and  iiformed  them 
that  it  v.'as  my  intention  not  to  present  the 
papers  I  had  received  to  the  Episcopal  Me- 
thcdi'ts,  as  it  was  my  intention  to  Join  the 
Methodist  Society.  They  appeared  somewhat 
surprized,  and  endeavoured  to  persuade  me 
to  remain  where  I  was,  that  is,  not  to  leave 
the  church.  I  told  them  that  my^mind  was 
fully  made  up — there  was  too  much  oppres- 
sion for  me  in  the  old  church,  and  that  a  dis- 


112  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

position  prevailed  to  keep  the  local  preach 
ers  down.  They  then  asked  me  why  I  hao 
said  that  I  believed  in  the  doctrine  and  dis- 
ciphne. — 1  replied  that  I  did  fully  believe  in 
the  doctrine,  but  that  1  had  taken  exceptions 
to  the  discipline;  that  while  I  was  w^ith  them 
and  they  did  not  stretch  the  chords  of  gov- 
ernment too  tight,  I  was  contented,  but  I 
coul  not  go  the  whole,  and  pin  my  faith  and 
hope,  as  many  of  them  did,  entirely  upon 
their  government.  The\  appeared  to  think 
that  I  had  done  wrong  in  saying  that  I  would 
be  governed  by  the  discipline — but  I  could 
not  see  in  the  same  glass,  for  as  long  as  I 
continued  in  that  church  I  conformed  to  its 
rules  ;  and  as  this  law  was  not  continuous  in 
its  nature,  whenever  I  ceased  to  be  a  mem- 
ber of  that  church,  its  binding  and  distinc- 
tive law,  touching  my  person  and  my  conduct 
became  df^arl — it  had  no  farther  of  future  ju- 
risdiction over  me.  1  cannot  think  that  1 
violated  any  holy  law,  by  promising  obedi- 
ence to  the  rules  of  the  Meihodist  Episco- 
pal church,  and  redeeming  that  pledge  so 
long  as  1  continued  in  the  jurisdiction  of  its 
law.  But  I  will  tell  the  reader  that  in  the 
judgment  of  charity,  I  think  they,  (the  mem- 
bers of  the  conference)  broke  the  command- 
ments of  God  ;  Brother  Covel  said,  ''  As  it 
has  come  to  this,  I  will  tell  you  that  it  was 
mentioned,  (much  to   your  prejudice  in  the 


A    r^ON  OF  THE  FOREST.  113 

conference,)  that  your  wife  in  a  hasty  zoay^ 
or  unguarded  moment,  had  said  that  she 
would  expose  you,"  Now  this  had  a  bad 
appearance — the  term  of  itself  is  bad  enough, 
as  it  implies  guilt,  or  offence  of  some  kind — 
and  this  slang  was  retailed  and  descanted 
on  in  the  conference,  and  what  do  you  think 
they  did  with  it  ? — It  was  raised  as  a  barrier 
between  me  and  a  licence  from  men  profes- 
sedly religious  to  preach  the  gospel ;  and  I 
should  never  have  known  the  cause  if  1  had 
not  left  the  church  ! !  !  I  told  Brother  Covel 
that  I  could  not  believe  that  my  wife  had 
ever  said  it,  and  on  asking  her  she  had  no 
recollection  of  saying  any  such  thing,  and  I 
beheve  her.  1  ascertained  that  the  report 
came  from  the  woman  who  was  so  pruel  to 
my  wife,  while  I  was  absent  at  Hudson,  as 
related  before,  she  was  angry  with  us,  and 
sought  I  think  to  do  us  evil.  Should  not  the 
members  of  the  conference  have  informed 
me  of  this  circumstance,  and  by  neglecting 
to  do  so,  did  they  not  violate  that  command- 
ment of  God,  which  says  explicitly,  if  thou 
hast  ought  against  thy  brother  go  and  he  re- 
conciled to  thy  brother  !  I  presume  that  every 
candid  reader  will  say,  if  they  credit  my 
statement,  that  they  violated  this  sacred  and 
imperative  obligation. 

I  will  not  charge  this  to  the  members  of 
the  church  at  large,  and  condemn  all  for  the 
g3 


114  A    SOX    OF    THE    rORF.ST. 

unkind  and  improper  conduct  of  a  /ezo.  Far 
be  such  a  course  from  me.  If  their  life  cor- 
responds with  the  gospel,  I  can  take  them 
by  the  hand,  and  I  hope  they  may  all  con- 
tend for  that  faith  which  was  once  delivered 
to  the  saints  ;  and  wherever  1  see  the  image 
of  Christ,  there  I  can  fellowship— and  where 
my  lot  is  now  cast  I  think  I  can  be  more 
useful  in  promoting  the  glory  of  God.  ***^^ 
****.  It  is  a  great  trial  for  me  to  be  mouth, 
for  God — to  stand  up  before  my  fellow  men, 
and  warn  them  to  flee  the  wrath  to  come. 
I  do  it  to  please  God  and  not  man,  from  a 
settled  conviction  that  it  is  my  duty,  and  that 
I  cannot  remain  in  the  enjoyment  of  religion 
if  I  neglect  it. 

I  pray  God  to  banish  all  prejudice  from 
my  mind — that  it  may  die  forever  should  be 
the  prayer  of  every  person  ;  but  I  suspect 
that  this  will  not  be  the  case  with  many  of 
my  brethren  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church — they  do  not  like  this  separation, 
which  is  contrary  to  their  former  sayings, 
for  when  I  joined  them,  it  was  on  the  express 
condition  that  I  should  stay  with  them  as 
long  as  1  liked  them — and  1  did  so.  I  have 
frequently  heard  them  say,  when  a  member 
was  dissatisfied,  or  could  enjoy  himself  Ix-tter 
elsewhere,  that  they  would  hold  up  both 
hands  for  him  to  go— but  let  him  go  and  join 
another  church,  and  what  a  storm  thev  will 


I  A    SON    OF    THE    rOREST.  113 

aise  ;  and  in  fact,  thej  had  rather  that  those 
yho  leave  them  should  remain  without  the 
Dales  of  any  church  rather  than  join  the 
Methodist  Society.  It  is  greatly  to  be  la- 
mented that  a  spirit  like  this  is  felt,  and  ex- 
hibited. I  feel  a  great  deal  happier  in  the 
new  thaii  I  did  in  the  oldchurch — the  govern- 
ment of  the  first  is  founded  on  republican, 
while  that  of  the  latter  is  fouiided  on 
tnonarchial  principles — and  surely  in  this 
land  where  the  tree  of  liberty  has  beea. 
nourished  by  the  blood  of  thousands,  we 
have  good  cause  to  contend  for  mutual 
rights,  more  especially  as  the  Lord  himself 
DIED  TO  MAKE  US  FREE !  I  rcjoicc  sinccrely 
in  the  spread  of  the  principles  of  civil  and 
religious  liberty — may  they  ever  be  found 
hand  in  hand"  accomplishing  the  designs 
of  God,  in  promoting  the  welfare  of  man- 
kind. If  these  blessed  principles  prevail, 
sectarianism  will  loose  its  influence,  and  the 
image  of  God  in  his  members  will  be  a 
sufficient  passport  to  all  Christian  privileges  ; 
and  all  the  followers  of  the  most  high  will 
unite  together  in  singing  the  song  of  praise, 
Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  (fee. 

I  can  truly  say  that  the  spirit  of  prejudice 
is  no  longer  an  inmate  of  my  bosom  ;  the 
sun  of  consolation  has  warmed  my  heart, 
and  by  the  grace  of  God  assisting  me,  I  am 
determined  to  sound  the  trump  of  the  gospel 
r,4 


1J6  A    SON    OF    THE    FOREST. 

—to  call  upon  men  to  turn  and  live.  Look 
brethren,  at  the  natives  of  the  forest — they 
come,  notwithstanding  you  call  them? 
"  savage^''"'  from  the "  east  and  from  the! 
west,  the  north  and  the  south,"  and  will  oc- 
cupy seats  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  before 
you.  Let  us  one  and  all  "contend"  va- 
liently  "  for  that  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints"  ;  and  if  we  are  contented,  and  love 
God  with  all  our  hearts,  and  desire  the  en- 
joyment of  his  peaceful  presence,  we  shall 
be  able  to  say  with  the  poet, 

"  Let  others  stretch  their  arms  like  seas, 
And  grasp  in  all  the  shore  ; 
Grant  me  the  visits  of  his  grace, 
And  I  desire  no  more." 

Now,  my  dear  reader,  1  have  endeavoured 
to  give  you  a  short  but  correct  statement  of' 
the  leading  features  of  my  life.  When  I 
think  of  what  I  am,  and  how  wonderfully 
the  Lord  has  led  me,  1  am  dumb  before 
him.  When  I  contrast  my  situation  with 
that  of  the  rest  of  my  family,  and  many  of 
my  tribe,  1  am  led  to  adore  the  goodness  of 
God.  When  1  reflect  upon  my  manj^  mis- 
deeds and  wanderings,  and  the  dangers  to 
which  1  was  consequently  exposed,  I  am  lost 
in  astonishment  at  the  long  forbearance,  and 
%\\e  unmerited  mercy  of  God.  I  stand  be- 
fore   you  as  a  monument    of  his  unfailing 


A    S9N    ©F    THE    FOREST.  lit. 

goodness — may  that  same  mercy  which  has 
upheld  me,  still  be  my  portion — and  may 
author  and  reader  be  preserved  until  the 
perfect  day,  and  dwell  forever  in  the  para- 
dise of  God. 

g5 


T)ftU3tf«lS 


I^TRODUCTIOBT. 

.  Believing  that  some  general  observations 
on  the  origin  and  character  of  the  Indians, 
as  a  nation,  would  be  acceptable  to  the  nu- 
merous and  highly  respectable  persons  who 
liave  lent  their  patronage  to  his  work,  the 
subscriber  has  somewhat  abridged  "•  his  life" 
to  make  room  for  this  Apendix.  In  the 
following  pages  the  reader  will  find  some 
"general  observations"  touching  his  breth- 
ren. He  is  conscious  that  they  are  throwQ 
together  without  that  order  that  an  accom- ' 
plished  scholar  would  observe — and  he  takes 
this  means  of  saying,  that  he  is  indebted  in 
a  great  measure  to  the  works  of  the  vene- 
rated BouDiNOT,  late  president  of  the  Ame- 
rican Bible  Society,  Brain  ard,  Golden,  and 
several  other  gentlemen,  as  well  as  to  the 
newspaper  press  and  missionary  Journals, 
for  many  of  the  interesting  facts.  &:c.  which 
will  be  found  in  this  department  of  his  work. 

WM.  APES. 


APPEBi^DIX. 

Ever  since  the  discovery  of  America  by 
the  celebrated  navigator,  Cokimbus,  the 
"civilized"  or  enlightened  natives  of  the  old 
world  regarded  its  inhabitants  as  an  exten- 
sive race  of  '■'■  savages  !" — of  course  they 
were  treated  as  barbarians,  and  for  nearly 
two  centuries  they  suffered  without  inter- 
mission, as  the  Europeans  acted  on  the  prin- 
cipal that  might  makes  right — and  if  they 
could  succeed  in  defrauding  the  natives  out 
of  their  lands,  and  drive  them  from  the  sea 
board,  they  were  satisfied  for  a  time.  With 
this  end  m  view  they  sought  to  "  engage 
them  in  war,  destroy  them  by  thousands 
with  ardent  spirits,  and  fatal  disorders  un- 
known to  them  before."  Every  European 
vice  that  had  a  tendency  to  debase  and  ruin 
both  body  and  soul  was  introduced  among 
them.  Their  avowed  object  was  to  obtain 
possession  of  the  goodly  inheritance  of  the 
indian,  and  in  their  "  enlightened"  estima- 
mation,  the  "  end  justified  the  means." 
When  1  reflect  upon  the  complicated  ills  to 
which  my  brethren  have  been  subject, 
ever  since  history  has  recorded  their  exis- 
tence— their  wanderings,  their  perils,  their 
privations,  and  their  many  sorrows,  and  the 


124  APPENDIX. 

fierceness  of  that  persecution  which  marked 
their  dwellings  and  their  persons  for  de- 
struction— When  I  take  into  consideration 
the  many  ancient  usages  and  customs  ob- 
served rehg'iouslj  by  them,  and  which  have 
so  near  and  close  resemblance  to  the  man- 
ners, &:c.  of  the  ancient  Israelites,  I  am  led 
to  believe  that  they  are  none  other  than  the 
decQndants  of  Jacob,  and  the  long  lost  tribes 
of  Israel.  In  view  of  this  subject,  the  late 
Wm.  Boudinot  says,  that  there  is  a  possi- 
bility that  these  unhappy  children  of  misfor- 
tune may  yet  be  proved  to  be  the  decendants 
of  Jacob  ;  and  if  so,  that  though  cast  otf  for 
their  henious  transgressions,  they  have  not 
been  altogether  forsaken,  and  will  hereafter 
appear  to  have  been  in  ail  their  dispersions 
and  wanderings,  the  subjects  of  God's  divine 
protection  and  gracious  care. 

The  writer  above  referred  to  is  of  the 
opinion  that  if  the  natives  had  been  favoured 
with  early  instruction,  and  their  cau^^e  had 
been  faithfully  and  fully  represented  to  pos- 
terity, "their  character  would  hiive  been 
considered  in  a  very  diiierent  point  of  light 
from  what  it  now  is."  It  is  often  said  of  the 
'•  savages'''^  that  their  mode  of  carrying  on 
war,  and  the  method  of  treating  their  pris- 
oners, is  cruel  and  barbarous  in  the  ex- 
treme— but  did  not  the  whites  set  them  the 
brutal   example  ?     When   they  first  .visited 


APPENDIX.  I'ZO 

these  shores,  they  found  the  wilderness,  as 
they  called  it,  teeming  with  a  healthy  and 
happy  population  ;  here  they  found,  after 
the  hrst  and  natural  impulses  of  fear  had 
subsided,  fast  friends  in  the  sons  of  the  forest. 
And  what  return  did  they  receive  for  all  their 
friendship  ? 

The  following  extracts  from  the  Bishop 
of  Chapia,  De  las  ^  Cases,  who  came  over 
from  Spain  for  the  purpose  of  teaching  the 
natives,  is  directly  in  point : — 

"  I  was  one  of  the  first  who  went  to  Ame- 
rica.   Neitiier  curiosity  nor  interest  prompt- 
ed me  to  undertake  so  long  and  dangerous  a 
vo}  age.    The  saving  the  souls  of  the  heathen 
was   my  sole   object.     Why  was  I  not  per- 
mitted, even  at  the  expense  of  my  blood,  to 
ransom  so  many  thousands  of  souls,  who  fell 
unhappy  victims  to  avarice  and  lust.    It  was 
said  that  barbarous   executions  were  neces- 
sary to  punish  or  check  the  rebellion  of  the 
Americans.     But  to  whom  was  this  owing? 
Did  not  this  people  receive  the  Spaniards 
who  first  came  among  them  with  gentleness 
and   humanity  ?     Did  they  not  show  more 
joy  in  proportion,  in  lavishing  treasure  upon 
them,  than   the   Spaniards  did  greediness  in 
receiving  it  ?     But  our  avarice  was  not  yet 
satisfied.     Though  they  gave  up  to  us  their 
lands  and  their  riches,  we  would  take  from 
them  their  wives,  their  children,  and  their 


liberty.  To  blacken  the  characters  ot  these 
imhappy  people,  their  enemies  assert  that 
they  are  scarce  human  creatures.  But  it  is 
2L-e  who  ought  to  blush  for  having  been  less 
men,  and  more  barbarous  than  they.  They 
are  represented  as  a  stupid  people,  and  ad- 
dicted to  vice.  But  have  they  not  con- 
tracted most  of  their  vices  from  the  exam- 
ples of  christians.  But  it  must  be  granted 
that  the  iodians  still  remain  untainted  with 
many  vices  usual  among  Europeans.  Such 
as  ambition,  blasphemy,  swearing,  treachery, 
and  many  such  monsters,  which  have  not 
yet  taken  place  among  them.  They  have 
scarce  an  idea  of  them.  All  nations  are 
equally  free.  One  nation  has  no  right  to 
infringe  on  the  freedom  of  another.  Let  us 
do  to  these  people,  as  we  would  have  them 
have  done  to  us,  on  a  change  of  circum- 
stances. What  a  strange  method  is  this  of 
propagating  the  gospel;  that  holy  law  of 
grace,  which,  from  being  slaves  to  Satan, 
initiates  us  into  the  freedom  of  the  children 
of  God.'' 

The  Abbe  Clavigero,  another  Spanish 
writer,  confirms  this  idea  of  the  South  Ame- 
ricans. ''  We  have  bad  intimate  converse, 
says  he,  with  the  Americans ;  have  lived 
some  years  in  a  seminary  destined  for  their 
instruction — attentively  observed  their  cha- 
racter— their  genius — their  disposition  and 


APFENDIX.  112Y 

manner  of  thinking ;  and  have  besides,  ex- 
amined with  the  utmost  dilligence  their 
ancient  history — their  religion — their  gov- 
ernment— their  laws  and  their  customs. 
After  such  Jong  experience  and  study  of 
them,  we  declare,  that  the  mental  qualities 
of  the  Americans  are  not  in  the  least  inferior 
to  those  of  the  Europeans." 

Who  were  the  first  aggressors,  and  who 
first  imbrued  their  hands  in  blood  ?  Not 
the  Indian.  No  :  he  treated  the  stranger 
as  a  brother  and  a  friend,  until  that  stranger 
whom  he  had  received  upon  his  fertile  soil 
endeavoured  to  enslave  him,  and  resorted 
to  brutal  violence  to  accomplish  his  designs. 
And  if  they  committed  excesses,  they  only 
followed  in  the  footsteps  of  the  whites,  who 
must  blame  themselves  for  provoking  their 
dependent  and  unyielding  spirits,  and  by  a 
long  series  of  cruelty  and  bloodshed,  drove 
them  to  arms.  I'his  was  the  case  in  the 
colony  of  Virginia,  where  the  natives  rose 
upon  tiie  whites,  who  in  their  turn  "  waged 
a  destructive  war  against  the  indians,  and 
murdered  men,  women  and  children." 

Dr.  Robertson,  in  his  History  of  America, 
says  that  the  English,  like  the  Spaniards,  re- 
gardless of  those  principles  of  faith,  honour, 
and  humanity,  which  regulate  hostilities 
among  civilized  nations,  and  set  bounds  to 
their  rage,  the  English  deemed  every  thing 

H 


1*^  APl»EM>iX 

allowable  that  tended  to  accomplish  iheir 
designs.  They  hunted  the  Indians  like  wild  . 
beasts,  rather  than  enemies ;  and  as  the 
pursuit  of  them  to  their  places  of  retreat  in 
the  woods  was  both  difficult  and  dangerous, 
they  endeavoured  to  allure  them  from  their 
inaccessible  fastnesses,  by  offers  of  peace 
and  promises  of  oblivion,  made  with  such  an 
artful  appearance  of  sincerity,  as  deceived 
the  crafty  indian  chief,  and  induced  the 
Indians  to  return  in  the  year  1623  to  their 
former  settlements,  and  resume  their  usual 
peaceful  occupations.  ,  The  behaviour  of 
the  two  people  seemed  now  to  be  perfectly 
reversed.  The  indians,  like  men  acquainted 
with  the  principles  of  integrity  and  good 
faith,  on  which  the  intercourse  between  na- 
tions is  founded,  confided  in  the  reconcilia- 
tion, and  lived  in  absolute  security,  without 
suspicion  of  danger,  while  the  English,  with 
perfidious  craft,  were  preparing  to  imitate 
savages  in  their  revenge  and  cruelty. 

"  On  the  approach  of  harvest,  when  a 
hostile  attack  would  be  most  formidable  and 
fatal,  the  English  fell  suddenly  on  all  the 
Indian  plantations,  and  murdered  every 
person  on  whom  they  could  lay  hold,  and 
drove  the  rest  to  the  woods,  where  so  many 
perished  with  hunger,  that  some  of  the  tribes 
nearest  to  the  English  were  totally  ex- 
lirpatfed^*'  - 


Robertson  again,  speaking  ot'  the  war  in 
New-England,  between  Connecticut  and 
Providence,  in  their  first  attempt  against  the 
Peqaod  Indians,  says,  "  that  the  Indians  had 
secured  their  town,  which  was  on  a  rising 
ground  in  a  swamp,  with  palhsades.  The 
New-England  troops,  unperceived,  reached 
the  pallisades.  The  barking  of  a  dog  alarmed 
the  Indians.  In  a  moment,  however,  they 
started  to  their  arms,  and  raising  the  war- 
cry,  prepared  to  repel  the  assailants.  The 
English  forced  their  way  through  into  the 
fort,  or  town,  and  setting  tire  to  the  huts, 
which  were  covered  with  reeds,  the  confusion 
and  terror  quickly  became  general.  Many 
of  the  women  and  children  perished  in  the 
flames,  and  the  warriors,  endeavouring  to 
escape,  were  either  slain  by  the  English,  or 
falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Indian  allies, 
who  surrounded  the  fort  at  a  distance,  were 
reserved  for  a  more  cruel  fate.  The  Eng- 
lish resolved  to  pursue  their  victory,  and 
hunting  the  Indians  from  one  place  of  re- 
treat to  another,  some  subsequent  encoun- 
ters were  hardly  less  fatal  than  the  first  ac- 
tion. In  less  than  three  months,  the  tribe 
of  the  Pequods  was  extirpated. 

"  Thus  the  English  stained  their  laurels 

by  the  use  they  made  of  victory.     Instead 

of  treating  the  Pequods  as  an  independent 

people,  who  made  a  gallant  effort  to  defend 

n2 


130  APPEM>IX. 

the  property,  the  rights  and  freedom  of  their 
nation,  they  retaHated  upon  them  all  the 
barbarities  of  American  war.  Some  they 
massacred  in  cold  blood,  others  they  gave 
up  to  be  tortured  by  their  Indian  allies,  a 
considerable  number  they  sold  as  t^hives  in 
Bermuda,  the  rest  were  reduced  to  servitude 
among  themselves." 

Dr.  Boudinot  says,  that  this  tribe,  (the 
Pequods  referred  to  above)  "  were  a  princi- 
pal nation  of  the  east,  and  very  forcibly  re- 
minds one  of  the  similarity  of  the  same  name 
in  Jeremiah,  1.  21.  where  the  inhabitants  of 
Pekod  are  particularly  mentioned;  aid  also 
in  Ezekiel,  xxiii.  2,  3.  The  difference  in 
spelling  one  with  a  k  and  the  other  with  a 
q\s  no  uncommon  thing,  the  indian  languages 
being  very  guttera!,  the  k  is  generally  used 
where  an  Englishman  would  use  the  q. 

Columbus  was  as  competent  to  form  a 
proper  estimate  of  the  character  of  the  na- 
tives, as  any  other  man.  In  his  account  to 
his  patrons,  he  says  : — "  I  swear  to  your 
majesties,  that  there  is  not  a  better  people 
in  the  world  than  these ;  more  affectionate, 
affable,  or  mild.  They  love  their  neighbours 
as  themselves.  Their  language  is  the  sweet- 
est, softest,  and  most  cheerful,  for  they 
always  speak  smiling." 

That  the  whites  were  treated  by  the  na- 
tives of  New-England,  with  the  utmost  kind- 


APPENDIX.  131 

iiess,  there  is  no  doubt.  The  Rev.  Mr. 
Cushman,  in  a  sermon  preached  at  Ply- 
mouth, in  1620,  thus  speaks  of  the  treatment 
of  the  indians  to  the  whites  :  "  The  indians 
are  said  to  be  the  most  cruel  and  treache- 
rous people  in  all  these  parts,  even  like 
lions,  but  to  us  they  have  been  like  lambs, 
so  kind,  so  submissive  and  trusty,  as  a  man 
may  truly  say,  many  christians  are  not  so 
kind  or  sincere.  Thougli  when  we  came 
first  into  this  country,  vve  wnie  few,  and 
many  of  us  very  sick,  and  many  died,  by 
reason  of  the  cold  and  wet,  it  being  the 
depth  of  winter,  and  we  having  no  houses 
or  shelter,  yet  when  there  were  not  six 
able  persons  among  us,  and  the  indians 
came  daily  to  us  by  hundreds,  with  their 
sachems  or  kings,  and  might  in  one  hour 
have  made  despatch  of  us ;  yet  such  fear 
was  upon  them,  as  that  they  never  of- 
fered us  the  least  injury  in  word  or  deed. 
And  by  reason  of  one  Tisquanio^  that  lives 
among  us,  and  can  speak  Etiglish,  we  have 
daily  commerce  with  their  kings,  and  can 
know  what  is  done  or  intended  towards  us 
among  the  savages."- 

Governor  Hutchinson  bore  unqualified 
testimony  to  the  kindness  and  courtesy  of 
the  natives.  The  celebrated  William  Penn 
represented  them  as  being  a  "kind  and  be- 
nevolent people."  Mr.  Smith,  in  his  history 
h3 


132  APPENDIX. 

of  New  Jersey,  says,  they  manifested  tlie 
greatest  cordiality  and  friendship  for  the  in- 
habitants. 

The  real  character  of  the  aborigines  is 
thus  noticed  by  Father  Charlevoix,  who 
had  by  extensive  travel  among  the  tribes 
scattered  from  Quebec  to  New-Orleans,  a 
great  opportunity,  of  forming  a  proper  esti- 
mate of  Indian  customs,  manners,  Szc.  In 
speaking  of  the  real  character  of  the  nations, 
he  says,  "  That  with  a  mein  and  appearance 
altogether  savage  :  and  with  manners  and 
customs  which  favour  the  greatest  barbarity, 
they  enjoy  all  the  advantages  of  society.  At 
first  view,  one  would  imagine  them  without 
form  of  government,  laws  or  subordination, 
and  subject  to  the  wildst  caprice.  Never- 
theless, they  rarelly  deviate  from  certain 
maxims  and  usages,  founded  on  good  sense 
alone,  which  holds  the  place  of  law,  and 
supplies  in  short,  the  want  of  legal  authority* 
They  manifest  much  stability  in  their  engage- 
ments they  have  solemnly  entered  upon  ; 
patience  and  affliction,  as  well  as  submission 
to  what  they  apprehend  to  be  the  appoint- 
ment of  Providence;  in  all  this  they  mani- 
fest a  nobleness  of  soul  and  constancy  of 
mind,  at  which  we  rarely  arrive,  with  all  our 
philosophy  and  religion.  They  are  neither 
slaves  to  ambition  nor  interest,  the  two  pas- 
sions that  have  so  much  weakened  in  us  the 


APPENDIX.  133 

seritirnents  of  humanity,  (which  the  kind'Uu- 
thor  of  nature  has  engraven  on  the  human 
heart)  and  kindled  those  of  covetousness, 
which  are  as  yet  generally  unknown  among 
them." 

''  The  nearer  view  we  take  of  our  savages, 
the  more  we  discover  in  them  some  valuable 
qualities.  The  chief  part  of  the  principles 
by  which  they  regulate  their  conduct;  the 
general  maxims  by  which  they  govern  them- 
selves ;  and  the  bottom  of  their  characters 
have  nothing  which  appears  barbarous.  The 
ideas,  though  now  quite  confused,  which 
they  have  .retained  of  a  first  Being;  the  tra- 
ces, though  almost  effaced,  of  a  religious 
worship,  which  they  appear  formerly  to  have 
rendered  to  the  Supreme  Deity,  and  the 
faint  marks  which  we  observe,  even  in  their 
most  indifferent  actions,  of  the  ancient  belief, 
and  the  primitive  religion,  may  bring  thettl 
more  easily  than  we  think  of,  into  the  way 
of  tri]th,  and  make  their  conversion  to  Chris- 
tianity more  easily  to  be  effected,  than  that 
of  more  civilized  natiofis." 

Mr.  Boudinot  after  speaking  more  particu- 
larly of  the  general  character  of  the  Indian- 
nations — of  their  kindness  to  women  and 
children  who  are  taken  prisoners,  and  of 
their  great  delicacy  towards  the  former — » 
of  their  haughty  tempers,  &;c..  proceeds  to 
n4 


134  AP  PEN  BIX. 

give  the  following  extract  from  Wynne's  His- 
tory of  America,  he  says  : — 

"  But  let  us  come  nearer  home.  Who  set 
them  the  example  of  barbarity,  even  to  those 
whom  they  invaded  and  plundered  of  their 
property — deprived  of  their  lands  and  ren- 
dered their  whole  country  a  scene  of  horror, 
confusion  and  distress.  Wynne,  in  his  histo- 
ry of  America,  tells  us,  '  that  the  New  Eng- 
land people,  in  an  early  day,  as  we  have  al- 
ready seen,  made  an  attack  upon  the  Pequod 
Indians,  and  drove  eight  hundred  of  them, 
Avith  about  two  hundred  of  their  women  and 
children,  into  a  swamp — a  fog  arising,  the 
men  escaped,  except  a  few,  who  were  either 
killed  or  wounded.  But  the  helpless  wo- 
men and  children  surrendered  at  discretion. 
The  sachem's  wife,  who  some  time  before, 
had  rescued  the  Weathersfield  maidens,  and 
returned  them  home,  was  among  them.  She 
made  two  request,  which  arose  from  a  ten- 
derness and  virtue  not  common  among  sava- 
ges. 1st.  That  her  chastity  might  remain 
unviolated.  2d.  That  her  children  might 
not  be  taken  from  her.  The  amiable  sweet- 
ness of  her  countenance,  and  the  modest 
dignity  of  her  deportment,  were  worthy  of 
the  character  she  supported  for  innocence 
and  justice,  and  were  sufficient  to  show  the 
Europeans,  that  even  barbarous  nations, 
sometimes  produceinstances  of  heroic  virtue. 


APPENDIX.  135 

U  is  not  said  by  the  historian,  whether  her 
requests  were  granted  or  not,  but  that  the 
women  and  children  were  dispersed  through 
the  neighbouring  colonies,  the  male  infants 
excepted,  who  were  sent  to  the  Bermudas,* 
— 1  vol.  66.  Indeed,  had  the  Indians,  on 
their  part,  been  able  to  answer  in  writing, 
they  might  have  formed  a  contrast  between 
theaiselves  and  their  mortal  enemies,  the 
civilized  subjects  of  Great  Britain.  They 
might  have  recapitulated  their  conduct  in 
the  persecution  of  Indians,  witches  and  qua-^ 
kers  Jn  New  England — Indians  and  Negroes 
in  New- York,  and  the  cruelty  with  which 
the  aborigines  were  treated  in  Virginia. 

"  These  invaders  of  a  country,  (in  the 
peaceable  possession  of  a  free  and  happy 
people,  entirely  independent,  as  the  deer  of 
the  forests)  made  war  upon  them  with  all 
the  advantage  of  fire  arms  and  the  military 
knowledge  of  Europe,  in  the  most  barbarous 
manner — not  observing  any  rules  of  nations, 
or  the  principles  of  modern  warfare,  much 
less  the  benign  injunctions  of  the  gospel. 
They  soon  taught  the  Indians  by  their  fatal 
examples,  to  retaliate  with  the  most  invete- 
rate malice  and  diabolical  cruelty.  The 
civilized  Europeans,  though  flying  from  the 
persecution  of  the  old  world,  did  not  hesitate 
to  deny  their  professed  religion  of  peace  and 
good  will  to  men,  by  murdering,  meoj  wo- 
tt.5 


VS6  '  APPENDIX, 

men  and  children — selling  captives  as  slaves 
— ci|tting  off  the  heads,  and  quartering  the 
bodies  of  those  who  were  killed,  nobly  light- 
ing for  their  liberty  and  their  country,  in 
self-defence,  and  setting  them  up  in  various 
places,  in  ignoble  triumph  at  their  success. 
Philip,  an  independent  sovereign  of  the  Pe- 
quods,  who  disdained  to  submit,  but  died 
lighting  at  the  head  of  his  men,  had  his  head 
cut  off  and  carried  on  a  pole  with  great  re- 
joicings, to  New  ii}mouth,  where,  Wynne 
says,  his  skull  is  to  be  seen  to  this  day. — 
Vide  vol.  1   106  to  108. 

"  This  conduct  produced  greater  violence 
tmd  barbarity  on  the  part  of  the  other  na- 
tions of  Indians  in  the  neig^hbourhood,  often 
joined  by  French  Europeans  who  acted,  at 
times,  worse  than  the  native  Indians,  and  by 
this  means,  a  total  disregard  of  promises 
and  pledged  faith  on  both  sides,  became 
common. — Ibid.  124-6." 

After  reading  the  above,  I  presume  that 
no  person  will  doubt  that  great  injustice  has 
been  done  to  the  Indians,  and  I  also  think  that 
no  liberal  mind  will  say  that  they  are  the 
only  savages.  It  is  matter  of  sober  fact, 
that  the  natives,  on  their  first  acquaintance 
with  the  Europeans,  manifested  themselves, 
generous,  highminded,  kind  and  hospitable, 
and  these  feelings  marked  all  their  inter- 
course  with  the  whites,  while  thev   were 


APPENDIX.  137 

treated  with  humanily;  and  it  was  not  till 
after  repeated  aggressions  on  the  part  of  the 
w^hites,  not  until  they  were  overreached,  and 
their  friends  and  relatives  carried  into  hope- 
less captivity,  that  they  manifested  that  deep 
and  settled  hatred  to  the  whites,  which  may 
very  properly  eb  termed  an  hereditary  ani- 
mosity. 

The  social  kindness  of  the  Indians  has 
been  referred  to  by  many  writers.  Le  Page 
da  Pratz,  says,  that  they  behaved  towards 
each  other  with  a  kindness  and  regard  not 
to  be  found  among  civilized  nations.  In  his 
history  of  Louisiana,  he  says,  "  We  are 
equally  charmed  w^ith  that  natural  and  unaf- 
fected gravity,  which  reigns  in  all  their  beha- 
viour, in  all  their  actions,  and  in  the  greatest 
part  of  their  diversions.  Also  with  the 
civility  and  deference  they  show  to  their 
equals,  and  the  respect  of  young  people  to 
the  aged.  And  lastly,  never  to  see  them 
quarrel  among  themselves,  with  those  inde- 
cent expressions,  oaths  and  curses,  so  com- 
mon among  us  ;  all  which  are  proofs  of  good 
sense  and  a  great  command  of  temper.^  In 
short  to  make  a  brief  portrait  of  tlw3se  peo- 
ple, with  a  savage  appearance,  manners  and 

*  "  I  have  studied  these  Indians  a  considerable  num- 
ber ofyears,  and  I  never  could  learn  that  there  ever 
were  any  disputes  or  boxing-  matches  among-  either 
the  bovs  or  men."     2  vol.  I 6.t, 


138  AVPE-NDIX. 

customs,  which  are  entirely  barbarous,  there 
observable  among  them,  a  social  kindness, 
free  from  almost  all  imperfections  which  si 
often  disturb  the  peace  of  society  among  us. 
They  appear  to  be  without  passion ;  but 
they  do  that  in  cold  blood,  and  sometimes 
through  principle,  which  the  most  violent 
and  unbridled  passion  produces  in  those  who 
give  no  ear  to  reason.  They  seem  to  lead 
the  most  wretched  life  in  the  world  ;  and  yet 
they  were,  perhaps  the  only  happy  people 
on  earth,  before  the  knowledge  of  the  objects 
which  so  work  upon  and  seduce  us,  had  ex- 
cited in  them,  desires  which  ignorance  kept 
in  supineness  ;  but  which  have  not  as  yet 
(in  1730)  made  any  great  ravages  among 
them.  We  discover  in  them  a  mixture  of 
the  fiercest  and  most  gentle  manners.  The 
imperfections  of  wild  beasts,  and  the  virtues 
and  qualities  of  the  heart  and  mind  which  do 
the  greatest  honour  to  human  nature." 

He  further  observes, '•  that  upon  an  ac- 
quaintance with  the  Indians,  he  was  convin- 
ced that  it  was  wrong  to  denominate  them 
savages,  as  they  are  capable  of  making  good 
use  of  their  reason,  and  their  sentiments  are 
just.  That  they  have  a  degree  of  prudence, 
faithfulness  and  generosity,  exceeding  that  of 
nations  who  would  be  offended  at  being  com- 
pared with  them.  No  people,  says  he,  are 
more  hospitable  and  free  than   (he  Indians. 


APPENDIX.  139 

Hence  they  may  be  esteemed  a  happy  peo- 
ple, if  that  happiness  was  not  impeded  by 
their  passionate  fondness  for  spirituous  li- 
quors, and  the  foolish  notion  they  hold  in 
common  with  many  professing  Christians,  of 
gaining  reputation  and  esteem  by  their  prow- 
ess in  war."  But  to  whom  do  they  owe 
their  uncommon  attachment  to  both  these 
evils  ?  Is  it  not  the  white  people  who  came 
to  them  with  destruction  in  each  hand,  while 
we  did  but  deceive  ourselves  with  the  vain 
notion,  that  we  were  bringing  the  glad  ti- 
dings of  salvation  to  them.  Instead  of  this, 
we  have  possessed  these  unoffending  people 
with  so  horrid  an  idea  of  our  principles, 
that  among  themselves  they  call  us  the 
accursed  people.  And  their  great  numbers, 
when  first  discovered,  shew  that  they  had, 
comparatively,  but  few  wars  before  we  came 
among  them." 

The  Indian  character,  I  have  observed 
before  has  been  greatly  misrepresented. 
Justice  has  not,  and  I  may  add,  justice  can- 
not be  fully  done  to  them  by  the  historian. 
My  people  have  had  no  press  to  record  their 
sulferings,  or  to  make  known  their  grievan- 
ces ;  on  this  account  many  a  tale  of  blood 
and  wo  has  never  been  known  to  the  public. 
And  during  the  wars  between  the  natives 
and  the  whites,  the  latter  could,  through  the 
medium  of  the  newspaper  press,  circulate 


ArPENDlX.  140 

extensively  every  exagerated  account  of 
"  indian  cruelty,"  while  the  poor  natives 
had  no  means  of  gaining  the  public  ear.  It 
therefore  affords  me  much  gratification  to 
bear  testimony  of  the  philanthrophy  of  some 
of  the  white  men,  and  that  his  brethren 
had  found  compassion  in  the  breasts  of 
those  who  sought  to  do  justice  to  the  poor 
despised  tribes  of  the  wilderness ;  and  I 
cannot  refrain  from  presenting  to  my  readers 
the  following  article,  which  originally  ap- 
peared in  the  Analectic  Magazine,  during 
the  time  that  the  United  States  was  engaged 
in  a  war  with  the  Creek  Indians. 

TRAITS  OF  INDIAN  CHARACTER. 

"  The  rights  of  the  savage  have  seldom 
been  deeply  appreciated  by  the  white  man — 
in  peace  he  is  the  dupe  of  mercinary  ra- 
pacity; in  war  he  is  regarded  as  a  ferocions 
animal,  whose  death  is  a  question  of  mere 
precaution  and  convenience.  Man  is  cruelly 
wasteful  of  life  when  his  own  safety  is  en- 
dangered, and  he  is  sheltered  by  impunity 

and  little  mercy  is  to  be  expected  from  him 
who  feels  the  sting  of  the  reptile,  and  is  con- 
scious of  the  power  to  destroy, 

"  It  has  been  the  lot  of  the  unfortunate 
aborigines  of  this  country,  to  be  doubly 
wronged  by  the  white  man — first,  driven 
from  their  native  soil  by  the  sword  of  the 


APVENDIX.  14i 

invader,  and  then  darkly  slandered  by  the 
pen  of  the  historian.  The  former  has  treated 
them  like  beasts  of  the  forest ;  the  latter  has 
written  volumes  to  justify  him  in  his  out- 
rages. The  former  found  it  easier  to  ex- 
terminate than  to  civilize  ;  the  latter  to  abuse 
than  to  discriminate.  The  hideous  appel- 
lations of  savage  and  pagan,  wore  sufficient 
to  sanction  the  deadly  hostilities  of  both; 
and  the  poor  wanderers  of  tiie  forest  were 
persecuted  and  dishonored,  not  because  they 
were  guilty,  but  because  they  were  ignorant. 
"The  same  prejudices  seem  to  exist,  in 
common  circulation,  at  the  presei  t  da}-.  We 
form  our  opinions  of  the  indian  character 
from  the  miserable  hordes  that  infest  our 
frontiers.  These,  however,  are  degenerate 
beings,  enfeebled  b)  the  vices  of  society, 
without  being  benefited  by  its  arts  of  living. 
The  independence  of  thought  and  action, 
that  formed  the  main  pjllar  of  their  charac- 
ter, has  been  completely  prostrated,  and  the 
whole  mora!  fabric  lies  in  ruins.  Their 
spirits  are  debased  by  conscious  inferiority, 
and  their  native  courage  completely  daunted 
by  the  superior  knowledge  and  power  of 
their  enlightened  neighbours.  Society  has 
advanced  upon  them  like  a  many-headed 
monster,  breathing  every  variety  of  misery. 
Before  it,  went  forth  pestilence,  famine  and 
the  sword  ;  and  in  its  train  came  the  slow, 


142  API'ENIDX. 

but  exterminating  curse  of  trade.  What  the 
former  did  not  sweep  away,  the  latter  has 
gradually  blighted.  It  has  increased  their 
wants,  without  increasing  the  means  of  gra- 
tification. It  has  enervated  their  strength, 
multiplied  their  diseases,  blasted  the  powers 
of  their  minds,  and  superinduced  on  their 
original  barbarity  the  low  vices  of  civiliza- 
tion. Poverty,  repining  and  hopeless  pov- 
erty— a  canker  of  the  mind  unknown  to  syl- 
van life — corrodes  their  very  hearts. — They 
loiter  like  vagrants  through  the  settlements, 
among  spacious  habitations  replete  with 
artificial  comforts,  which  only  render  them 
sensible  of  the  comparative  wretchedness  of 
their  own  condition.  Luxury  spreads  its 
ample  board  before  their  eyes,  but  they  are 
expelled  from  the  banquet.  The  forest, 
which  once  furnished  them  with  ample 
means  of  subsistence,  has  been  levelled  to 
the  ground — waving  fields  of  grain  have 
sprung  up  in  its  place  ;  but  they  have  no 
participation  in  the  harvest  ;  plenty  revels 
around  them,  but  they  are  starving  amidst 
its  stores  ;  the  whole  wilderness  blossoms 
like  a  garden,  but  they  feel  like  the  reptiles 
that  infest  it. 

"  How  different  was  their  case  while  yet 
the  undisputed  lord  of  the  soil.  Their  wants 
were  (e\v,  and  the  means  of  gratifying  them 
within  their   reach.     Thev  saw  everv  one 


APPENDIX.  143 

aVoLind  them  sharing  the  same  lot,  enduring 
the  same  hardships,  living  in  the  same  cabins, 
feeding  on  the  same  aliments,  arrayed  in  the 
same  rude  garments.  No  roof  (hen  rose, 
but  what  was  open  to  the  houseless  stranger  ; 
no  smoke  curled  among  the  trees,  but  he 
was  welcome  to  sit  down  by  its  fire,  and  join 
the  hunter  in  his  repast.  "  For,"  says  an 
old  historian  of  New-England,  "their  life  is 
so  void  of  care,  and  they  are  so  loving  also, 
that  they  make  use  of  those  things  they  enjoy 
as  common  goods,  and  are  therein  so  com- 
passionate that  rather  than  one  should  starve 
through  want,  they  would  starve  all :  thus 
do  they  pass  their  time  merrily,  not  regard- 
ing our  pomp,  but  are  better  content  with 
theirown,  which  some  men  esteem  so  meanly 
of."  Such  were  the  indians  while  in  the 
pride  and  energy  of  primitive  simplicity  : 
they  resemble  those  wild  plants  that  thrive 
-best  in  the  shades  of  the  forest,  but  which 
shrink  from  the  hand  of  cultivation,  and 
perish  beneath  the  influence  of  the  sun. 

"  In  the  general  mode  of  estimating  the 
savage  character,  we  may  perceive  a  vast 
degree  of  vulgar  prejudice,  and  passionate 
exaggeration,  without  any  of  the  temperate 
discussion  of  true  philosophy.  No  allow- 
ance is  made  for  the  difference  of  circum- 
stances, and  the  operations  of  principles 
\mder  which    they   have   been    educated. 


144  APfENDIX. 

Virtue  and  vice,  though  radically  the  same, 
yet  differ  widely  in  their  influence  on  liumaii 
conduct,  according  to  the  habits  and  maxims 
of  the  society  in  which  the  individual  is 
reared.  No  being  acts  more  rigidly  from 
rule  than  the  Indian.  His  whole  conduct  is 
regulated  according  to  some  general  maxims 
early  implanted  in  his  mind.  The  moral  I 
laws  that  govern  him.,  to  be  sure,  are  but!] 
few,  but  then  he  conforms  to  them  all.  The 
white  man  abounds  in  laws  of  religion,  mo- 
rals, and  manners  ;  but  how  many  does  he 
violate  ? 

"A  common  cause  of  accusation  against' 
the    Indians    is,    the  faitldessness   of  their 
friendships,  and  their  sudden  provocations  to 
hostility.     But  we   do  not  make  allowance 
for   their  peculiar   modes    of  thinking  and 
feeling,  and  the  principles  by  which  they  arej 
governed.     Besides,   the  friendship    of  the! 
whites  towards  the  poor  Indians  was  everi 
cold,   distrustful,    oppressive,  and  insulting. 
In  the  intercourse  with  our  frontiers  they  are 
seldom  treated  with  confidence,  and  are  fre- 
quently subject  to  injury  and  encroachment. 
The  solitary  savage  feels  silently  but  acutely; 
his  sensibilities  are  not  diffused  over  so  wide  a 
surface  as  those  of  the  white  man,  but  they 
run  in  steadier  and  deeper  channels.     His 
pride,  his  affections,  his  superstitions,  are  all 
directed  towards   fewer    objects,    but   th© 


woLUKis  intiicted  on  them  are  proportionably 
severe,  and  furnish  motives  of  hostility  which 
vre  cannot  sufficiently  appreciate.  Where  a 
community  is  also  limited  in  number,  and 
forms,  as  in  an  Indian  tribe,  one  great  pat- 
riarchal family,  the  injury  of  the  individual 
is  the  injury  of  the  whole  ;  and  as  their  body 
pohtic  is  small,  the  sentiment  of  vengeance 
is  almost  instantaneously  diffused.  One 
council  fire  is  sufficient  to  decide  the  mea- 
sure. Eloquence  and  superstition  combine 
to  inflame  their  minds.  The  orator  awak- 
ens all  their  martial  ardour,  and  they  are 
wrought  up  to  a  kind  of  religious  desperation 
by  the  visions  of  the  prophet  and  the 
dreamer. 

"  An  instance  of  one  of  these  sudden  exas- 
perations, arising  from  a  motive  peculiar  to 
the  Indian  character,  is  extant  in  an  old  re- 
cord of  the  early  settlement  of  Massachusetts. 
The  planters  of  Plymouth  had  defaced  the 
monuments  of  the  dead  at  Passonagessit,  and 
had  plundered  the  grave  of  the  sachem's 
mother  of  some  skins  with  which  it  had  been 
piously  decorated.  Every  one  knows  the 
hallowed  reverence  which  the  Indians  en- 
tertain for  the  sepulchres  of  their  kindred. 
Even  now,  tribes  that  have  passed  genera- 
tions, exiled  from  the  abodes  of  their  ances= 
tors,  when  by  chance  they  have  been  travel- 
ling, on  some  mission  to  our  seat  of  govern- 


140  APPf-NDij:. 

rnent,  have  been  known  to  turn  asiiie  ifom 
the  liighway  for  many  miles  distance,  and 
guided  by  wonderful  accurate  tradition,  have 
sought  some  tumuhis,  buried  perhaps  in  the 
woods,  where  the  bones  of  their  tribe  were 
anciently  deposited  ;  and  there  have  passed 
some  time  in  silent  lamentation  over  the 
ashes  of  their  forefathers.  Influenced  by 
this  sublime  and  holy  feeling,  the  sachem, 
whose  mother's  tomb  had  been  violated,  in 
the  moment  of  indignation,  gathered  his  men 
together,  and  addressed  them  in  the  follow- 
ing beautifully  simple  and  pathetic  harangue 
— an  harangue  which  has  remained  unquot- 
ed for  nearly  two  hundred  3^ears — a  pure 
specimen  of  Indian  eloquence,  and  an  alfect- 
ing  monument  of  filial  piety  in  a  savage. 

'•  When  last  the  glorious  light  of  all  the 
sky  was  underneath  this  globe,  and  birds 
grew  silent,  I  began  to  settle,  as  my  custom 
is,  to  take  repose.  Before  mine  eyes  were 
fast  closed,  methought  I  saw  a  vision,  at 
which  my  spirit  was  much  troubled,  and, 
trembling  at  that  doleful  sight,  a  spirit  cried 
aloud — behold  my  son,  whom  I  have  cher- 
ished see  the  breasts  that  gave  thee  suck, 
the  hands  that  lapped  thee  warm  and  fed 
thee  oft !  canst  thou  forget  to  take  revenge  of 
those  wild  people,  who  have  defaced  my 
monument  in  a  despiteful  manner,  disdain- 
ing our  antiquities  and  honourable  customs. 


APXJiMDIX.  147 

See  now,  the  sachem's  grave  lies  like  the 
common  people,  defaced  by  an  ignoble  race. 
Thy  mother  doth  complain,  and  implores 
thy  aid  against  this  thievish  people,  who 
have  newly  intruded  in  our  land.  If  this 
be  suffered  I  shall  not  rest  quiet  in  my  ever- 
lastin'jj  habitation. — This  said,  the  spirit 
vanished,  and  1,  all  in  a  sweat,  not  able 
scarce  to  speak,  began  to  get  some  strength 
and  recollect  my  spirits  that  were  fled,  and 
determined  to  demand  your  counsel,  and  so- 
licit your  assistance.' 

Another  cause  of  violent  outcry  against 
the  Indians,  is  their  inhumanity  to  the  van- 
quished. This  originally  arose  partly  from 
political  and  partly  from  superstitious  mo- 
tives. Where  hostile  tribes  are  scanty  in 
their  numbers,  the  death  of  several  warriors 
completely  paralyzes  their  power;  and  ma- 
ny an  instance  occurs  in  Indian  history, 
where  a  hostile  tribe,  that  had  long  been  for- 
midable to  its  neighbour,  has  been  broken 
up  and  driven  away,  by  the  capture  of  its 
principal  fighting  men.  This  is  a  strong 
temptation  to  the  victor  to  be  merciless,  not 
so  much  as  to  gratify  any  cruelty  of  revenge, 
as  to  provide  for  future  security.  But  they 
had  other  motives,  originating  in  a  supersti- 
tious idea,  common  to  barbarous  nations,  and 
even  prevalent  among  the  Greeks  and 
Romans — ttiat  the  manes  of  their  deceased 


14S  APPENDIX, 

friends  slain  in  battle,  were  soothed  by  the 
blood  of  the  captives.  But  those  that  are 
not  thus  sacrificed  are  adopted  into  their 
families,  and  treated  with  the  confidence 
and  affection  of  relatives  and  friends  ;  nay, 
so  hospitable  and  tender  is  their  enten  n- 
ment,  that  they  will  often  prefer  to  remain 
with  their  adopted  brethren,  rather  than 
return  to  the  home  and  the  friends  of  their 
youth. 

"  The  inhumanity  of  the  Indians  towards 
their  prisoners  has  been  heightened  since 
the  intrusion  of  the  whites.  We  have  exas- 
perated what  was  formerly  a  compliance 
with  policy  and  superstition  into  a  gratifica- 
tion of  vengeance.  They  cannot  but  be 
sensible  that  we  are  the  usurpers  of  their 
ancient  dominion,  the  cause  of  their  degl-a- 
dation,  and  the  gradual  destroyers  of  their 
race.  They  go  forth  to  battle  smarting 
with  injuries  and  indignities  which  they  have 
individually  suffered  from  the  injustice  and 
the  arrotiance  of  white  men,  and  they  are 
driven  to  madness  and  despair,  by  the  wide 
spreading  desolation  and  the  overwhelming 
r 'in  of  our  warfare.  We  set  them  an  ex- 
ample of  violence,  by  burning  their  villages, 
and  laying  waste  their  slender  means  of 
subsistence ;  and  then  wonder  that  savages 
will  not  show  moderation  and  majjnanimitv 


APPENDIX.  14U 

lovvards  men,  who  have  left  them  nothing 
but  mere  existence  and  wretchedness. 

'•  It  is  a  common  thing  to  exclaim  against 
new  forms  of  cruelty,  while  reconciled  bv 
custom,  we  wink  at  long  established  attroci- 
ties.  What  right  does  the  generosity  of  our 
conduct  give  us  to  rail  exclusively  at  Indian 
warfare.  VVith  all  the  doctrines  of  Christi- 
anity, and  the  advanta^ies  of  cultivated  mo- 
rals, to  govern  and  direct  us,  what  horrid 
crimes  disgrace  the  victories  of  Christian 
armies.  Towns  laid  in  ashes  ;  cities  given 
up  to  the  sword  ;  enormities  perpetrated,  at 
which  manhood  blushes,  and  history  drops 
the  pen.  Well  may  we  exclaim  at  the  out- 
rages of  the  scalping  knife;  but  where,  in 
the  records  of  Indian  barbarity,  can  we  point 
to  a  violated  female  ? 

"  We  stigmatize  the  Indians  also  as  cow- 
ardly and  treacherous,  because  they  use 
stratagem  in  warfare,  in  preference  to  open 
force;  but  in  this  they  are  fully  authorized 
by  their  rude  code  of  honor.  They  are 
early  taught  that  stratagem  is  praiseworthy; 
the  bravest  warrior  thinks  it  no  disgrace,  to 
lurk  in  silence  and  take  every  advantage  of 
his  foe.  He  triumphs  in  the  superior  craft 
and  sagacity  by  v^hich  he  has  been  enabled 
to  surprise  and  massacre  an  enemy.  Indeed, 
man  is  naturally  more  prone  to  subtlety  than 
open  valor,  owing  to  his  physical  weakness 
t3 


ioO  APPENDIX. 

in  comparison  with  other  animals.  They 
are  endowed  with  natural  weapons  of  de- 
fence ;  with  horns,  with  tusks,  with  hoofs 
and  talons ;  but  man  has  to  depend  on  his 
superior  sagacity.  In  ail  his  encounters, 
therefore,  with  these,  his  proper  enemies, 
he  has  to  resort  to  stratagem  ;  and  when  he 
perversely  turns  his  hostility  against  his 
fellow  man,  he  continues  the  same  subtle 
mode  of  warfare. 

"  The  natural  principle  of  war  is  to  do  the 
most  harm  to  our  enemy,  with  the  least 
harm  to  ourselves ;  and  this  of  course  is  to  be 
effected  by  cunning.  That  chivalric  kind 
of  courage  which  teaches  us  to  despise  the 
suggestions  of  prudence,  and  to  rush  in  the^ 
face  of  certain  danger,  is  the  offspring  of  so- 
ciety, and  produced  by  education.  It  is 
honourable,  because  in  fact  it  is  the  triumph 
of  lofty  sentiment  over  an  instinctive  repug- 
nance to  pain,  and  over  those  selfish  yearn- 
ings after  personal  ease  and  security  which 
society  has  condemned  as  ignoble.  It  is  an 
emotion  kept  up  by  pride,  and  the  fear  of 
shame;  and  thus  the  dread  of  real  evils  is 
overcome  by  the  superior  dread  of  an  evil 
that  exists  but  in  the  mind.  This  may  be 
instanced  in  the  case  of  a  young  British 
officer  of  great  pride,  but  delicate  nerves, 
who  was  going  for  the  first  time  into  battle. 
Being  agitated   by  the  novelty   and   awful 


APPENDIX.  {5| 

peril  of  the  scene,  he  was  accosted  by 
another  officer,  of  a  rough  and  boisteorus 
character—-  What,  sir,"  cried  he,  -do  you 
tremble?"  -Yes  sir,",  rephed  the  other, 
and  if  yoLi  were  half  as  much  afraid  as  I 
am  you, would  run  away."  'j'his  youno- 
officer  signalized  himself  on  many  occasion? 
by  his  gallantry,  though,  had  he  been  brou-lit 
Tip  m  savage  hfe,  or  even  in  a  humbler  a^nd 
Jess  responsible  situation,  it  is  more  than 
probable  he  coLrid  never  have  ventured  into 
open  action. 

"  Besides  we  must  consider  how  mucli 
the  quality  of  open  and  desperate  courage 
IS  chenshed  and  stimulated  by  society  U 
has  been  the  theme  of  many  a  spirit-slirrintc 
song,  and  chivalric  story.  The  minstrel  has 
sung  of  It  in  the  loffiest  strain  of  his  lyre— 
the  poet  has  delighted  to  shed  around  it  all 
the  splendours  of  fiction— and  even  the  ijis- 
torian  has  forgotten  thi-  sober  gravity  of 
narration,  and  burst  forth  into  enthusiasm 
and  rhapsody  m  its  praise.  Triumphs  an4 
gorgeous  pageants  have  been  its  reward- 
monuments,  where  art  has  exhausted  its 
§icnl,  and  opulence  its  treasures,  have  been 
erected  to  perpetuate  a  nation's  gratitude 
ftnd  admiration.  Thus  artificially  excited, 
courage  has  arisen  to  an  extraordinary  and 
factitious  degree  of  heroism  ;  and,  arrayed 
ni  all  the  glorious  "^pomp  and  circumstance" 


of  war,  this  turbulent  quality  has  everiiceiv 
able  to  eclipse  many  of  tiiose  quiet,  but  in- 
valuable virtues,  which  silently  enoble  the 
human  character,  and  swell  the  tide  of  hu- 
man happiness. 

"  But  if  courage  intrinsically  consist  in  the 
defiance  of  hunger  and  pain,  the  life  of  the 
Indian  is  a  continaai  exhibition  of  it.  He 
lives  in  a  perpetual  state  of  hostility  and 
risk. — Peril  and  adventure  are  congenial  ta 
his  nature,  or,  rather,  seem  necessary  to 
arouse  his  faculties  and  give  an  interest  to 
existence.  Surrounded  by  hostile  tribes,  he 
is  always  equipped  for  t'lght,  with  his  v/ea- 
pons  in  his  hands.  He  traverses  vast  wil- 
dernesses, exposed  to  the  hazards  of  lonely 
sickness,  or  lurking  enemies,  "or  pining 
famine.  Stormy  lakes  present  no  obstacle 
to  his  wanderings  ;  in  his  light  canoe  of  bark, 
he  sports  like  a  feather  on  their  waves,  and 
darts  with  the  swiftness  of  an  arrow  down 
the  roaring  rapids  of  the  rivers. — Trackless 
wastes  of  snow,  rugged  mountains,  the  glooms 
of  swamps  and  morasses,  where  poisonous 
reptiles  curl  among  the  rank  vegelation,  are 
fearlessly  encountered  by  this  wanderer  of 
the  wilderness.  He  gains  his  food  by  the 
hardships  and  dangers  of  the  chase;  he  wraps 
himself  in  the  spoils  of  the  bear,  the  pan- 
ther, and  the  buffalo,  and  sleeps  among  the 
thunders  of  the  cataract. 


AI'PENDIX.  153 

'•  No  hero  pf.ancient  or  modern  days  can 
surpass  the  indian  in  his  lofty  contempt  of 
death,  and  the  fortitude  with  which  he  sus- 
tains all  the  varied  torments  with  which  it  is 
frequently  inflicted.  Indeed  we  here  behold 
him  rising  superior  to  the  white  man,  merely 
in  consequence  of  his  pecuhar  education. 
The  latter  rushes  to  glorious  death  at  the 
cannon's  mouth ;  the  former  coolly  con- 
templates its  approach,  and  triumphantly 
endures  it,  amid  the  torments  of  the  knife 
and  the  protracted  agonies  of  fire.  He  even 
takes  a  savage  delight  in  taunting  his  perse- 
cutors, and  provoking  their  ingenuity  of 
torture ;  and  as  the  devouring  flames  prey 
on  his  very  vitals,  and  the  flesh  shrinks  from 
the  sinews,  he  raises  his  last  song  of  triumph, 
breathing  the  defiance  of  an  unconquered 
heart,  and  invoking  the  spirits  of  his  fathers 
to  witiiess  that  he  dies  without  a  groan. 

"  Notwithstanding  all  the  obloquy  with 
which  the  early  historians  of  the  colonies 
have  overshadowed  the  characters  of  the 
unfortunate  natives,  some  bright  gleams  will 
occasionally  break  through,  that  throw  a  de- 
gree of  melancholy  lustre  on  their  memo- 
ries. Facts  are  occasionally  to  be  met  with, 
in  their  rude  annals,  which,  though  recorded 
with  all  the  colouring  of  prejudice  and  bigo- 
try, yet  speak  for  themselves  :  and  will  be 
1.5 


i53  APPENDIX. 

<iwelt  on  with  applause  and  synapathy,  when 
prejudice  shall  have  passed  away. 

"  in  one  of  the  homely  narratives  of  the 
Indian  wars  in  New-England,  there  is  a 
touching  account  of  the  dessolation  carried 
into  the  tribe  of  the  Pequod  Indians.  Hu- 
manity shudders  at  the  cold-blooded  accounts 
given,  of  indiscriminate  butchery  on  the  part 
of  the  settlers.  In  one  place  we  read  of  the 
surprisal  of  an  Indian  fort  in  the  night,  when 
the  wigwams  were  wrapped  in  flames,  and 
the  miserable  inhabitants  shot  down  and 
slain,  in  attempting  to  escape,  "  all  being 
despatched  and  ended  in  the  course  of  an 
hour."  After  a  series  of  similar  transac- 
tions, "  Our  soldiers,"  as  the  historian 
piously  observes,  "•  being  resolved  b}  God's 
assistance  to  make  a  final  destruction  of 
them."  the  unhappy  savages  beinp-  hunted 
from  their  homes  and  fortresses,  and  pursued 
with  fire  and  sword,  a  scanty  but  gallant 
band,  the  sad  remnant  of  the  Pequod  war- 
riors, with  their  wives  and  children,  took 
refuge  in  a  swamp. 

"  Burning  with  indignation,  and  rendered 
sullen  by  despair — with  hearts  bursting  with 
grief  at  the  destruction  of  their  tribe,  and 
spirits  galled  and  sore  at  the  fancied  igno- 
miny of  their  defeat,  they  refused  to  ask 
their  hves  at  the  hands  of  an  insulting  foe, 
and  preferred  death  to  submission. 


Ai»PExNl>iX.  J  55 

*•  As  the  night  drew  on  they  were  sur- 
rounded in  their  dismal  retreat,  in  such 
manner  as  to  render  escape  impracticable. 
Thus  situated,  their  enemy  ''  plied  them 
with  shot  all  the  time,  by  which  means  many 
were  killed  and  buried  in  the  mire.  In  the 
darkness  and  tog  that  precedes  the  dawn  of 
day,  some  few  broke  through  the  besiegers 
and  escaped  into  the  woods  :  "  the  rest  were 
left  to  the  conquerers,  of  which  many  were 
killed  in  the  swamp,  like  sullen  dogs,  who 
would  rather,  in  their  self-willedness  and 
madness,  sit  still  and  be  shot  through,  or  cut 
to  pieces,"  than  implore  for  mercy.  When 
the  day  broke  upon  this  handful  of  forlorn, 
but  dauntless  spirits,  the  soldiers,  we  are 
told,  entered  the  swamp,  "  saw  several 
heaps  of  them  sitting^  close  together,  upon 
whom  they  discharged  their  pieces,  laden 
with  ten  or  twelve  pistol  bullets  at  a  time  ; 
putting  the  muzzles  of  their  pieces  under 
the  boughs,  within  a  few  yards  of  them  ;  so 
as,  besides  those  that  were  found  dead,  many 
more  were  killed  and  sunk  inta  the  mire, 
and  never  were  minded  more  by  friend  or 
foe." 

"Can  any  one  read  this  plain  unvarnished 
tale,  without  admiring  the  stern  resolution, 
the  unbending  pride,  and  loftiness  of  spirit, 
that  seemed  to  nerve  the  hearts  of  these 
self-taught  heroes,  and  raise  them  above  the 


lot)  AFFEiNDr.V. 

instinctive  feelings  of  human  nature  !  Wherr" 
the  Gauls  laid  waste  the  city  of  Rome,  they 
found  the  nobles  clothed  in  their  robes,  and 
seated  with  stern  tranquility  in  their  curule 
chairs ;  in  this  manner  they  sutiered  death 
without  an  attempt  at  suppiication-or  resis- 
tance. Such  conduct  in  them  was  ap- 
plauded as  noble  and  magna!)imous  ;  in  the 
hapless  Indian  it  was  reviled  a§  ohstiriate 
and  sullen.  How  much  are  we  the  dupes  of 
show  and  circumstance  !  How  diiierent  is 
virtue,  arrayed  in  purple  and  enthroned  in 
state,  from  virtue,  destitute  and  naked,  re- 
duced to  the  last  stage  of  wretchedness,  and 
pe:       -ng  obscurely  ni  a  wilderness. 

"Do  these  records  of  ancient  excesses 
fill  us  with  disgust  and  aversion  ?  Let  us 
take  heed  that  we  do  not  suffer  ourselves  ta, 
be  hurried  into  the  same  iniquities.  Pos-~ 
terity  lifts  up  its  hands  with  horror  at  past 
misdeeds,  because  the  passimis  that  urged 
to  them  are  not  felt,  and  the  arguments  that 
persuaded  to  them  are  forgotten  ;  but  wc 
are  reconciled  lo  the  present  perpetration 
of  injustice  by  all  the  seitish  motives  with 
which  interest  chills  the  heart  and  silences 
the  conscience.  Even  at  the  present  ad- 
vanced day,  when  we  should  suppose  that 
enlightened  philosophy  had  expanded  our 
nainds,  and  true  religion  had  warmed  our 
hearts  into   philanthropy — when    wo    have 


APPENDIX,        -  157 

been  admonished  by  a  sense  of  past  trans- 
gressions, and  instructed  by  the  indignant 
censures  of  candid  history — even  now,  we 
perceive  a  disposition  breaking  out  to  renew 
the  persecutions  of  these  hapless  beings. 
Sober-thoughted  men,  far  from  the  scenes 
of  danger,  in  the  security  of  cities  and  popu- 
lous regions,  can  coolly  talk  of  "  extermina- 
ting measures,"  and  discuss  the  policij  of 
extirpating  thousands.  If  such  is  the  talk  in 
the  cities,  what  is  the  temper  displayed  on 
the  borders  ?  The  sentence  of  dessolation 
has  gone  forth — "  the  roar  is  up  amidst  the 
woods  ;"  implacable  wrath,  goaded  on  by 
interest  and  prejudice,  is  ready  to  confound 
all  rights,  to  trample  on  all  claims  of  justice 
and  humanity,  and  to  act  over  those  scenes 
of  sanguinary  vengeance  which  have  too 
often  stained  the  pages  of  colonial  history. 
These  are  not  the  idle  suggestions  of  fancy  ; 
they  are  wrung  forth  by  facts,  which  still 
haunt  the  public  mind. 

"As  yet  our  government  has  in  some 
measure  restrained  the  tide  of  vengeance, 
and  inculcated  lenity  towards  the  hapless 
Indians.  Such  temper  is  worthy  of  an 
enlightened  government — let  it  still  be  ob- 
served— let  sharp  rebuke  and  signal  pun- 
ishment be  inflicted  on  those  who  abuse 
their  delegated  power,  and  disgrace  their 
victories  with  massacre  and  conflagration-. 


APPENDIX. 

The  enormities  of  the  Indians  form  no  excuse 
for  the  enormities  of  white  men.  It  has 
pleased  heaven  to  give  them  but  hraited 
jDOwers  of  mind,  and  feeble  lights  to  guide 
their  judgments  ;  it  becomes  us  who  are 
blessed  with  higher  intelects  to  think  for 
them,  and  set  them  an  example  of  humanity. 
It  is  the  nature  of  vengeance,  if  unrestrained, 
to  be  headlong  in  its  actions,  and  to  lay  up, 
in  a  moment  of  passion,  ample  cause  for  an 
age's  repentance.  We  may  roll  over  these 
miserable  beings  with  our  chariot  wheels, 
and  crush  them  to  the  earth  ;  but  when  pas- 
sion has  subsided,  and  it  is  too  late  to  pity  or 
to  save — we  shall  look  back  with  unavailing 
compunction  at  the  mangled  corses  of  those 
whose  cries  were  unheeded  in  the  fury  of 
our  career. 

"  In  a  little  while,  the  remaining  tribes 
will  go  the  way  that  so  many  have  gone 
before.  The  few  hordes  that  still  linger 
about  the  shores  of  Huron  and  Superior, 
and  the  tributary  streams  of  the  Mississippi, 
will  share  the  fate  of  those  tribes  that  once 
lorded  it  along  the  proud  banks  of  the  Hud- 
son ;  of  that  gigantic  race  that  are  said  to 
have  existed  on  the  borders  of  the  Susque- 
hanna, and  of  those  various  nations  that 
flourished  about  the  Potowmac  and  the 
Rappahanoc,  and  that  peopled  the  forests  of 
the   vast   vallev   Shenandoah.      They   will 


APPENDIX.  159 

vanish  like  a  vapour  from  the  face  of  the 
earth — their  very  history  will  be  lost  in 
forgetfulness — and  "  the  places  that  now 
know  them,  will  know  them  no  more  for- 


ever 


55 


"  Or  if  perchance  some  dubious  memorial 
of  them  should  survive  the  lapse  of  time,  it 
may  be  in  the  romantic  dreams  of  the  poet, 
to  populate  in  imagination  his  glades  and 
groves,  like  the  fauns,  and  satyrs,  and  sylvan 
deities  of  antiquity.  But  should  he  venture 
upon  the  dark  story  of  their  wrongs  and 
wretchedness — should  he  tell  how  they  were 
invaded,  corrupted,  despoiled — driven  from 
their  native  abodes  and  the  sepulchres  of 
their  fathers— hunted  like  wild  beasts  about 
the  earth,  and  sent  down  in  violence  and 
butchery  to  the  grave — posterity  will  either 
turn  with  horror  and  incredulity  from  the 
tale,  or  blush  with  indignation  at  the  inhu- 
manity of  their  forefathers. — "  We  are  driven 
back,"  said  an  old  warrior,  "  until  we  can 
retreat  no  further — our  hatchets  are  broken 
— our  bows  are  snapped — our  fires  are 
nearly  extinguished — a  little  longer  and 
'the  white  men  will  cease  to  persecute  us — - 
for  we  will  cease  to  exist!" 

The  warlike  ability  of  the  indians  has 
been  very  generally  despised  by  European 
officers — and  this  opinion  has  cost  many 
tbou!*ands  of  men  their  lives.  The  following 


idO  APPENDIX. 

brief  account  of  their  military  conduct,  wil 
not  be  uninteresting  to  the  general  reader 
and  it  will  show  from  good  authority,  thai 
the  number  of  Indians  engaged  in  every  bat 
tie,  in  which  they  proved  victorious,  ha 
always  been  exaggerated  by  their  enemiei 
— a  id  E'lropean  otiicers  particularly,  havini 
often  been  beaten  by  a  comparatively  smak 
number  of  untutored  natives  of  the  forest? 
have  been  led  to  give  very  false  reports  o! 
the  combats  in  which  they  have  been  en: 
gaged. 

''  In  Col.  Boquet's  last  campaign  of  1764 
I  saw,  (says  Col.  Smith,)  the  official  retur, 
made  by  the  British  officers,  of  the  numbe! 
of  Indians  that  were  in  arms  against  us  in  tha' 
year,  which  amounted  to  thirty  thousand! 
As  I  was  then  a  lieutenant  in  the  Britis; 
service,  I  told  them  1  was  of  opinion,  tha' 
there  was  not  above  one  thousand  in  arm 
against  us,  as  they  were  divided  by  Broad 
street's  army,  being  then  at  Lake  Erie 
The  British  officers  hooted  at  me,  and  sai 
that  they  could  not  make  England  sensibl 
of  the  difficulties  they  laboured  under 
lighting  them  :  and  it  was  expected  that  thei 
troops  could  tight  the  undisciplined  savage; 
in  America,  hve  to  one  as  they  did  the  Eas 
Indians,  and  therefore  my  report  would  nc 
answer  their  purpose,  as  they  could  not  giv 


Al'rKNUIX.  101 

an  iionourable  account  of  the  war  but  by 
augmenting  their  numbers. 

"  Smith  was  opinion,  that  from  Braddock's 
defeat,  until  the  time  of  his  writing,  there 
never  were  more  than  three  thousand  In- 
dians, at  any  time  in  arms  against  us,  west  of 
Fort  Pitt,  and  frequently  not  more  than  half 
of  that  number. 

Boudinot  says,  that  "  According  to  the  In- 
dians own  account,  during  the  whole  of 
Braddock's  war,  or  from  1755  to  1758,  they 
killed  and  took  fifty  of  our  people  for  one 
that  they  lost.  In  the  war  of  1763,  they 
[killed,  comparatively,  few  of  our  people, 
[and  lost  more  of  theirs,  as  the  frontier  inha- 
bitants, especially  the  Virginians,  had  learn- 
ed something  of  their  method  of  war  :  yet 
pven  in  this  war,  according  to  their  account 
which  Smith  believed  to  be  true,)  they 
filled  and  took  ten  of  our  people  for  one 
hey  lost. 

''  The  Indians,  though  few  in  number,  put 

he  government  to  immense  expense  of  blood 

ind  treasure,  in  the  war  from  1756  to  1791, 

Jhe   following   campaio;ns  in    the    western 

ountry,  will  be  a  proof  of  this. 

'•General  Braddock's  in  the  year  1755 — 
^ol.  Armstrong's  against  Ihe  Chntaugau 
town,  on  the  Alleghany,  in  1757 — General 
Forbes's  in  1 758 — Gen.  Stanwix's  in  1  759 — 
Sen.  Moncton's  in  1760 — Col.  Boquet's  in 


162  APPEM>1X. 

1761— and  again  in  1763,  when  lie  fought 
the  battle  of  Brushy  Run,  and  lost  above  one 
hundred  men  ;  but  by  taking  the  advice  and 
assistance  of  the  Virginia  volunteers,  finally 
drove  the  Indians — Col.  Armstrong's  up  the 
west  branch  of  the  Susquehannah  in  the 
same  year — -Gen.  Broadstreet's  up  Lake 
Erie  in  1764 — Col.  Boquet's  at  Muskingum 
at  the  same  time — Lord  Dunmore's  in  1774 
Gen.  M'Intosh's  in  1778,  and  again  in  1780 
—Col.  Bowman's  in  1779— Gen.  Clark's 
in  1782 — and  against  the  Wabash  Indian's 
in  1786 — Gen.  Logan's  against  the  Shaw- 
nese  in  the  same  year,  and  Col.  Harmer's  in 
1790— Gen.  Willdnson's  in  1791,— Gen. 
St.  Clair's  in  1791,  and  Gen.  AVayne's  in 
in  1794,  which  in  all  are  twenty  three  cam- 
paigns, besides  smaller  expeditions,  such  as 
the  French  creek  expedition.  Colonels 
Edward's,  Loughrie's,  c^-c.  All  these  were 
exclusive  of  the  numbers  of  men  v.ho  were 
internally  employed  as  scouting  parties,  in 
erecting  forts,  guarding  stations,  i:c.  &c. 

"  When  we  take  the  foregoing  account 
into  consideration,  may  we  not  reasonably 
conclude,  that  the  Indians  are  the  best  disci- 
plined troops  in  the  world,  especially  when 
we  consider,  that  the  ammunition  and  arms 
that  they  are  obliged  to  use,  are  of  the  worst 
sort,  without  bayonets  or  cartouch  boxes. 
No  artificial  means  of  carrying  either  bag- 


A1'»>em;jx.  163 

gage  or  provisions,  while  their  enemies  have 
every  warlike  implement,  and  other  resour- 
ces, to  the  utmost  of  their  desire.  Is  not 
that  the  best  discipline,  that  has  the"greatest 
tendency  to  annoy  an  enemy,  and  save  their 
own  men  ?  It  is  apprehended  that  the  Indian 
discipline  is  belter  calculated  to  answer 
their  purpose  in  the  woods  of  America,  than 
the  British  discipline  in  the  plains  of  Flan- 
ders. British  discipline,  in  the  woods  is  the 
way  to  have  men  slaughtered,  with  scarcely 
any  chance  to  defend  themselves. 

'*-  Privates. — The  Indians  sum  up  their 
art  of  w^ar  thus — 'The  business  of  the  pri- 
vate warrior  is  to  be  under  command,  or 
punctually  to  obey  orders — to  learn  to  march 
a -breast  in  scattered  order,  so  as  to  be  in 
readiness  to  surround  the  enemy,  or  to  pre- 
vent being  surrounded — to  be  a  good  marks- 
man, and  active  in  the  use  of  their  mnsket 
or  rifle — to  .  practice  running — to  learn  to 
endure  hunger  or  hardships  with  patience 
and  fortitude — to  tell  the  truth  at  all  times 
to  their  officers,  more  especiauy  when  sent 
out  to  spy  the  enemy. 

^'■"Concerning  Officers. — They  say  that  it 
would  be  absurd  to  appoint  a  man  to  an 
office, whose  skill  and  courage  had  never  been 
tried — that  all  officers  should  be  advanced 
only  according  to  merit — that  no  single  man 
should  have   the   absolute  comnoand  of  an 

K 


164  APPENDIX. 

army — that  a  council  of  officers  should  de- 
termine when  and  how  an  attack  is  made, 
•i — that  it  is  the  duty  of  officers  to  lay  plans, 
and  take  every  advantage  of  the  enemy— ta' 
ambush  and  surprise  them,  and  to  prevent 
the  like  to  themselves.  It  is  the  duly  oi 
officers  to  prepare  and  deliver  speeches  ta 
the  men,  in  order  to  animate  and  encoi 
age  them,  and  on  a  march  to  prevent  the 
men,  at  any  time,  getting  into  a  huddle,  be- 
cause if  the  enemy  should  surround  them  in 
that  position,  they  would  be  greatly  exposed 
so  the  enemy's  fire.  It  is  likewise  their  bu- 
siness, at  all  times,  to  endeavour  to  annoy 
the  enemy,  and  save  their  own  men  ;  and 
therefore  ought  never  to  bring  on  an  attack 
without  considerable  advantage,  or  without 
what  appeared  to  them  to  insure  victory, 
and  that  with  a  loss  of  but  few  men.  And 
if  at  any  time  they  should  be  mistaken  in 
this,  and  are  likely  to  lose  many  men  in 
gaining  the  victory,  it  is  their  duty  to  retreat^ 
and  wait  for  a  better  opportunity  of  defeat- 
ing their  enemy,  without  the  danger  oi 
losing  so  many  men.'  Their  conduct  proves 
that  they  act  on  these  principles. 

"  This  is  the  statement  given  by  those  whoi 
are  experimentally  acquainted  with  them, 
and  as  long  as  the  British  officers  despised 
both  Indians  and  Americans,  who  studied 
their  art  of  war,  and  formed  themselves  ont 


APPEKDIX.  165 

the  same  plan,  they  were  constantly  beaten 
by  those  soldiers  of  nature,  though  seldom 
one  fourth  of  the  number  of  the  British.  But 
the  British  officers  had  one  advantage  of 
them.  This  was  the  art  of  drawing  up  and 
reporting  to  their  superiors,  plans  of  their 
battles,  and  exaggerated  accounts  of  their 
great  success,  and  the  immense  loss  of  the 
indians,  which  were  never  thought  of  till 
long  after  the  battle  was  over,  and  often 
while  they  were  smarting  under  their  severe 
defeat  or  surprise. 

When  the  Indians  determine  on  war  or 
hunting,  they  have  stated  preparatory,  re- 
ligious ceremonies,  for  purification,  particu- 
larly by  fasting,  as  the  Israelites  had. 

'^Father  Charlevoix  gives  an  account  of 
this  custom  in  his  time.  In  case  of  an  in- 
tention of  going  to  war,  he  who  is  to  com- 
mand does  not  commence  the  raising  of 
soldiers,  till  he  has  fasted  several  days, 
during  which  he  is  smeared  with  black — 
has  no  conversation  with  any  one — invokes 
by  day  and  night,  his  tutelar  spirit,  and  above 
all,  is  very  careful  to  observe  his  dreams. 
The  fast  being  over,  he  assembles  his  friends, 
and  with  a  string  of  wampum  in  his  hands, 
lie  speaks  to  them  after  this  manner.  Breth- 
ren !  the  great  spirit  authorizes  my  senti- 
ments, and. inspires  me  with  what  I  ought  to 
An.    The  blood  of is  not  wiped  away — 


K-' 


KiC  APPENDIX. 

his  body  is  not  covered,  and  I  will  acquit 
myself  of  this  duty  towards  hiirij"  &c. 

Mr.  M'Kenzie  in  some  measure  confirms 
this  account,  though  among  different  nations. 
"If  the  tribes  feel  themselves  called  upon 
to  go  to  war,  the  elders  convene  the  people 
in  order  to  obtain  the  general  opinion.  If 
it  be  for  war,  the  chief  publishes  his  inten- 
tion to  smoke  in  the  sacred  stem  (a  pipe)  at 
a  certain  time.  To  this  solemnity,  media- 
tion and  fasting  are  required  as  preparatory 
ceremonials.  When  the  people  are  thus  as- 
sembled, and  the  meeting  sanctified  by  the 
custom  of  smoking  (this  maybe  in  imitation 
of  the  smoke  of  the  incense  offered  on  the 
altar  of  the  Jews)  the  chief  enlarges  on  the 
causes  which  have  called  them  together,  and 
the  necessity  of  the  measures  proposed  on 
the  occasion.  He  then  invites  them  who 
are  willing  to  follow  him,  to  smoke  out  of 
the  sacred  stem,  which  is  considered  as  a 
token  of  enrolment."  A  sacred  feast  then 
takes  place,  and  after  much  ceremony,  usual 
on  such  occasion,  •'  the  chief  turninji  to  the 
east,  makes  a  speech  to  explain  more  fully 
the  design  of  their  meeting,  then  concludes 
with  an  acknowledgement  for  }>ast  mercies 
received,  and  a  prayer  for  the  continuance 
of  them,  from  the  master  of  life.  He  then 
sits  down,  and  the  whole  company  declare 
their  approbation  and  thanks  by  uttering  the 


APPENDIX.  Un 

word  Ho!'''  (in  a  very  hoarse,  guttural  sound, 
being  the  third  syllable  of  the  beloved 
name,)  '•  with  an  emphatic  promulgation  of 
the  last  letter.  The  chief  then  takes  up  the 
pipe,  and  holds  it  to  the  mouth  of  the  offi- 
ciating person,"'  (like  a  priest  of  the  Jews, 
with  thf  incense)  ''  who  after  smoking  three 
whilfs,  utters  a  short  prayer,  und  then  goes 
round  with  it  from  east  to  w^est,  to  every 
person  present."  The  ceremony  then  being 
ended,  ''  he  returns  the  company  thanks  for 
their  attendance,  and  wishes  them,  as  well 
as  the  whole  tribe,  health' and  long  life."' 

Do  not  these  practices  remind  the  reader 
of  the  many  directions  in  the  Jewish  ritual, 
commanding  the  strict  purification  or  sanc- 
tifying individuals  about  to  undertake  great 
business,  or  enter  on  important  offices. 

"The  indians,  by  oppression,  diseases, 
wars  and  ardent  spirits,  have  greatly  dimin- 
ished in  numbers,  degenerated  in  their  moral 
character,  and  lost  their  high  standing  as 
warriors,  especially  those  contigious  to  our 
settlements. 

"  The  very  ancient  men  who  have  wit- 
nessed the  former  glory  and  prosperity  of 
their  country,  or  who  have  heard  from  the 
mouths  of  their  ancestors,  and  particularly 
from  their  beloved  men,  (whose  office  it  is 
to  repeat  their  traditions  apd  laws  to  the 
rising  generations,  with  the  heroic  achieve- 


108  APPENDIX. 

merits  of  their  forefathers)  the  former  state 
of  their  country  with  the  ijreat  prowess  and 
success  of  their  warriors  of  old  tim-^^s.  they 
weep  like  infants,  when  they  speak  of  the 
fallen  condition  of  their  nations.  They  de- 
rive however  some  consolation  from  a  pro- 
phecy of  ancient  origin  and  universal  cur- 
rency among  them,  that  the  men  of  America 
will,  at  some  future  period,  regain  their  an- 
cient ascendency  and  expel  the  man  of  Eu- 
rope from  this  western  hemisphere.  This 
flattering  and  consolatory  persuasion  has 
enabled  the  Seneca  and  Shawnese  prophets 
to  arrest,  in  some  tribes,  the  use  of  intoxi- 
cating lixquors,  and  has  given  birth,  at  diffe- 
rent periods,  to  attempts  for  a  general  con- 
federacy of  the  Indians  of  North  America.- ' 
Clinton, 

The  compiler  of  the  Star  in  the  West  was 
present  at  a  dinner  given  by  general  Knox 
to  a  number  of  indians,  in  the  year  1  789,  at 
New-York ;  they  had  come  to  the  President 
on  a  mission  from  their  nations.  The  house 
was  in  Broadway.  A  little  before  dinner, 
two  or  three  of  the  Sachems,  with  their  chief 
or  principal  man,  went  into  the  balcony  at 
the  front  of  the  house,  the  drawing  room 
being  up-stairs.  From  this  they  had  a  view 
of  the  city,  the  harbour,  Long-Island,  he. 
After  remaining  there  a  short  time,  they  re- 
turned into  the  room,  apparently  dejected  ; 


APPENDIX,  169 

hut  the  chief  more  than  the  rest.  General 
Knox  took  notice  of  it,  and  said  to  him, 
brother  !  what  has  happened  to  you  ? — You 
look  sorry  I — 'Is  there  any  thing  to  distress 
you  ?  He  answered — I'll  tell  you,  brother. 
1  have  been  looking  at  your  beautiful  city — 
the  great  water — your  fine  country — and  see 
how  happy  you  all  are.  But  then,  I  could 
not  help  thinking,  that  this  (ine  country  and 
this  great  water  was  once  ours.  Our  an- 
cestors lived  here — they  enjoyed  it  as  their 
own  in  peace — it  was  the  gift  of  the  great 
spirit  to  them  and  their  children.  At  last 
the  white  people  came  here  in  a  great  canoe. 
They  asked  only  to  let  them  tie  it  to  a  tree, 
lest  the  waters  should  carry  it  away — we 
consented.  They  then  said  some  of  their 
people  were  sick,  and  they  asked  permission 
to  land  them  and  put  them  under  the  shade 
of  the  trees.  The  ice  then  came,  and  they 
could  not  go  away.  They  then  begged  a 
piece  of  land  to  build  wigwams  for  the  win- 
ter— we  granted  it  to  them.  They  then 
asked  for  some  corn  to  keep  them  from 
starving — we  kindly  furnished  it  to  them, 
they  promising  to  go  away  when  the  ice  was 
:ione.  When  this  happened,  we  told  them 
t!iey  must  now  go  away  with  their  big  canoe  ; 
Iv.it  they  pointed  lo  their  big  guns  roiuj^l 
their  wiguams,  and  said  they  would  rflay 
there,  ap.d  we  could  not  make  them  go  awa^fc 
k4 


170  APPENDIX. 

Afterwards,  more  came.  Thoy  brought 
spirituous  and  intoxicating  liquors  with  them, 
of  which  the  indians  became  \ery  fond. 
They  persuaded  us  to  sell  them  some  land. 
Finally  they  droVe  us  back,  from  time  to 
time,  into  the  wilderness,  far  from  the  water, 
and  the  fish,  and  the  oysters — they  have  de- 
stroyed the  game — our  people  have  wasted 
away,  and  now  we  live  miserable  and 
wretched,  while  you  are  enjoying  our  fine 
and  beautiful  country.  This  makes  me 
sorry,  brother!    and  I  cannot  help  it!" 

From  the  great  similarity  of  the  manners 
and  customs  of  the  Indian  natives  and  those 
recorded  of  the  Jews,  many  learned  men 
have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  indian 
tribes  are  none  other  than  the  descendants 
of  the  ten  lost  tribes  of  Judah.  If  not,  in 
what  manner  can  we  account  for  this  simila- 
rity ?  Their  religious  emblems  are  nearly 
of 'the  same  import — their  rites  and  cere- 
monies in  many  respects  do  not  dilFer  essen- 
tially— their  is  an  evident  approach  in  many 
instances  between  the  two  languages,*  and 
withal  there  is  a  personal  resemblance. 

The  late  ^Vm.  l*enn,  who  was  acquainted 

*  Tiierc  flic  bat  two  Miodier  tonp:«ips,  it  is  said, 
nmopg-  (lie  Norfhprn  Indians,  iricliK'iiip:  (lio^e  trilies 
llilt  inliahit  the  Mississippi,  (liC  Huron  iind  Alf^oi.- 
<inin4|  There  is  not  more  (liilercnce  between  tliesf, 
J}(^n  hot^veon  the  Ts'nrrTinn  nnd  Ftoiirh. 


APPENDIX.  171 

with  the  natives  before  they  became  cor- 
rupted by  the  whites,  was  exceedingly  struck 
with  their  appearance,  and  in  one  oi  bis  let- 
ters to  a  friend  in  England,  he  says,  "  1  found 
them  with  Hke  countenance  with  the  Jewish 
race  ;  and  their  children  of  so  lively  a  re- 
semblance to  them,  that  a  man  would  think 
himself  in  Duke's-place  or  Berry  street,  in 
London,  when  he  seeth  them."  (Penn's 
Works,  2d  vol.  80p,  year  1682.)  They  wore 
ear-rings  and  nose  jewels  ;  bracelets  on 
their  arms  and  legs  ;  rings  on  their  tlngers; 
necklaces  made  of  highly  polished  shells 
found  in  their  rivers  and  on  their  coasts. 
Their  females  tied  up  their  hair  behind, 
w^orked  bands  round  their  heads,  and  orna- 
mented them  with  shells  and  feathers,  and 
are  fond  of  strings  of  beads  round  st^veral 
parts  of  their  bodies.  They  use  shells  and 
turkey  spurs  round  the  tops  of  their  mocasins, 
to  tinkle  like  httle  beiis.  as  they  walk." 
Isaiah  proves  this  to  have  been  the  custom 
of  the  Jewish  women,  or  some'liiiig  much 
like  it.  "  In  that  day,  says  the  prophet,  the 
Lord  will  take  away  the  bravery  of  their 
tinkling  ornaments  about  their  feet,  and 
their  cauls,  and  their  round  tires  like  the 
moon.  The  chains  and  the  bracelets  and 
the  muflers.  The  bonnets  and  the  orna- 
ments of  the  legs,  and  the  head-bands,  and 
the  tablets,  and  the  ear  rings  ;  the  rings  and 
k5 


1 72  APPENDIX. 

the  nose  jewels."  Isaiah,  iii.  IS.  They 
religiously  observed  certain  feasts,  and  feasts 
very  similar  to  those  enjoiiied  on  the  He- 
brews, by  Moses,  as  will  hereinafter  more 
particulailj  be  shewn.  In  short,  many,  and 
indeed,  it  may  be  said,  most  of  the  learned 
men,  who  did  pay  any  particalar  attention 
to  these  natives  of  the  wilderness  at  their 
first  coming  among  them,  both  English  and 
Spaniards,  were  struck  with  their  general 
likeness  to  the  Jews.  The  Indians  in  New 
Jersey,  about  1681,  are  described,  as  persons 
straight  in  their  limbs,  beyond  the  usual 
proportion  in  most  nations ;  very  seldom 
crooked  or  deformed;  their  features  regular; 
their  countenances  somewhat  fierce,  in  com- 
mon rather  resembling  a  Jew  than  a  Chris- 
tian.— Smith's  History  of  New  Jersey. 

In  general  the  Indian  languages  are  very 
"  copious  and  expressive,'''  considering  the 
narrow  sphere  in  which  they  move.  In 
comparison  with  civilized  nations,  their 
ideas  are  few.  In  their  language,  we  find 
neither  cases  or  declensions,  and  few  or  no' 
prepositions.  This  has  been  remarked  more 
particularly,  as  there  is  no  language  known 
in  Europe,  except  the  Hebrew,  without 
prepositions.  The  public  speeches  of  the 
Indians  are  short  but  bold,  nervous,  and 
abounding  with  metaphor.  For  instance, 
the  speech  made  by  Logan,  a  famous  indian 


APPENDIX.  173 

chief,  about  the  year  1775,  was  never  ex- 
exceeded  by  Demosthenes  or  Cicero.  In 
revenge  for  a  murder  committed  by  some 
unknown  indians,  a  parly  of  our  people  tired 
on  a  oanoe  loaded  with  women  and  children, 
and  one  man,  all  of  whom  happened  to  be- 
long to  the  family  of  Logan,  who  had  been 
long  the  staunch  friend  of  the  Americans, 
and  then  at  perfect  peace  with  them.  A 
war  immediately  ensued,  and  afier  much 
blood-shed  on  both  sides,  the  indians  were 
beat,  and  sued  for  peace.  A  treaty  was 
held,  but  Logan  disdainfully  refused  to  be 
reckoned  among  the  suppliants ;  but  to  pre- 
vent any  disadvantage  from  his  absence,  to 
his  nation,  he  sent  the  following  talk,  to  be 
delivered  to  Lord  Dunmore  at  the  treaty  : — 
"  1  appeal  to  any  \t^hite  man  to  say,  if  he 
ever  entered  Logan's  cabin  hungry,  and  he 
gave  him  not  meat — if  ever  he  came  cold 
and  naked,  and  Logan  clothed  him  not. 
During  the  course  of  the  last  long  and 
bloody  war,  Logan  remained  idle  in  his 
cabin,  an  advocate  for  peace.  Such  was 
his  love  for  the  white  men,  that  my  coun- 
trymen pointed  as  they  passed,  and  said, 
Logan  is  the  friend  of  lohite  men.  1  had 
thought  to  have  lived  with  you,  but  for  the 

injuries  of  one  man.     Colonel  ~ the  last 

spring,  in  cold  blood,  and  unprovoked,  mur- 
dered all  tlse  rclalion?  of  Logan,  not  sparing 


174  APPENDIX. 

even  my  women  and  children.  There  runs 
not  a  drop  of  liis  blood  in  the  vekis  of  any 
living  creature.  This  calls  on  me  for  re- 
venge. 1  have  sought  it.  I  have  killed 
many.  1  have  fully  glutted  my  vengeance. 
For  my  country,  1  rejoice  at  the  beams  of 
peace.  But  do  not  harbor  a  thouglit  that 
mine  is  the  joy  of  fear.  Logan  never  felt 
fear.  He  will  not  turn  on  his  heel  to  save 
his  life.  Who  is  there io  rnuurn  for  Logan  ? 
No,  not  one." 

"'  Great  allowance  must  be  made  for  trans- 
lations into  another  language,  especially  by 
illiterate  and    ignorant   interpreters,     'i'his?- 
destroys  the  force  as  well  as   beauty  of  the 
original. 

''  A  writer  (Adair)  who  has  ha*!  the  bcit 
opportunities  to  know  tlic  true  idiom  of  their 
lano-uage,  bv  a  residence  amonii  them  for 
forty  years,  has  taken  great  pains  to  show 
the  similarity  of  the  Hebrew  with  the  indian 
languages,  both  in  their  roots  and  general 
construction  ;  and  insists  that  many  of  tiie 
indian  words,  to  this  day,  are  purely  Hebrew, 
notwithstanding  their  exposure  to  the  loss 
of  it  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  make  the 
{)reservation  of  it  so  fl\i-,  little  less  than 
miraculous." 

Mr.  Boudinot  in  his  able  work,  states,  "  as 
a  matter  of  curiosity,  that  the  Mohawks,  in 
confed^'racv  with   tiie  Five   Nations,  as  snl)- 


APPENDIX.  175 

sisting  at  the  first  arrival  of  the  Europeans 
in  America,  were  considered  as  the  lawgiv- 
ers, or  the  interpreters  of  duty  to  the  other 
tribes.  Nay,  this  was  so  great,  that  all  paid 
I  obedience  to  their  advice.  They  conside- 
'  red  themselves  as  supreme,  or  first  among 
the  rest.  Mr.  Golden  says,  that  he  had  been 
told  by  old  men  in  New  England,  that  when 
their  Indians  were  at  war,  formerly  with  the 
Mohawk?,  as  soon  as  one  appeared,  their 
Indians  raised  a  cry  from  hill  to  hill,  a  Mo- 
hawk.' a  Mohawk!  upon  which  all  fled  like 
sheep  before  a  wolf,  without  attempting  to 
make  the  least  resistance.  And  that  all  the 
nations  around  them,  have  for  many  years, 
entirely  submitted  to  their  advice,  and  pay 
them  a  yearly  tribute  of  wampum.  The 
tributary  nations  dare  not  make  war  or  peace, 
without  the  consent  of  the  Mohawks.  Mr. 
Golden  has  given  a  speech  of  the  Mohawks, 
in  answer  to  one  from  the  governor  of  Vir- 
ginia, complaining  of  the  confederate  nations, 
which  shows  the  Mohawks'  superiority  over 
them,  and  the  mode  in  which  they  corrected 
their  misdoings.  Now  it  seems  very  remark- 
able that  the  Hebrew  word  Mhhokek,  spel- 
led so  much  like  the  Indian  word,  means  a 
law-giver,  (or  leg;es  interpres)  or  a  stiperior. 
"  BHnd  chance  could  not  have  directed 
so  great  a  number  of  remote  and  warring 
savage  nations  to  fix  on,  and  unite  in  so  nice 


176  APPENDIX. 

a  religious  standard  of  speech,  and  even 
sjrammatical  construction  of  language,  where 
there  was  no  knowledge  of  letters  or  syntax. 
For  instance.  A,  oo,  EA,  is  a  strong  religi- 
ous Indian  emblem,  signifying,  T  climbs  as- 
cend^  or  remove  to  another  place  of  residence. 
It  points  to  A-no-wah,  the  first  person  singu- 
lar, and  O  E  A,  or  Yah,  lio.  Wah,  and  im- 
plies putting  themselves  under  the  divine 
patronage.  The  beginning  of  thqt  most 
sacred  symbol,  is  by  studious  skill  and 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  power  of  leUers, 
placed  twice,  to  prevent  them  from  being 
applied  to  the  sacred  name,  for  vain  purpo- 
ses, or  created  things. 

"Though  they  lost  the  true  meaning  of 
their  religious  emblems,  except  what  a  very 
few  of  the  more  intelligent  traders  revive 
in  their  retentive  memories  of  the  old  inqui- 
sitive magi,  or  beloved  man ;  yet  tradition 
directs  them  to  apply  them  properly.  They 
use  many  plain  religious  emblems  of  the 
divine  name,  as  Y,  O,  he  wah — Yah  and 
Ale,  and  these  are  the  roots  of  the  prodigi- 
ous number  of  \yords,  through  their  various 
dialects.  It  is  worthy  of  remembrance,  that 
two  Indians,  who  belong  to  far  distant  na- 
tions, without  the  knowledge  of  each  other's 
language,  except  from  the  general  idiom, 
will  intelligibly  converse  together,  and  con- 
tract engagements  without  any  intepretcr. 


APPENDIX.  1T7 


I 

Kn  such  a  surprising  manner,  as  is  scarcely 
pcredible.     In  like  manner  we  read  of  Abra- 
ham, Isaac  and  Jacob,  travelling  from  coun- 
f  try  to  country,  from  Chaldea  into  Palestine, 
I  when  inhabited  by  various  ditfering  nations 
;  — thence  into  Egypt  and  back  again,  making 
engagements,    and    treating    with    citizens 
.  wherever  they   went.     But  we  never  read 
of  any    difficulty   of  being    understood,   or 
their  using  an  interpreter. 

"  The  Indians  generally  express  them- 
selves with  great  vehemence  and  short 
pauses,  in  their  public  speeches.  Their 
periods  are  well  turned,  and  very  sonorous 
and  harmonious.  Their  words  are  specially 
chosen,  and  well  disposed,  with  great  care 
and  knowledge  of  their  subject  and  language, 
to  show  the  being,  power  and  agency  of  the 
great  spirit  in  all  that  concerns  them. 

"  To  speak  m  general  terms,  their  lan- 
guage in  their  roots,  idiom,  and  particular 
construction,  appears  to  have  the  whole 
genus  of  the  Hebrew,  and  what  is  very  re- 
markable, and  well  worthy  of  serious  obser- 
vation, has  most  of  the  peculiarities  of  that 
language,  especially  those  in  which  it  differs 
,  from  most  other  languages  ;  and  "  often  both 
in  letters  and  signification,  synonimous  with 
the  Hebrew  language."  They  call  the 
lightning  and  thunder,  Eloha,  and  its  rumb- 
line:  noise    Rowah.   which   may  not.  impro- 


178  APPENDIX 

perly,  be  deduced  from  the  Hebrew  word 
Ruach^  a  name  of  the  third  person  in  the 
holy  Trinity,  originally  signifying  "  the  air 
in  motion,  or  a  rushing  wind." — Faber. 

The  Indian  compounded  words  are  gene- 
rally pretty  long,  but  those  that  are  radical 
or  simple,  are  mostly  short ;  ver)  few,  if 
any  of  them,  exceed  three  or  four  syllables. 
And  as  their  dialects  are  guttural,  every 
word  contains  some  consonants,  and  these 
are  the  essential  characteristics  of  language. 
Where  they  deviate  from  this  rule,  it  is  by 
religious  emblems,  which  obviously  proceeds 
from  the  great  regard  they  pay  to  the  names 
of  the  Deity,  especially  to  the  great  four 
lettered  divine,  essential  name,  by  using  the 
letters  it  contains,  and  the  vowels  it  was 
originally  pronounced  with,  to  convey  a  vir- 
tuous idea  ;  or  by  doubling  or  transposing 
them,  to  signify  the  contrary.  In  this  all  the 
Indian  nations  agree.  And  as  this  general 
custom  must  proceed  fromoneiprimar)  cause, 
it  seems  to  assure  us,  that  this  people  was 
not  in  a  savage  state  when  they  tirst  separa- 
ted, and  varied  their  dialects  with  so  much 
religious  care  and  exact  art." 

Mr.  Boudinot  speaking  of  the  indian  tra- 
ditions as  received  by  their  nations,  says, 
not  having  the  assistance  afforded  by  the 
means  of  writing  and  reading,  they  are 
oh]i2:ed  to  have  recour.-e  (o  tradition,  as  Du 


APPENDIX.  1'79 

Pratz,  2  vol.  169,  has  justly  observed,  "  to 
preserve  the  remembrance  of  remarkable 
transactions  or  historical  facts  ;  and  this  tra- 
dition cannot  be  preserved,  but  by  frequent 
repetitions  ;  consequently  many  of  their 
young  men  are  often  employed  in  hearken- 
ing to  the  old  beloved  men,  narrating  the 
history  of  their  ancestors,  which  is  thus 
transmitted  from  generation  to  generation." 
"  In  order  to  preserve  them  pure  and  incor- 
rupt, they  are  careful  not  to  deliver  them 
indifferently  to  all  their  young  people,  but 
only  to  those  young  men  of  whom  they  have 
the  best  opinion.  They  hold  it  as  a  certain 
fact,  as  delivered  down  from  their  ancestors, 
that  their  forefathers,  in  very  remote  ages, 
came  from  a  far  distant  country,  by  the  way 
of  the  west,  where  all  the  people  were  of 
one  colour,  and  that  in  process  of  time  they 
moved  eastward  to  their  present  settle- 
ments." 

This  tradition  is  corroborated  by  a  current 
•report  among  them,  related  by  the  old 
Chickkasah  Indians  to  our  traders,  that  now 
about  100  years  ago,  there  came  from  Mex- 
ica,  some  of  the  old  Chickkasah  nation,  or 
as  the  Spaniards  call  them,  Chichemicas,  in 
quest  of  their  brethren,  as  far  north  as  the 
Aquahpah  nation,  above  one  hundred  and 
thirty  miles  above  the  Natchez,  on  the  south 
east   side    of   the    Mississippi    river  ;    but 


18J  Ari'ENlIJX. 

through  French  pohcy,  they  were  eithei 
killed  or  sent  back,  so  as  to  prevent  their 
opening  a  brotherly  intercourse  with  them. 
as  they  had  proposed.  It  is  also  said,  that 
the  Nauatalcas  believe  that  they  dwelt  in 
another  region  before  they  settled  in  Mexico. 
That  their  forel'athers  v/andered  eighty  years 
in  search  of  it,  through  a  strict  obedience  to 
tlie  commands  of  the  great  spirit,  who  or- 
dered them  to  go  m  quest  of  new  lands,  that 
had  sUch  particular  marks  as  were  made 
known  to  them,  and  they  punctually  obeyed 
the  divine  mandate,  and  by  that  means  found 
out  and  settled  that  fertile  countr}' of  Mexico. 
Our  southern  indians  have  also  a  tradition 
among  them  which  they  firmly  believe,  that 
of  old  time,  their  ancestors  lived  beyond  a 
great  river.  That  nine  parts  of  their  nation, 
out  of  ten,  passed  over  the  river,  but  the  re- 
mainder refused,  and  staid  behind,  'i'hat 
they  had  a  king  when  they  lived  far  to  the 
west,  who  left  two  sons.  That  one  of  them, 
with  a  number  of  his  people,  travelled  a 
great  way  for  many  years,  till  they  came  to 
Delaware  river,  and  settled  there.  That 
some  years  ago,  the  king  of  the  country  from 
which  they  had  emi<j;rated,  sent  a  j)arty  in 
search  of  them.  This  was  at  the  time  the 
French  were  in  possession  of  the  country  on 
the  river  Alleghany.  'I'hat  after  seeking  six 
years,  thev  found  an  indian  who  led  them 


Al'PEx\l>lX.  l»f 

to  the  Delaware  towns,  where  they  staid  one 
year.  That  the  French  sent  a  white  man 
with  them  on  their  return,  to  bring  back  an 
account  of  their  country,  but  they  have 
never  been  heard  of  since. 

It  is  said  among  their  principal,  or  beloved 
men,  that  they  have  it  handed  down  from 
their  ancestors,  that  the  book  which  the 
white  people  have  was  once  theirs.  That 
while  they  had  it  they  prospered  exceed- 
ingly ;  but  that  the  white  people  bought  it 
of  them,  and  learnt  many  things  from  it; 
while  the  indians  lost  their  credit,  offended 
the  great  spirit,  and  suffered  exceedingly 
from  the  neighbouring  nations.  That  the 
great  spirit  took  pity  on  them  and  directed 
them  to  this  country.  That  on  their  way 
they  came  to  a  great  river,  which  they  could 
not  pass,  when  God  dried  up  the  waters  and 
they  passed  over  dry  shod.  They  also  say 
that  their  forefathers  were  possessed  of  an 
extraordinary  divine  spirit,  by  which  they 
foretold  future  events,  and  controled  the 
common  course  of  nature,  and  this  they 
transmitted  to  their  offspring,  on  condition 
of  their  obeying  the  sacred  laws.  That  they 
did  by  these  means  bring  down  showers  of 
plenty  on  the  beloved  people.  But  that 
this  power,  for  a  longtime  past,  had  entirely 
ceased. 

The  reverendgentleman  mentioned  before, 

I' 


182  AL'i'E^DlX. 

who  had  taken  so  much  pains  in  the  veaf 
1764  or  5,  to  travel  far  westward,  tu  find 
Indians  who  had  never  seen  a  white  ntian, 
informed  the  writer  of  these  memoirs,  that 
far  to  the  nortliwest  of  the  Ohio,  he  attended 
a  party  of  indians  to  a  treaty,  with  indians. 
from  the  west  of  the  Mississippi.  Here  he 
Ibund  the  people  he  was  in  search  of — he 
conversed  with  iheir  beloved  man  who  had 
never  seen  a  white  man  belore,  b)  the  as- 
sistance of  three  grades  of  interpreters.  The 
indian  informed  him,  '•  that  one  of  their 
ancient  traditions  was.  that  a  great  while 
ago,  they  had  a  common  father,  who  lived 
towards  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  governed 
the  whole  world.  That  ail  the  white  people's 
heads  were  under  his  feet.  That  he  had 
twelve  sons,  by  whom  he  admu\istered  his 
f^overnment.  That  his  authority  was  berived 
from  the  great  spirit,  by  virtue  of  some 
special  gift  from  him.  That  the  twelve  sons 
hehaved  very  bad  andt)mnnized  over  the 
people,  abusing  their  power  to  a  great  de- 
<Tree,  so  as  to  offend  the  great  spirit  exceed- 
ingly. That  he  being  thus  angry  with  them, 
sulfered  the  white  people  to  introduce 
spirituous  liquors  among  them,  made  them 
drunk,  stole  the  special  gift  of  the  great 
spirit  from  them,  and  by  this  means  usurped 
the  power  over  them,  and  ever  since  the 
indians'  heads  were  under  the  white  people's 


APPENDIX.  tS3 

feet.  But  that  they  also  had  a  traditioiii 
that  the  time  would  come,  when  the  Indian 
would  regain  the  gift  of  the  great  spirit  from 
the  white  people,  and  with  it  their  f>ncient 
power,  when  the  white  people's  heads  would 
be  again  under  the  Indian's  feet. 

Mr.  M'Kenzie  in  his  History  of  the  Fur 
Trade,  and  his  journey  through  Nor^h  Ame- 
rica, by  the  lakes,  to  the  So'ith  Sea.  -n  the 

year ,  says,  '•'that  the  nidians  intormed 

him,  that  they  had  a  tradition  among  them, 
that  they  originally  came  fro^n  another  coun- 
try, inhabited  by  vvickeo  people,  and  had 
travei'sed  a  great  lake,  which  was  narrow, 
shallow,  and  full  of  islands,  where  tUev  had 
suffered  great  hardships  and  much  misery, 
it  bein^  always  winter,  with  ice  and  deep 
snows — at  a  place  they  called  the  Copper- 
?nine  River,  where  they  made  the  first  land, 
the  ground  was  covered  with  copper,  over 
which  a  body  of  earth  had  since  been  col- 
lected to  the  de;.th  of  a  man's  heighth. 
They  believe  also  that  in  ancient  times  their 
ancestors  had  liv.*)  till  their  feet  were  worn 
out  with  walking,  and  their  throats  with 
eating.  They  described  a  deluge,  when 
the  waters  spread  over  the  whole  earth,  ex- 
cept the  highest  mountain,  on  the  top  of 
"which  they  were  preserved.  They  also 
believe  in  a  future  judgment.'*  M'Kenzie' 
history,  page  1 13. 


o 


184  APPENBIX. 

The  indians  to  Ihe  eastward  say,  that  pre- 
vious to  the  white  people  coming  into  the 
country,  their  ancestors  were  in  the  habit  of 
using  circumcision,  but  latterly,  not  being 
able  to  assign  any  reason  for  so  strange  a 
practice,  their  young  people  insisted  on  its 
being  abolished. 

M'Kenzie  says  the  same  of  the  indians  he 
saw  on  his  route,  even  at  this  day.  History, 
page  34.  Speaking  of  the  nations  of  the 
Slave  and  Dog-rib  indians,  very  far  to  the 
northwest,  he  snys.  "  whetlter  circumcision 
be  practised  among  them.  I  cannot  pretend 
to  say,  but  the  appearance  of  it  was  general 
among  those  1  saw." 

The  Dog-rib  indians  live  about  two  or 
three  hundred  miles  from  the  straits  of  Kam- 
schatka.  Dr.  Beatty  says,  in  his  journal  of 
a  visit  he  paid  to  the  indians  on  the  Ohio, 
about  tifty  years  ago,  that  an  old  christian 
indiaii  informed  him,  that  an  old  uncle  of 
his,  who  died  about  the  year  1 728,  related^ 
to  him  several  customs  and  traditions  of 
former  times  ;  and  among  others,  that  cir- 
cumcision was  practiced  among  the  indians 
long  ago, but  their  young  men  making  a  mock 
at  it,  brought  it  into  disrepute,  and  so  it  came 
to  be  disused.  Journal,  page  89.  The 
same  indian  said,  that  one  tradition  they  had 
was,  that  once  the  waters  had  overflowed  all 
the  land,  and  drowned  all  the   people  then 


Ari'ENDlX.  185 

living,  except  a  few,  who  made  a  great  canoe, 
and  were  saved  in  it.  Page  90.  And  that 
a  long  time  ago,  the  people  went  to  build  a 
high  place.  That  while  they  were  building 
of  it,  they  lost  their  language,  and  could  not 
understand  one  another.  That  while  one, 
perhaps,  called  for  a  stick,  another  brought 
him  a  stone,  &c.  &c.  and  from  that  time  the 
Indians  began  to  speak  different  languages. 

Father  Charlevoix,  the  French  historian, 
informs  us  that  the  Hurons  and  Iroquois,  in 
that  early  day,  had  a  tradition  among  them 
that  the  first  women  came  from  heaven,  and 
had  twins,  and  that  the  elder  killed  the 
younger. 

In  an  account  published  in  the  year  1644, 
by  a  Dutch  minister  of  the  gospel,  in  New- 
York,  giving  an  account  of  the  Mohawks,  he 
says,  "  an  old  woman  came  to  my  house  and 
told  the  family,  that  her  forefathers  had  told 
her  that  the  great  spirit  once  went  out  walk- 
ing with  his  brother,  and  that  a  dispute  arose 
between  them,  and  the  great  spirit  killed  his 
brother."  This  is  plainly  a  confusion  of  the 
story  of  Cain  and  Abel.  It  is  most  likely 
from  the  ignorance  of  the  minister  in  the 
idiom  of  the  Indian  language,  misconstruing, 
Cain  being  represented  a  great  man,  for  the 
great  spirit.  Many  mistakes  of  this  kind  are 
frequently  made. 

Mr.  Adair,  who  has  written  the  History  of 

T.8  "      ' 


i8t>  APPENDIX. 

the  Indians,  and  who  deserves  great  credit 
for  his  industry,  and  improving  the  very 
great  and  uncommon  opportunities  he  en- 
joyed, tells  us,  that  the  southern  indians 
have  a  tradition,  that  when  they  left  their 
own  native  land,  they  brought  with  them  a 
sanctified  rod,  by  order  of  an  oracle,  which 
they  fixed  eveiy  night  in  the  ground  ;  and 
were  to  remove  from  place  to  place  on  this 
continent,  towards  the  rising  sun,  till  it  buded 
in  one  night's  tim.e.  That  they  obeyed  the 
sacred  oracle,  and  the  miracle  at  last  took 
place,  after  they  arrived  on  this  side  of  the 
Mississippi,  on  the  present  land  they  possess. 
This  was  the  sole  cause  of  their  settling. 
there — of  fighting  so  firmly  for  their  reputed 
holy  land  and  holy  things — that  they  maybe 
buried  with  their  beloved  forefathers." 
This  seems  to  be  taken  from  Aaron's  rod. 
Colonel  James  Smith,  in  his  Journal  of 
Events,  that  happened  while  he  was  prisoner 
with  the  Caughnevvaga  indians,  from  1755 
to  1759,  says,  "they  have  a  tradition  that  in 
the  beginning  of  this  continent,  the  angels  or 
heavenly  inhabitants,  as  they  call  them,  fre- 
quently visited  the  people,  and  talked  with 
their  forefathers,  and  gave  directions  how  to 
pray,  and  how  to  appease  the  great  being, 
wh«*n  he  was  oflfended.  They  told  them 
thei  vtM'e  to  offer  sacrifice,  burn  tobacco, 
Vmffaioe  and  deer's  bones,  &c.  &c.  Page  79. 


APPENDIX.  187 

The  Ottawas  say,  ''  that  there  are  two 
great  beings  that  rule  and  govern  the  uni- 
verse, who  are  at  war  with  each  other  ;  the 
one  they  call  Maneto,  and  the  other  Matche- 
maneto.  They  say  that  Maneto  is  all  kind- 
ness and  love,  and  the  other  is  an  evil  spirit 
that  delights  in  doing  niischief.  Some  say 
that  they  are  equal  in  power  ;  others  say 
tliat  Maneto  is  the  first  great  cause,  and 
therefore  must  be  all  powerful  and  supreme, 
and  ought  to  be  adored  and  worshipped  ; 
whereas  Matchemancto  ought  to  be  rejected 
and  despised."  "  Some  of  the  Wyandots 
and  Caughnewagas  profess  to  be  Roman 
Catholics  ;  but  even  these  retain  many  of 
the  notions  of  their  ancestors.  Those  who 
reject  the  Roman  Cathohc  religion,  hold  that 
there  is  one  great  first  cause,  whom  they 
call  Owaheeyo,  that  rules  and  governs  the 
universe,  and  takes  care  of  all  his  creatures 
rational  and  irrational,  and  gives  them  their 
food  in  due  season,  and  hears  the  prayers  of 
all  those  who  call  upon  him  ;  therefore  it  is 
but  just  and  reasonable  to  pray  and  offer 
sacrifice  to  this  great  being,  and  to  do  those 
things  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight.  But 
they  widely  differ  in  what  is  pleasing  or  dis- 
pleasing to  this  great  bemg.  Some  hold  that 
following  nature  or  their  own  propensities 
is  the  way  to  happiness.  Others  reject  this 
opinion  altogether,  and  sav,  that  following 

T,4 


188  -    APPENDIX. 

their  own  propensities  in  this  manner  is~ 
neither  the  means  of  happiness,  or  the  way 
to  plvase  thedeiiy  M}  friend,  Tecaughre- 
tane^o,  sajd.  our  happiiiess  depends  on  our 
usin^  our  reason,  in  order  to  suppress  these 
evil  dispositions  ;  but  when  our  propen- 
sities neither  lead  us  to  injure  ourselves  nor 
others,  we  way  with  safety  indulge  them,  or 
even  pursue  them  as  the  means  of  happi- 
ness.*'   Page  86. 

Can  any  man,  says  Mr.  Boudinot,  read 
this  short  account  of  indian  traditions,  drawn 
from  tribes  of  various  nations,  from  the  west 
to  the  east,  and  from  the  south  to  the  north, 
wholly  separated  from  each  other,  written 
by  different  authors  of  the  best  characters, 
both  for  knowledge  and  integrity,  possessing 
the  best  means  of  information,  at  various 
and  distant  times,  without  any  possible  com- 
munication with  each  other,  and  in  one  in- 
stance from  occular  and  sensible  demonstra- 
tion ;  written  on  the  spot  in  several  instances, 
with  the  relat^'rs  befon^  th^m — and  yet  sup- 
pose that  all  this  is  eith(  r  the  effect  of 
chance,  accident  or  design,  from  a  love  of 
the  marvellous  or  a  premeditated  ii.tet.tion 
of  deceiving,  and  thereby  ruining  their  own 
well  established  reputations  'I 

Charlevoix  was  a  clerg}n)an  of  character, 
who  was  with  the  indians  some  vears,  and 


APPENDIX,  IbU 

travelled  from  Canada  to  the  Mississippi  in 
that  early  day. 

Adair  lived  forty  years  entirely  domesti- 
cated with  the  southern  Indians,  and  was  a 
man  of  learning  and  great  observation.  Just 
before  the  revolutionary  war  he  brought  his 
manuscript  to  EHzabethtown,in  New  Jersey, 
to  William  Livingston,  Esq.  (a  neighbour  of 
the  writer)  to  have  it  examined  and  cor- 
rected, which  was  prevented  by  the  troubles 
of  a  political  nature,  just  breaking  out.  The 
Rev.  Mr.  Brainerd  was  a  man  of  remarkable 
piety,  and  a  missionary  with  the  Crosweek 
Indians  to  his  death.  Dr.  Edwards  was 
eminent  for  his  piety  and  learning,  and  was 
intimately  acquainted  with  the  Indians  from 
his  youth.  Dr.  Beatty  was  a  clergyman  of 
note  and  established  character.  Bartram 
was  a  man  well  known  to  the  writer,  and 
travelled  (he  country  of  the  southern  Indians 
as  a  bontanist,  and  was  a  man  of  considera- 
ble discenunent,  and  had  great  means  of 
kiiowledge  ;  and  M'Kenzie,  in  the  employ- 
ment of  the  northwest  compatiy,  an  old 
trader,  and  the  first  adventurous  explorer  of 
the  country,  from  the  lake  of  the  woods  to 
the  southern  ocean. 

It  is  now  asked,  continues  Mr.  Boudinot, 
can  any  one  carefully  and  with  deep  reflec- 
tion codsider  and  compare  these  traditions 
with  the  history  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel, 
l5 


190  APPENDIX. 

and  the  late  discoveries  of  the  Russians, 
Capt.  Cook  and  others,  in  and  abotit  the 
peninsula  of  Kamschatka  and  the  northeast 
coast  of  Asia  and  the  opposite  shores  of 
America,  of  which  httle  was  before  known 
by  any  civilized  nation,  without  at  least 
drawing  strong  presumptive  inferences,  in 
favour  of  these  wandering  nations  being  de- 
scended from  some  oriental  nation  of  the  old 
world,  and  most  probably,  all  things  con- 
sidered, being  the  lost  trioes  of  Israel. 

Let  us  look  into  the  late  discoveries,  and 
-compare  them  with  the  indian  traditions. 

Kamschatka  is  a  large  peniiisula  on  the 
north  eastern  part  of  Asia — It  is  a  moun- 
tainous country,  lying  between  titty-one 
and  sixty-two  degrees  of  north  latitude,  and 
of  course  a  wery  coid  and  frozen  climate. 
No  crrain  can  be  rais<^d  there,  though  some 
vegetabh-s  are.  Skins  and  furs  are  their 
chief  exports.  The  natives  are  wWd  as  the 
country  itself,  and  live  on  fish  and  sea  ani- 
mals, with  their  rein  deer.  i'he  islanci-  in 
this  sea.  which  separate  it  from  the  north- 
west coast  of  Ameri(  a,  are  so  numerous  that 
the  existence  of  an  almost  continued  chain 
of  them  between  the  two  continents  is  now 
rendered  extremely  probable.  The  {>rnicipal 
of  them  are  the  Kurile  Islands,  those  called 
Bherings  and  Copper  IslaFiHs.  the  Aleutian 
Islands,  and  Fox  Islands.     Copper   Island. 


APPENDIX.  191 

T which  hes  in  fifty- four  degrees  north,  and  in 
fuli  si^ht  of  Bhering's  Island,  habits  name 
from    the  great  quantities  of  copper  with 
^  which  the  northeast  coast  of  it  abounds.   Mr. 
V  Grieve's   history.     It  is   washed   up  by  the 
•  sea.  and  covers  the  shores  in  such  abundance, 
-.  that  many  ships  might  be  loaded  with  it  very 
easily.     Thes«'   islands   are   snbjei  t  to  con- 
tinual €iarthquakes.  and  abound  in  sulphur. 
Alaska  is  one  of  the  most  eastwardly  islands, 
and  probably  is  not  far  from   the    American 
coast.      The  snow  lies  on   thes€   islands  till 

-  March,  and  the  sea  is  tilled  with  ice  in  win- 
ter. There  is  little  or  no  wood  growing  in 
any  part  of  the  country,  and  the  inhabitants 
h've  in  holes  dug  in  the  earth.  Their  greatest 
delicacies  are  wild  lily  and  other  roots  and 
berries,  with  fish  and  other  sea  animals. 
The  distance  between   the   most   northeast- 

-  wardly  part  of  Asia  and  the  northwest  coast 
of  America,  is  determined  by  the  famous 
navigator  Capt.  Cook,  not  to  exceed  thirty- 
nine  miles.  These  straits  are  often  fiiled 
with  ice,  even  in  summer,  and  frozen  in 
winter,  and  by  that  means  might  become  a 
safe  passage  for  the  most  numerous  host  to 
pass  over  in  safety,  though  these  continents 
had  never  been  once  Joined,  or  at  a  much 
less  distance  than  at  present.  The  sea  from 
the  south  of  Bhering's  Straits  to  the  islands, 

^  between  the  two  continents,  is  very  shallow 


192  APPENDIX. 

From  the  frequent  volcanoes  that  are  con- 
tinually happening,  it  is  probable,  not  only 
that  there  has  been  a  separation  of  the  con- 
tinent at  Bhenng's  Straits,  but  that  the  whole 
space  from  the  island  to  that  small  opening 
was  once  filled  up  by  land  ;  but  that  it  had 
by  the  force  and  fury  of  the  waters,  perhaps 
actuateu  bv  tire,  beeii  totally  sunk  and  de- 
stroyed, and  the  islands  left  in  its  room. 
Neither  is  it  improbible  that  the  tirst  passage 
of  the  sea  wu--  rtuich  -mailer  than  at  present, 
and  that  it  is  widening  yearly,  and  perhaps 
many  small  islands  that  existed  at  the  tirst 
separatiotj  of  the  continents,  have  sunk  or 
otherwise  have  been  destroyed.  These 
changes  are  manifest  in  almost  every 
country. 

Monsieur  Le  Page  du  Pratz,  in  his  2d. 
vol.  of  his  History  of  Louisiana,  page  120, 
informs  us,  that  being  exceedingly  desirous 
to  be  informed  of  the  origin  of  the  indian 
natives,  made  every  enquiry  in  his  power, 
especially  of  the  nation  of  the  Natchez,  one 
of  the  most  intelligent  among  them.  All  he 
could  learn  from  them  was,  that  they  came 
from  between  the  north  and  the  sun  setting — 
being  no  way  satislied  with  this,  he  sought 
for  one  who  bore  the  character  of  one  of 
iheir  wisest  men.  He  was  happy  enough  to 
discover  one  named  Moneachtape.  among 
the  Yazons.  a  nation   about   forty  leagues  j 


tslPpejsdix.  193 

iVoni  the  Natchez.  This  man  was  remarka- 
ble for  his  sohd  understanding  and  elevation 
of  sentiment,  and  his  name  was  given  to  him 
by  his  nation  as  expressive  of  the  man — 
meaning  "  killer  of  pain  and  fatigue, ^"^  His 
eager  desire  was  to  see  the  country  from 
whence  his  forefathers  came — he  obtained 
directions  and  set  off.  He  went  up  the  Mis- 
souri, whence  he  staid  a  long  time,  to  learn 
the  different  languages  of  the  nations  he  was 
to  pass  through.  After  long  travelling  he 
came  to  the  nation  of  the  Otters,  and  by 
them  was  directed  on  his  way,  till  he  reached 
the  southern  ocean.  Aft.r  being  some  time 
with  the  nations  on  the  shores  of  the  great 
sea,  he  proposed  to  proceed  on  his  journey, 
and  joined  him5elf  to  some  people  who  in- 
habited more  westwardly  on  the  coast.  They 
travelled  a  great  way  between  the  north  and 
the  sun  setting,  when  they  arrived  at  the 
village  o^  his  fellow  travellers,  where  he 
found  t>ie  days  long  and  the  nights  short. 
He  ^as  here  advised  to  give  over  all  thoughts 
of  continuing  his  journey.  They  told  him 
•'  that  the  land  extended  still  a  long  way  in 
the  direction  aforesaid,  after  which  it  ran 
directly  west,  and  at  length  was  cut  by  the 
great  water  from  north  to  south.  One  of 
them  added,  that  when  he  was  young  he 
knew  a  very  old  man,  who  had  seen  that 
distant  land  before  it  was  eat  away  by  the 


194  APPENDIX. 

great  water  \  and  when  the  great  water  was 
low,    many   rocks   still  appeared   in   those* 
parts."     Moneachtape   took   their    advice, 
and  returned  home  after  an  absence  of  five 
years. 

This  account  given  to  Du  Pratz,  in  the 
year  1720,  confirms  the  idea  of  the  narrow 
passage  at  Kamschatka,  and  the  probability 
that  the  continents  once  joined. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  people,  especially 
the  Kamschatkians,  in  their  marches,  never 
go  but  in  indiaii  file,  following  one  another 
in  the  same  track.  Some  of  the  nations  in 
this  quarter,  prick  their  flfsh  with  small 
punctures  with  a  needle  in  various  shapes, 
theij  rub  into  them  charcoal,  blue  liquid  or 
some  other  colour,  so  a«  to  make  the  marks 
to  become  indelible,  after  the  manner  of  the 
more  eastern  nations. 

Bishop  Lowth,  in  his  notes  on  the  16th 
verse  of  the  xlixth  chapter  of  Isaiah,  says, 
"  this  is  certainly  an  allusion  to  some  prac- 
tice common  among  the  Jews  at  that  time, 
of  making  marks  on  their  hands  and  arms  by 
punctures  on  the  skin,  with  some  sort  of 
sign  or  representation  of  the  city  or  temple, 
to  shew  their  affection  and  zeal  for  it.  They 
had  a  method  of  making  such  punctures  in- 
dellible  by  fire  or  staining — and  this  art  is 
practiced  by  travelling  Jews  all  over  the 


APXENDIX,  195 

world  at  this  day — Vid.  also  his  note  on 
chap.  xlv.  5th  verse. 

Thus  it  is  with  our  northern  indians  ;  they 
always  go  in  indian  file,  and  mark  their  flesh 
just  as  above  represented. 

The  writer  of  this  has  seen  an  aged 
christian  indian  Sachem,  of  good  character, 
who  sat  for  his  portrait.  On  stripping  his 
neck  to  the  lower  part  of  his  breast,  it  ap- 
peared that  the  whole  was  marked  with  a 
deep  blueish  colour  in  various  figures,  very 
discernablc.  On  being  asked  the  reason  of 
it,  h(^  answered,  with  a  heavy  sigh,  that  it 
was  one  of  the  follies  of  his  }outh,  when  he 
was  a  great  warrior,  before  his  conversion 
to  Christianity ;  and  now,  says  he,  I  must 
bear  it,  as  a  punishment  for  my  folly,  and 
carry  the  marks  of  it  to  my  grave. 

The  people  of  Siberia  made  canoes  of 
birch  bark,  distended  over  ribs  of  wood, 
nicely  sewed  together.  The  writer  has 
seen  this  exactly  imitated  by  the  indians  on 
the  river  St.  Lawrence,  and  it  is  universally 
the  case  on  the  lakes.  Col.  John  Smith 
says,  "  at  length  we  all  embarked  in  a  large 
birch  bark  canoe.  This  vessel  was  about 
four  feet  wide  and  three  feet  deep,  and  about 
thirty-five  feet  long;  and  though  it  could 
carry  a  heavy  burthen,  it  was  so  artfully  and 
curiously  constructed,  that  four  men  could 
carry  it  several    miles,    from    one    landing 


196  APPENDIX. 

place  to  another  ;  or  from  the  waters  of  the 
lakes  to  the  waters  of  the  Ohio.  At  night 
they  carry  it  on  the  land,  and  invert  it,  or 
turn  it  bottom  up,  and  convert  it  into  a 
dwelling:-house." 

It  also  appears  from  the  history  of  Kam- 
schatka  written  by  James  Grieve,  that  in 
the  latediscoveries,  the  islands  which  t^xtend 
from  the  south  point  of  Knmschatka,  amount 
to  thirty-one  or  thirty-two.  That  on  these 
islands  are  high  mountains,  and  many  of 
them  smoking  volcanoes.  That  the  pas- 
sages between  them,  except  in  one  or  two 
instances,  were  but  one  or  two  days  row,  at 
the  time  of  the  author^  writing  that  history. 
They  are  liable  to  terrible  inundations  and 
earthquakes. 

The  following  is  collected  from  Mr.  Stel» 
ler's  journal,  as  recorded  in  the  above  his- 
tory : — "  The  main  land  of  America  lies 
parallel  with  the  coast  of  Kamschatka.  inso- 
much that  it  may  reasonably  be  concluded 
that  these  lands  once  joined,  especially  at 
the  Techukotskoi  Noss,  or  Cape  le  offers 
reasons  to  prove  it :  1st.  The  appearance 
of  both  coasts,  which  appear  to  be  torn 
asunder.  2d.  Many  capes  project  into  the 
sea  from  thirty  to  sixty  versts.  3d.  Many 
islands  are  in  the  sea  which  divides  Kam- 
schatka from  America.  4th.  The  situation 
of  the  Islands,  and  the  breadth  of  that  sea. 


Ai'i'EMUX.  19.7 

The  sea  is  full  of  islands,  which  extend  fronj 
the  northwest  point  of  America  to  the  chan- 
nel of  Anianova.  One  follows  another,  as 
the  Keruloski  islands  do  at  Japan.  The 
American  coast  at  sixty  degrees  of  north 
latitude,  is  covered  with  wood ;  but  at  Kam- 
schatka,  which  is  only  tifty-one  degrees, 
there  is  none  for  near  fifty  versts  from  the 
sea,  and  at  sixty-two  not  one  tree  is  to  be 
found.  It  is  known  also,  that  the  fish  enter 
the  rivers  on  the  American  coast,  earhef 
than  they  do  in  the  rivers  of  Kamschatka, 
There  are  also  raspberries,  of  a  large  size 
and  tine  taste,  besides  ho-  y  suckles,  cran- 
berries and  black-berries  in  great  plenty. 
In  the  sea  there  are  seals,  sea-beavers, 
whales  and  dog-fish.  In  the  country  and  in 
the  rivers  on  the  American  coast,  red  and 
black  foxes,  swans,  ducks,  quails,  plover,  and 
ten  kinds  of  birds  not  known  in  Europe. 
These  particulars  may  help  to  answer  the 
question,  whence  was  America  peopled  ;  for 
though  we  should  grant  that  the  two  conti- 
nents never  were  joined,  yet  they  lie  so  near 
to  each  other,  that  the  possrbility  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Asia  going  over  to  America, 
especially  considering  the  number  of  the 
islands,  and  the  coldness  of  the  climate, 
cannot  be  denied.  From  Bhcring's  Island, 
on  its  high  mountains,  you  can  see  mountains 
covered  with  snow,  that  appear  to  be  capes 


198  APPENDIX. 

of  the  main  land  of  America.  From  all 
which  it  appears  clearly,  here  was  a  proba- 
ble mean  of  a  people  passing  from  Asia  to 
America,  either  on  the  main  land  before  a 
separation,  or  from  island  to  inland  ;  or  on 
tbe  ice  after  a  separation,  by  which  the  con- 
tinent of  America  might  have  been  peopled, 
by  the  tribes  of  Israel  wandering  north-east, 
and  directed  by  the  unseen  hand  of  Provi- 
dence, and  thus  they  entered  into  a  country 
wherein  mankind  never  before  dwelt. 

It  is  not  presumed  that  the  ten  tribes  of 
Israel  alone  did  this.  Many  of  the  inhabi- 
tants might  have  gone  with  them  from  Tar- 
tary  or  Scythia ;  and  particularly  the  old 
inhabitants  of  Damascus,  who  were  carried 
away  in  the  tirst  place  by  Tiglah  Pilnezer, 
before  his  conquest  of  the  Israelites,  and 
were  their  neighbours,  and  perhaps  as  much 
dissatisfied  with  their  place  of  banishment, 
though  for  diiferent  reasons,  as  the  Israelites, 
as  well  as  from  Kamschatka,  on  their  way 
where  they  were  stopped  some  time,  as  the 
Egyptians  did  with  the  Israelites  of  old. 
And  indeed  it  is  not  improbable,  as  has  be- 
fore been  hinted,  that  some  few  of  other 
nations,  who  traded  on  the  seas,  might,  in  so 
long  a  course  of  time,  have  been  driven  by 
stress  of  weather,  and  reached  the  Atlantic 
shores  at  diflercnt  places  ;  but  the  great  body 
of   people    settling    in    North   and    Soutl^ 


APPENDIX.  199 

America,  must  have  originated  from  the 
same  source. 

Hence  it  would  not  be  surprising  to  find 
among  their  descendants,  a  mixture  of  the 
Asiatic  languages,  manners,  customs  and 
peculiarities.  Nay,  it  would  appear  rather 
extraordinary  and  unaccountable  if  this  was 
not  so.  And  if  we  should  tind  this  to  be  the 
case,  it  would  greatly  corroborate  the  fact 
of  their  having  passed  into  America  from 
the  north-east  point  of  Asia,  according  to  the 
indian  tradition.  We,  at  the  present  day, 
can  hardly  conceive  of  the  facility  with 
which  these  wandering  northern  nations  re- 
moved from  one  part  of  the  country  to  the 
other.  The  Tartars  at  this  time,  who  pos- 
sess that  northern  country,  hve  in  tents  or 
covered  carts,  and  wander  from  place  to 
place  in  search  of  pasture,  &c. 

The  general  character,  manners,  habits, 
and  customs  of  the  indians  have  been  very 
generally  misrepresented.  It  is  quite  cer- 
tain, that  at  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  this 
continent  by  Colombus,  it  was  peopled  by- 
some  thousands  of  tribes,  scaitered  from  the 
coast  opposite  Kamschatka  to  Hudson's  Bay. 
Their  exact  number  has  never  been  ascer- 
tained, and  at  this  time  it  is  impossible — 
generation  after  generation,  and  tribe  after 
tribe  have  gone  down  to  the  grave,  and  of 
^ome  great  and  powerful  nations,  there  is 

M 


30jO  AFFE.SDIX, 

not  a  solitary  survivor  left.  It  seems  as  it 
the  destroying  angel  had  passed  over  the 
country,  and  that  the  numerous  and  happy 
natives  had  looked  on  him  and  died.  Mr. 
Boudinot  mentions  one  hundred  and  ninety 
different  nations  each  having  a  king  and 
sachem, 

"  Du  Pratz,  in  his  History  of  Louisiana, 
(1  vol.  108 — 123)  gives  an  account  of  the 
single  nation  of  the  Padoucas,  lying  west  by 
north-west  of  the  Missouri,  in  1724,  which 
may  give  a  faint  idea  of  the  numbers  origi- 
nally inhabiting|this  vast  continent.  He  says, 
"  the  nations  of  the  Paduca's  is  very  nume- 
rous, extends  almost  two  hundred  leagues, 
and  they  have  villages  quite  close  to  the 
Spaniards  of  New  Mexico."  "  They  are  not 
to  be  considered  as  a  wandering  nation, 
though  employed  in  hunting,  summer  and 
winter — page  121.  Seeing  they  have  large 
villages,  consisting  of  a  great  number  of 
cabins,  which  contain  very  numerous  fami- 
lies. These  are  permanent  abodes ;  from 
which  one  hundred  hunters  set  out  at  a  time 
with  their  horses,  their  bows  and  a  good 
stock  of  arrows."  "  The  village  where  we 
were,  consisted  of  one  hundred  and  forty 
huts,  containing  about  eight  hundred  war- 
riors, fifteen  hundred  women,  and  at  least 
two  thousand,  children,  some  Padoucas 
having  four  wives." — page    124.      ^'  The 


APPENDIX.  .  201 

natives  of  North-America  derive  their  origin 
from  the  same  country,  since  at  bottom  they 
all  have  the  same  manners  and  usages,  as- 
also  the  same  manner  of  speaking  and 
thinking.'' 

'  "  Mr.  Jefferson,  late  President  of  the 
United  States,  in  his  Notes  on  Virginia,  has 
also  given  much  useful  information  to  the 
world  on  several  important  subjects  relating 
to  America,  and  among  others,  as  to  the 
numbers  of  the  Indians  in  that  then  dominion. 
Speaking  of  the  indian  confederacy  of  the 
warriors,  or  rather  nations,  in  that  state  and 
its  neighbourhood,  called  "  the  Powhatan 
confederacy,"  says,  it  contained  in  point  of 
territory,  as  he  supposes,  of  their  patrimonial 
country  "  about  three  hundred  miles  in 
length,  and.one  hundred  in  breadth.  That 
there  was  about  one  inhabitant  for  every 
square  mile,  and  the  proportion  of  warriors 
to  the  whole  number  of  inhabitaiit.^,  was  as . 
three  to  ten,  making  the  number  of  souls 
about  thirty  thousand." 

"  Some  writers  state  (he  number  of  their 
warriors  at  the  first  coming  of  the  Europeans 
to  Virginia,  to  be  fifteen  thousand,  and  their 
population  fifty  thousand.  La  Houtan  says 
that  each  village  contained  about  fourteen 
thousand  souls,  that  is,  fifteen  hundred  that 
liorearms,  two  thousand  supcranuated  men, 
mn  thousand  women,  two  thousand  maids, 
m5  ' 


20'2  Al'PtNDIX. 

and  four  thousand  five  hundred  children* 
From  all  which,  it  is  but  a  moderate  esti- 
mate to  suppose  that  there  were  six  hundred 
thou-and  fi;ihting  men,  or  w^arriors,  on  this 
continent  at  its  first  discover}. 

"  In  1677,  Col.  Course),  an  agent  for  Vir- 
^ginia.  had  a  conference  w'ith  the  Five  Na- 
tions, at  Albany.  The  number  of  warriors 
was  estimated  at  that  time  in  those  nations 
at  the  following  rate.  Mohawks  4hree  hun- 
dred, Oneidas  two  hunslred,  Onondagoes 
three  Imndred  and  fifty.  Cayugas  three  hun- 
dred. Senecas  one  thousand — total  tw^o 
thousand  one  hundred  and  fifty,  which 
makes  the  population  about  seven  thousand 
two  hundred.  Vide  Chalmer's  Political 
Annals,  GOG. 

"  Smith,  in  his  History  of  New- York,  say^ 
that  in  1756,  the  number  of  fighting  meii 
were  about  twelve  hundred. 

"  Douglass,  in  his  History  of  Massachu- 
setts, says  that  they  were  about  fifteen  hun- 
dred in  1760. 

"In  1764,  Col.  Boquet  states  the  whole 
number  of  the  inhabitants  (he  must  mean 
fighting  men)  at  fifteen  hundred  and  fifty. 

"  Captain  Hutchins,  in  1768,  states  ihcm 
at  two  thousand  one  hundred  and  twenty, 
and  Dodixe,  an  indian  trader,  in  1779,  at 
sixteen  hundred,  in  the  third  year  of  the 
American  revolutionarv  war.   Manv  reasons 


.,     APPENDIX.  203 

■nay  be  assigned  for  the  above  differences — 
some  may  have  staid  at  home  for  the  de- 
fence of  their  towns — some  might  be  absent 
treating  on  disputes  with  their  neighbours, 
or  sickness,  &c.  &;c. 

"  During  the  above  war,  in  1776 — 7,  the 
British  had  in  their  service,  according  to  the 
returns  of  their  agent — Mohawks  three  hun- 
dred, Ojieidas  one  hundred  and  fifty,  Tus- 
caroras  two  hundred,  Onondagoes  three 
hundred,  Cayugas  two  hundred  and  thirty, 
Senecas  four  hundred — In  the  whole  fifteen 
hundred  and  eighty.  The  Americans  had 
about  two  hundred  and  twenty,  making  up 
eighteen  hundred  warriors,  equal  to  about 
six  thousand  souls. 

'■In  1783,  Mr.  Kirkland,  missionary  to 
the  Oneidas,  estimated  the  number  of  the 
Seneca  warriors  at  six  hundred,  and  the 
total  number  of  the  Six  Nations,  at  more 
than  four  thousand. 

"  In  1790,  he  made  the  whole  number  of 
indian  inhabitants  then  remaining,  including 
in  addition,  those  who  reside  on  Grand  River, 
in  Canada,  and  the  Stockbridge  and  Brother- 
town  indians.  to  be  six  thousand  three  hun- 
dred and  thirty. 

In  1794,  the  Six  Nations  numbered  seven 
thousand  one  hundred  and  forty-eight  souls. 
But  what  are  these  to  the  Southern  In- 
dians^ and  especially  those  of  Mexico  and 
m8 


204  AFPENiilX. 

Peru.  Twill  ojiv^e  one  example.  Mons.  Le 
Page  Du  Pratz,  in  his  History  of  Louisiana, 
written  about  the  year  1730,  assures  us, 
"  that  the  nation  of  the  Natchez,  from  whom 
the  town  of  that  name  on  the  Mississippi  is 
called,  were  the  most  powerful  nation  in 
North  America — 2  vol.  146.  "They  ex- 
tended from  the  river  Manchas  or  Iberville, 
which  is  about  fifty  leagues  from  the  sea,  to 
the  river  Wabash,  which  is  about  four  hun- 
dred and  sixty  leagues  from  the  sea,  and 
that  they  had  five  hundred  Sachems  in  the 
nation."*  He  further  says,  "  that  the  Chat- 
kas  or  Flat-heads,  near  the  river  Pacha 
Ogulas,  had  twenty-five  thousand  warriors, 
but  in  which  number,  he  supposes  many 
were  reckoned  who  had  but  a  slight  title  to 
that  name — Page  1 40. 

A  distinguishing  trait  in  the  character  of 
the  aborigines,  is  that  of  unbounded  hos- 
pitality. Mr.  Bartram.  who  knew  the  Semi- 
nole indians  well,  as  he  travelled  among 
them  considerably,  says  that  they  possess  a 
vast  territory,  all  Rast  Florida,  a-nd  the 
greatest  part  of  West  Florida,  which  being 
naturally  cut  and  divided  into  thousands  of 
islets,  knolls,  and  eminences,  by  the  innume- 
rable rivers,  lakes,  swamps,  savannas  and 
ponds,  form  so  many  secure  retreats  and 
temporary  dwelling  places,  that  effectually 
guard  them  from  any  sudden  invasion  or 


APPENDIX.  105 

attacks  from  their  enemies.  And  being  such 
a  swampy,  hammoky  country,  furnishes  such 
a  plenty  and  variety  of  supphes  for  the 
nourishment  of  every  sort  of  animal,  that  I 
can  venture  to  assert,  that  no  part  of  the 
globe  so  abounds  with  wild  game  or  crea- 
tures tit  for  the  food  of  man.  Tlius  they 
enjoy  a  superabundance  of  the  necf^ssities 
and  conveniences  of  life  with  the  security  of 
person  <\i\d  property,  the  two  great  concerns 
of  mankind.  They  seem  to  be  {ret;  from 
want  or  desires.  No  cruel  enemy  to  dread  ; 
nothing,  to  give  them  disquietude  but  the 
gradual  encroachments  of  the  white  people. 
Th'.is  contented  and  undisturbed,  they  ap- 
pear as  blithe  and  free  as  the  birds  of  the 
air,  and  like  them  as  volatile  and  active, 
tuneful  and  vociferous.  The  visage,  action, 
and  deportment  of  a  Se-.ninole,  being  the 
most  slriknig  picture  of  happiness  in  this 
life — Joy,  coitentmcitt,  love  and  friendship 
without  guile  or  atfectation,  seem  inherent 
in  them,  or  predominate  in  their  vital  prin- 
ciple, for  it  leaves  thca  but  with  the  last 
breath  of  life. 

To  exemplify  their  kindness  to  strangers, 
he  says,  ''that  ha\ing  lost  his  way  in  tra- 
velliri*:  throuiih  their  towns,  he  was  at  a 
stand  how  to  proceed,  when  he  obser\  ed  an 
Indian  man  at  the  door  of  his  habitation, 
?3eckoning  to  him,  to  come  to  him.  Bar- 
Mi 


206  APPENIDX. 

tram  accordingly  rode  up  to  him.  He  cheer^ 
fully  welcomed  him  to  his  house,  took  care 
of  his  horse,  and  with  the  most  graceful  air 
of  respect  led  him  into  an  airy,  cool  apart- 
ment, where  being  seated  on  cabins,  his 
women  brought  in  a  refreshing  repast,  with 
a  pleasant  cool  liquor  to  drink — the?;  pipes 
and  tobacco.  After  ir*  hour's  conver-^aiion, 
and  Mr.  Bartram  informing  him  of  his  busi- 
ness, and  where  he  war^  bound,  but  having 
lost  his  way,  he  did  not  know  how  to  go  on. 
The  indian  cheerfully  replied,  that  he  was 
pleased  that  Mr.  B.  was  come  into  their 
country,  where  he  should  meet  with  friend- 
ship and  protection  ;  and  that  he  would  him- 
self lead  him  into  the  right  path.  He  turned 
out  to  be  the  prince  or  chief  of  Whatoga. 
How  long  would  an  indian  have  rode  through 
our  country,  before  he  would  have  received 
such  kindness  from  a  common  farmer,  much 
less  a  chief  magistrate  of  a  country  ?  Mr. 
Bartram  adds  to  the  testimony  of  Father 
Charlevoix,  in  favour  of  their  good  charac- 
ters among  themselves.  He  says  they  are 
just,  honest,  liberable  and  hospitable  to 
strangers  ;  considerate,  loving  and  affec- 
tionate to  their  wives  and  relations  ;  fond  of 
their  children  ;  frugal  and  persevering  ; 
charitable  and  forbearing.  He  was  weeks 
and  months  among  them  in  their  towns,  and 
never  observed  the  least  siiin  of  contention 


APPENDIX.  207 

or  wranglino; ;  never  saw  an  instance  of  an 
indian  beating  his  wife,  or  even  reproving 
her  in  an^ier." 

Col.  John  Smith  says,  "when  we  had 
plenty  of  screen  corn  and  roasting  ears,  the 
hunters  beca^ne  lazy,  and  spetit  their  time 
in  singing  and  danciivg.  Thev  appeared  to 
be  fulnlling  the  scriptnres,  beyond  many  of 
those  'vho  profess  to  beheve  them,  in  that  of 
takina;  no  thought  for  to-morrow,  but  in 
living  in  love,  peace  and  friendship,  without 
disputes.  In  this  last  respect  they  are  an 
example  to  those  who  [>rofess  Christianity — 
page  29. 

"  As  the  Israelites  were  divided  into 
tribes,  and  had  a  chief  over  them,  and 
always  marched  under  t-nsigns  of  some  ani- 
mal peculiar  to  each  tribe  so  the  indian 
nations  are  universaiiv  diviiled  into  tribes, 
under  a  sachem  >r  kmg,  chose  i  by  the  peo- 
ple fro  n  (he  widest  and  bravest  am.)n^  them. 
He  has  leith t  -nduf^ncn  or .  iistinction,  but 
fro^n  !iis  wis  lorn  a  :d  !)rn<ie  ice.  He  is  as- 
sisted bv  a  con  icil  of  old  wise,  and  benevo- 
lent men.,  a^  (hey  call  their  priests  and  coun- 
sellors. N[othin^;iis  deterinin.'d  (of  a  public 
iiarure)  but  in  this  council,  wh-'re  every  one 
has  an  eqtjal  voice.  The  chief -^r  sachem 
sits  in  tlie  middle,  and  the  council  on  each 
hand,  forming  a  semi-circle,  as  the  high 
m5 


*^06  APPENDIX. 

priest   of  the   Jews  did  in   the  Sanhedritit 
of  that  nation.*' 

Mr.  Penn,  when  he  first  arrived  in  Penn- 
sylvania, in  the  year  i  683,  and  made  a  treaty 
with  them,  makes  the  following  observations^ 
in  a  letter  he  then  wrote  to  his  friends  in 
England.  "  Every  king  has  his  council,  and 
that  consists  of  all  the  old  and  wise  men  ot 
his  nation,  which  perhaps  are  two  hundred 
people.  Nothing  of  moment  is  undertaken.^ 
be  it  war,  peace,  selling  of  land,  or  traffic, 
without  advising  with  them.  'Tis  admirable 
to  consider  how  powerful  the  chiefs  are,  and 
yet  how  they  move  by  the  breath  of  the 
people.  I  have  had  occasion  tp  %e  in  coun- 
cil with  them  upon  treaties  for  land,  and  to 
adjust  the  terms  of  trade.  Their  order  is 
thus  ;  the  king  sits  in  the  middle  of  an  half 
moon,  and  hath  his  council,  the  old  and  wise 
on  each  hand.  Behind  them,  at  a  little  dis- 
tance, sit  the  young  fry,  in  the  same  figure. 
Having  consulted  and  resolved  their  busi- 
ness, the  king  ordered  one  of  them  to  speak 
to  me.  He  came  to  me,  and  in  the  name  of 
his  king,  saluted  me.  Then  took  me  by  the 
hand,  and  told  me  that  he  was  ordered  by 
his  king  to  speak  to  me  ;  and  that  now  it 
was  not  he,  but  the  king  who  spoke,  because 
what  he  should  say  was  the  king's  mind. 
During  the  time  this  person  was  speaking, 
not  a  man  of  them  was  observed  to  whisper 


APPENDIX.  2Q9 

or  smile.  The  old  were  grave — the  young 
reverend  in  their  deportment.  They  spoke 
httle,  but  fervently  and  with  elegance.  He 
will  deserve  the  name  of  zoise,  who  out-wits 
them  in  any  treaty  about  a  thing  they  under- 
stand. At  every  sentence  they  shout,  and 
say  amen,  in  their  way." 

Mr.  Smith,  in  his  history  of  New  Jersey, 
confirms  this  general  statement.  '  They 
are  grave  even  to  sadness,  upon  any  com- 
mon, and  more  so  upon  serious  occasions — 
observant  of  those  in  company,  and  respect- 
ful to  the  aged — of  a  temper  cool  and  de- 
liberate— never  in  haste  to  speak,  but  wait, 
for  a  certai  ;ty,  that  the  person  who  spake 
before  thcL.,  nad  finished  all  he  had  to  say. 
They  seemed  to  hold  European  vivacity  in 
contempt,  because  they  found  such  as  came 
among  them,  apt  to  interrupt  each  other, 
and  frequently  speak  altogether.  Their 
behaviour  in  public  councils  was  strictly 
decent  and  instructive.  Every  one,  in  his 
turn,  according  to  rank  of  years  or  wisdom, 
or  services  to  his  country.  Not  a  word, 
whisper,  or  murmur,  was  heard  while  any 
one  spoke  :  no  interruption  to  commend  or 
condemn  :  the  younger  sort  were  totally 
silent.  Those  denominated  kings,  were 
sachems  distinguished  by  their  wisdom  and 
good  conduct.  The  respect  paid  them  was 
voluntary,  and  not  exacted   or  looked  for. 


*-ilO  APPENDIX. 

nor  the  omission  regarded.  The  sachems 
directed  in  their  councils,  and  had  the  cliief 
disposition  of  their  lands."" — page  14^1,  144. 
Every  rjation  of  indians  have  certain  cus- 
toms, which  they  observe  in  their  public 
transactions  with  other  nations,  and  in  their 
private  affairs  among  themselves,  which  is 
scandalous  for  any  one  among  them  not  to 
observe.  And  these  always  draw  after  them 
either  public  or  private  resentment,  when 
ever  they  are  broken.  Atlliough  these  cus- 
toms may,  in  their  detail,  diifer  in  o-ie  nation, 
when  compared  with  another  ;  yet  it  is  easy 
to  discern  that  they  have  all  had  one  origin. 
This  is  also  apparent  from  every  nation  un- 
derstanding them.  Mr.  Cokletj  says,  "their 
great  men,  both  sachems  and  captains,  arc 
generally  poorer  than  the  common  people  ; 
for  they  affect  to  give  way,  a;.d  distribute  all 
the  presents  or  plunder  they  get  in  their 
treaties  or  in  war.  so  as  to  leave  nothing  to 
themselves.  There  is  not  a  man  in  the 
ministry  of  the  Five  Nations  (of  whom  Mr. 
Colden  was  writing)  who  has  gained  his 
office  otherwise  than  by  merit.  There  is' 
not  the  least  salary,  or  any  sort  of  profit, 
annexed  to  any  olfue,  to  tem.pt  the  covetous 
or  the  sordid  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  (nery 
unwoitiiy  action  is  unavoidably  attended 
with  the  forfeiture  of  their  commission  ;  for 
their  authority  is   only  the  esteem   of  the 


APPENDIX.  *^11 

people,  and  ceases  the  moment  that  esteem 
is  lost.  An  old  Mohawk  sachem,  in  a  poor 
blanket  and  a  dirty  shirt,  may  be  seen  issuing 
his  orders,  with  as  arbitrary  an  authority  as 
a  Roman  dictator. 

"  As  every  nation,  as  before  observed,  has 
its  peculiar  standard  or  symbol,  as  an  eagle, 
a  bear,  a  wolf,  or  an  otter,  so  has  each  tribe 
the  like  badge,  from  which  it  is  denominated. 
When  they  encamp,  on  a  march,  they  always 
€ut  the  representation  of  their  ensign  or 
symbol,  on  the  trees,  by  which  it  may  be 
known  who  have  been  there.  The  sachem 
of  each  tribe  is  a  necessary  party  in  all  con- 
veyances and  treaties,  to  which  he  affixes 
the  mark  of  his  tribe,  as  a  corporation  does 
that  of  the  public  seaL 

"If  you  go  from  nation  to  nation,  you  will 
not  find  one  who  does  not  lineally  distinguish 
himself  by  his  respective  family.  As  the 
family  or  tribe  of  the  eagle,  panther,  (which 
is  their  lion)  tyger,  buffalo,  (their  ox  or  bull,) 
and  also  the  bear,  deer,  racoon,  &c.  &c. 
So  among  the  Jews,  was  the  lion  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah — Dan  was  known  by  a  serpent — 
Issachar  by  an  ass,  and  Benjamin  by  a  wolf. 
But  the  Indians,  as  the  Jews,  pay  no  re- 
ligious respect  for  any  of  these  animals,  or 
for  any  other  whatever. 

"  They  reckon  time  after  the  manner  of 
the  Hebrews.     They  divide  the  year  into 


212  APPENDIX, 

spring,  summer,  autumn,  or  the  falling  of  the 
leaf,  and  winter.  Korah  is  their  word  for 
winter  with  the  Cherokee  Indians,  as  it  is 
with  the  Hebrews.  They  number  the  years 
by  any  of  these  four  periods,  for  they  have 
no  name  for  a  year.  And  they  subdivide 
these,  and  count  the  year  by  lunar  months, 
or  moons,  like  the  Israehtes,  who  also 
counted  by  moons.  The >  call  the  sun  and 
moon  by  i:hp  sanie  word,  with  the  addition 
of  day  and  night,  as  the  day  sun,  or  moon — 
the  night  sun,  or  moon.  They  count  the 
day  by  three  sensible  difftrences  of  the  sun, 
like  the  Hebrews — as  the  sun  coming  out — 
mid-day,  and  the  sun  is  dead,  or  sunset. 
Midnight  is  half  wwy  between  the  sun  going 
in  and  coming  out  of  the  water — also  by 
ipid-night  and  cock-crowing.  They  begin 
their  ecclesiastical  year  at  the  first  appear- 
ance of  the  first  new  moon  of  the  vernal 
equinox,  according  to  the  ecclesiastical  year 
of  Moses.  They  pay  great  regard  to  the 
first  appearance  of  every  new  moon.  They 
name  the  various  seasons  of  the  year  from 
the  planting  and  ripening  of  the  fruits.  The 
green  eared  moon  is  the  most  beloved  or 
sacred,  when  the  first  fruits  become  shhc- 
tified,  by  bfing  annually  offered  up  ;  and 
from  this  period  they  count  their  beloved  or 
holy  things. 

The  greatest  act  of  hostility  towards  a 


APPENDIX.  )iVS 

nation  is  to  profane  the  graves  of  their  dead. 
If  one  of  their  nation  dies  at  a  distance,  they 
secure  the  body  from  birds  and  wild  beasts, 
and  whv^  i  they  ''  inva^ine  the  flesh  is  con- 
sumed, and  the  bones  dried,  they  return  to 
the  place,  bring  them  home,  and  inter  them 
in  a  very  solemn  manner.  The  Hebrews, 
in  like  manner,  carefully  buried  their  dead, 
but  on  any  accident,  they  gathered  their 
bones,  and  laid  them  in  the  tombs  of  their 
forefathers.  Thus  Jacob  "  cha/ged  his  sons, 
and  said  unto  them,  I  am  to  be  gathered 
unto  my  people,  bury  me  with  my  fathers, 
in  the  cave  that  is  in  the  field  of  Ephron  the 
Hittite."  This  was  in  Canaan.  "  There 
they  buried  Abraham  and  Sarah  his  wife  ; 
there  they  buried  Isaac  and  Rebeckah  his 
wife;  and  there  1  buried  Leah."  "And 
Joseph  took  an  oath  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  saying,  God  will  surely  visit  you,  and 
ye  shall  carry  my  bones  from  hence."  "  And 
Moses  took  the  bones  of  Joseph  with  him."* 
"  And  the  bones  of  Joseph,  which  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  brought  up  out  of  Egypt, 
buried  they  in  Shechem,"  as  above  men- 
tioned.— Joshua  xxiv.  32.  The  Jews  buried 
near  their  cities,  and  sometimes  opposite  to 
their  houses,  implying  a  silent  lesson  of 
friendship,  and  a  caution  to  live  well.  They 

"  Gen.  xlix.  29,  31—1.  2.5— Exod.  xiii.  F». 


'iH  APPENDIX. 

buried  families  together;  but  strangers  apart 
by  themselves. 

When  an  old  indian  finds  that  it  is  proba- 
ble that  he  must  die,  he  sends  for  his 
friends,  a')d  with  them  collects  his  children 
and  family  around  him;  and  then,  with  the 
greatest  camposure,  he  addrr>:se'  them  in 
the  most  affectionate  manner,  giving  them 
his  last  council,  and  advising  th'-m  to  such 
conduGt  as  he  thinks  for  their  best  interests. 
So  did  the  patriarchs  of  old,  and  the  indians 
seem  to  follow  their  steps,  and  with  as  much 
coolness  as  Jacob  did  to  his  children,  when 
he  was  about  to  die. 

A  very  worthy  clergyman,  with  whom  the 
writer  was  well  acquainted,  and  who  had 
long  preached  to  the  indians,  informed  him, 
that  many  years  ago,  having  preached  in  the 
morning  to  a  considerable  number  of  them, 
in  the  recess  between  the  morning  and  after- 
noon services,  news  was  suddenly  brought, 
that  the  son  of  an  indian  woman,  one  of  the 
congregation  then  present,  had  fallen  into 
a  mill-dam,  and  was  drowned.  Immediately 
the  disconsolate  mother  retired  to  some 
distance  in  deep  distress,  and  sat  down  on 
the  ground.  Her  female  friends  soon  fol- 
lowed her,  and  placed  themselves  in  like 
manner  around  her,  in  a  circle  at  a  small 
distance.  They  continued  a  considerable 
time  in  profound   and  melancholy  silence. 


except  now  and  then  uttering  a  deep  groan. 
All  at  once  the  mother  putting  her  hand  on 
her  mouth,  fell  with  her  face  flat  on  the 
ground,  her  hand  continuing  on  her  mouth. 
This  was  followed,  in  like  manner,  by  all 
the  rest,  when  all  cried  out  with  the  most 
melancholy  and  dismal  yellings  and  groan- 
ings.  Thus  they  continued,  with  their  hands 
on  their  mouths,  and  their  mouths  in  the 
dust  a  considerable  time.  The  men  also 
retired  to  a  distance  from  them,  and  went 
through  the  same  ceremony,  making  the 
most  dismal  groanings  and  yellings. 

Need  any  reader  be  reminded  of  the 
Jewish  customs  on  occasions  of  deep  humi- 
liation, as  in  Job  21  and  5 — Mark  me  and 
be  astonished,  and  lay  your  hand  on  your 
mouth.  29  and  9— The  princes  refrained 
talking,  and  laid  their  hands  on  their  mouths. 
49  and  4 — Behold  !  I  am  vile,  what  shall  I 
answer  thee  ?  I  will  lay  my  hand  on  my 
mouth.  Micah  7  and  16 — The  nations  shall 
see  and  be  confounded  ;  they  shall  lay  their 
hands  on  their  mouth.  Lament.  3  and  7 — 
He  putteth  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  if  so  be, 
there  may  be  hope.  Prov.  30  and  32 — If 
thou  hast  throught  evil,  lay  thine  hand  upon 
thine  mouth. 

Tha  Choktaw  Indians  hire  mourners  to 
magnify  the  merit  and  loss  of  the  dead,  and 
if  their  tears  do  not  flow,  their  shrill  voices 


'416  APPEN1>IX, 

will  be  heard  to  cry,  which  answers  thq 
solemn  chorus  much  better.  However,  some 
of  them  have  the  art  of  shedding  tears  abun- 
dantly, Jerem.  ix.  chap.  17,  19 — Thus 
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  consider  ye,  and 
call  for  the  mourning  women,  that  they  may 
come,  and  send  for  cunning  women,  that 
they  may  come,  for  a  voice  of  wailing  i§ 
heard,  &c. 


THE    END, 


It; 


i%