Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



\ 







HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



Preservation facsimile 

printed on alkaline/buffered paper 

and bound by 

Acme Bookbinding 

Charlestown, Massachusetts 

2004 



APOLLONIUS OF PEEGA 



TREATISE ON CONIC SECTIONS. 



ftonlM: C. J. CLA7 AND SONS, 
CAMBBIDGB UNIVBBSITT PBBSS WABBHOUSB, 

AVB MABIA LANS. 
•iMfrts: fn, ASOTLB 8T&BBT. 




Ednif : F. A. BR0CKHAU8. 
IMiVorfc: MAOMILLAN AND 00. 




jariftippiis ^hl((/aphuj SnxmUcus, naidragto cam ejectui adyUwdw^pum 

Utu-s animadi/erwil Ganrutrua Jcnefiata d^cripta, &xdjima/\»^ od. 

co^nitcs ixa dicitur. Bene (peremtw, Hominum enim veiligia video. 



J 



APOLLONIUS OF PEEGA 



TEEATISE ON CONIC SECTIONS 



EDITED IN MODERN NOTATION 

WITH INTRODUCTIONS INCLUDING AN ESSAY ON 
THE EARLIER HISTORY OF THE SUBJECT 



BY 

T. L. HEATH, M.A. 

lOIOBTnCS FBLLOW OF TBINITT OOLLKOB, CA1CBRII>0B. 



Kal pSi/ia, dXX' o^ ^x^f^^ ^^^^ rpnipoXop, Pboolub. 



CAMBRIDGE : 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 

1896 

[All Right* re$erved.] 



Mdtti 275.2 -iO 

5 



PBDITXD BT J. AMD 0. W. OLkY, 
LT THS UHXTSB8ITT PBBBB. 



MANIBUS 



EDMUNDI HALLEY 



D. D. D. 



PREFACE. 



TT is not too much to say that, to the great majority of 
-^ mathematicians at the present time, ApoIIonius is nothing 
more than a name and his Conies, for all practical purposes, a 
book unknown. Tet this book, written some twenty-one 
centuries ago, contains, in the words of Chasles, "the most 
interesting properties of the conies," to say nothing of such 
brilliant investigations as those in which, by purely geometrical 
means, the author arrives at what amounts to the complete 
determination of the evolute of any conic. The general neglect 
of the " great geometer," as he was called by his contemporaries 
on account of this very work, is all the more remarkable from 
the contrast which it affords to the &te of lus predecessor 
Euclid; for, whereas in tins country at least the Elements of 
Euclid are still, both as regards their contents and their order, 
the accepted basis of elementary geometry, the influence of 
ApoIIonius upon modem text-books on conic sections is, so far 
as form and method are concerned, practically nil. 

Nor is it hard to find probable reasons for the prevailing 
absence of knowledge on the subject. In the first place, it could 
hardly be considered surprising if the average mathematician 
were apt to show a certain fiuntheartedness when confix)nted 
with seven Books in Qreek or Latin which contain 387 



VUl PREFACE. 

propositions in all; and doubtless the appai'ently portentous 
bulk of the treatise has deterred many from attempting to 
make its acquaintance. Again, the form of the propositions is 
an additional difficulty, because the reader finds in them none 
of the ordinary aids towards the comprehension of somewhat 
complicated geometrical work, such as the conventional appro- 
priation, in modem text-books, of definite letters to denote 
particular points on the various conic sections. On the contrary, 
the enunciations of propositions which, by the aid of a notation 
once agreed upon, can now be stated in a few lines, were by Apol- 
lonius invariably given in words like the enunciations of Euclid. 
These latter are often sufficiently unwieldy; but the incon- 
venience is greatly intensified in Apollonius, where the greater 
complexity of the conceptions entering into the investigation of 
conies, as compared with the more elementary notions relating 
to the line and circle, necessitates in many instances an enun- 
ciation extending over a space equal to (say) half a page of this 
book. Hence it is often a matter of considerable labour even 
to grasp the enunciation of a proposition. Further, the propo- 
sitions are, with the exception that separate paragraphs mark 
the formal divisions, printed continuously ; there are no breaks 
for the purpose of enabling the eye to take in readily the 
successive steps in the demonstration and so facilitating the 
comprehension of the argument as a whole. There is no uni- 
formity of notation, but in almost every fresh proposition a 
different letter is employed to denote the same point: what 
wonder then if there are the most serious obstacles in the way 
of even remembering the results of certain propositions? 
Nevertheless these propositions, though unfamiliar to mathe- 
maticians of the present day, are of the very essence of 
Apollonius' system, are being constantly used, and must there- 
fore necessarily be borne in mind. 

The foregoing remarks refer to the editions where Apollonius 
can be read in the Greek or in a Latin translation, i.e. to those 
of Halley and Heiberg ; but the only attempt which has been 



PBEFACE. IX 

made to give a complete view of the substance of Apollonius 
in a form more accessible to the modem reader is open to 
much the same objections. This reproduction of the Conies in 
Qerman by H. Balsam (Berlin, 1861) is a work deserving great 
praise both for its accuracy and the usefulness of the occasional 
explanatory notes, but perhaps most of all for an admirable set 
of figures to the number of 400 at the end of the book ; the 
enunciations of the propositions are, however, still in words, 
there are few breaks in the continuity of the printing, and the 
notation is not sufficiently modernised to make the book of any 
more real service to the ordinary reader than the original 
editions. 

An edition is therefore still wanted which shall, while in 
some places adhering even more closely than Balsam to the 
original text, at the same time be so entirely remodelled by 
the aid of accepted modem notation as to be thoroughly 
readable by any competent mathematician; and this want 
it is the object of the present work to supply. 

In setting mjrself this task, I made up my mind that any 
satisfactory reproduction of the Conies must fulfil certain 
essential conditions: (1) it should be Apollonius and nothing 
but Apollonius, and nothing should be altered either in the 
substance or in the order of his thought, (2) it should be 
complete, leaving out nothing of any significance or importance, 
(3) it should exhibit under different headings the successive 
divisions of the subject, so that the definite scheme followed by 
the author may be seen as a whole. 

Accordingly I considered it to be the first essential that I 
should make myself thoroughly &miliar with the whole work at 
first hand. With this object I first wrote out a perfectly literal 
translation of the whole of the extant seven Books. This was a 
laborious task, but it was not in other respects difficult, owing 
to the excellence of the standard editions. Of these editions, 
Halley's is a monumental work, beyond praise alike in respect 
of its design and execution ; and for Books v — vil it is still the 



X PREFACE. 

only complete edition. For Books I — iv I used for the most 
part the new Greek text of Heiberg, a scholar who has earned 
the undying gratitude of all who are interested in the history 
of Greek mathematics by successively bringing out a critical 
text (with Latin translation) of Archimedes, of Euclid's Elements, 
and of all the writings of Apollonius still extant in Greek. The 
only drawback to Heibeig's Apollonius is the figures, which are 
poor and not seldom even misleading^ so that I found it a great 
advantage to have Halley's edition, with its admirably executed 
diagrams, before me even while engaged on Books i — iv. 

The real difficulty began with the constructive work of 
re-writing the book, involving as it did the substitution of a 
new and uniform notation, the condensation of some pro- 
positions, the combination of two or more into one, some slight 
re-ammgements of order for the purpose of bringing together 
kindred propositions in cases where their separation was rather 
a matter of accident than indicative of design, and so on. The 
result has been (without leaving out anything essential or 
important) to diminish the bulk of the work by considerably 
more than one-half and to reduce to a corresponding extent the 
number of separate propositions. 

When the re-editing of the Conies was finished, it seemed 
necessary for completeness to prefix an Introduction for the 
purposes (L) of showing the relation of Apollonius to his pre- 
decessors in the same field both as regards matter and method, 
(2) of explaining more fully than was possible in the few notes 
inserted in square brackets in the body of the book the mathe- 
matical significance of certain portions of the Conies and the 
probable connexion between this and other smaller treatises of 
Apollonius about which we have information, (3) of describing 
and illustrating fully the form and language of the propositions 
as they stand in the original Greek text. The first of these 
purposes required that I should give a sketch of the history of 
conic sections up to the time of Apollonius; and I have ac- 
cordingly considei-ed it worth while to make this part of the 



PREFACE. XI 

Introduction as far as possible complete. Thus e.g. in the case 
of Archimedes I have collected practically all the propositions 
in conies to be found in his numerous works with the substance 
of the proofs where given ; and I hope that the historical sketch 
as a whole will be found not only more exhaustive, for the 
period covered, than any that has yet appeared in English, but 
also not less interesting than the rest of the book. 

For the purposes of the earlier history of conies, and the 
chapters on the mathematical significance of certain portions of 
the Conies and of the other smaller treatises of Apollonius, I 
have been constantly indebted to an admirable work by 
H. 0. Zeuthen, Die Lehre van den Kegelschnitten im Altertum 
(German edition, Copenhagen, 1886), which to a large extent 
covers the same ground, though a great portion of his work, 
consisting of a mathematical analysis rather than a reproduction 
of Apollonius, is of course here replaced by the re-edited 
treatise itself. I have also made constant use of Heiberg's 
LitterargeechickUiche Studien iiber EvMid (Leipzig, 1882), the 
original Greek of Euclid's Elements, the works of Archimedes, 
the awarftoyii of Pappus and the important Commentary on 
Eucl. Book I. by Proclus (ed. Friedlein, Leipzig, 1873). 

The fi*ontispiece to this volume is a reproduction of a 
quaint picture and attached legend which appeared at the 
beginning of Halley's edition. The story is also told elsewhere 
than in Vitruvius, but with less point (cf. Claudii Galeni 
Pergameni UpoTpeimKi^ hrX r^xva^ c. v. § 8, p. 108, 8-8 
ed I. Marquardt, Leipzig, 1884). The quotation on the title 
page is from a vigorous and inspiring passage in Proclus' 
Commentary on Eud. Book i. (p. 84, ed. Friedlein) in which he 
is describing the scientific purpose of his work and contrasting 
it with the useless investigations of paltry lemmas, distinctions 
of cases, and the like, which formed the stock-in-trade of the 
ordinary Greek commentator. One merit claimed by Proclus 
for his work I think I may fairly claim for my own, that it 
at least contains iaa irpar/fAarcuoBearepav ix€i, Oefaplav ; and I 



Xll PREFACE. 

should indeed be proud if, in the judgment of competent critics, 
it should be found possible to apply to it the succeeding phrase, 
avpreXel irpo^ rfjp oKriv ^CKoao^iav. 

Lastly, I wish to express my thanks to my brother, 
Dr R. S. Heath, Principal of Mason College, Birmingham, 
for his kindness in reading over most of the proof sheets and 
for the constant interest which he has taken in the progress 
of the work. 

T. L. HEATH. 

Mardi, 1896. 



LIST OF PRINCIPAL AUTHORITIES. 

Edkukd Halley, ApoUanii Fergaai Conicorwn libri octo et Sereni Antit- 
tensia de sectvme cylindri et ooni libri duo, (Oxford, 1710.) 

Edmund Hallet, ApdUtmii Pergo/ei de Seetiane Matianis Itbri duo, ex 
Arahioo vereu (Oxford, 1706.) 

J. L. Heibbeq, ApoUonii Pergaei quae Oraece exttant cum oommentariie 
aiUiquis. (Leipzig, 1891-3.) 

H. Balsam, Dee ApoUoniue van Perga eieben BUcher uber EegeleckniUe 
n^t dem dttreh Halley wieder hergestdlten adUen Buche deutech 
bearbeitet. (Berlin, 1861.) 



J. L. HsiBEBO, Litterargeechichtliche Studien uber Euklid, (Leipzig, 
1882.) 

J. L. Heibeeo, Eudidis eUmenta. (Leipzig, 1883-8.) 

O. Fribdlsin, Procli Diadochi in primum Eudidie elementorum Hbrum 
cammenCani, (Leipzig, 1873.) 

J. L. HsiBSRO, Qutuetionee Archtmedeae. (Copenhagen, 1879.) 

J. L. Heibeeo, Archimedie opera omnia cum commentariie Eutocii, 
(Leipzig, 1880-1.) 

F. HuLTSCH, Pappi Alexandrini coUeetionie quae supersunt. (Berlin, 
1876-8.) 

C. A. Bretbchneideb, Die Oeometrie und die Geometer vor EuJdidee. 
(Leipzig, 1870.) 

M. Cantor, Vorleeungen Uber Oeechichte der Mathematik. (Leipzig, 1880.) 

H. O. Zeuthen, Die Lehre von den Kegelschnitten im Altertum, Deutache 
Autgabe, (Copenhagen, 1886.) 



CONTENTS. 



INTRODUCTION. 

PART I. THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONIC SECTIONS 

AMONG THE GREEKS. 

PAGE 
ChAFTBR J. ThB DI800VSBT OF CONIO SECTIONS: Ms- 

NA.BCHMU8 Zvii 

Chaptbb II. Aristasus and Euclid xxxi 

Chapter III. Arohdcedes xli 



PART II. INTRODUCTION TO THE CONICS OP APOLLONIUa 

Chapter I. The author and his own account of the 

C0H108 Ixviii 

Chapter II. General characteristics luzvii 

§ 1. Adherence to Euclidean form, conoeptions and 

language Ixxzvii 

§ 2. Planimetric character of the treatise. xcvii 

§ 3. Definite order and aim xcviii 

Chapter III. The methods of Apolloniur .... ci 

§ 1 . Geometrical algebra ci 

(1) The theory of proportions ... ci 

(2) The application of areas .... cii 

(3) Graphic representation of areas by means 

of auxiliary lines cxi 

(4) Special use of auxiliary points in Book vil cxiii 

§ 2. The use of coordinates cxv 

§ 3. Transformation of coordinates .... cxviii 

§ 4. Method of finding two mean proportionals cxxy 
§ 5. Method of constructing normals passing through 

a given point cxxvii 

Chapter IV. The construction of a conic bt means of 

TANGENTS CXXX 



XVI CONTENTS. 

PAOB 

Chaffer V. Thb thbis-linb and four-line locub . . czzxviii 

Chapter VI. The construction of a conic through five 

POINTS di 

Appendix. Notes on the tseicinoloot of Qreek obo- 

METRT dvii 



THE C0NIC8 OF APOLLONIUS. 

THE CONE 1 

THE DIAMETER AND ITS CONJUGATE 16 

TANGENTS 22 

PROPOSITIONS LEADING TO THE BEFEBENCE OF A CONIC 
TO ANY NEW DIABiETEB AND THE TANGENT AT ITS 

EXTBEMITT 81 

CONSTBUCTION OF CONIOS FBOM CEBTAIN DATA . 42 

ASTMPTOTES 63 

TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAKETEBS AND AXES. 64 

EXTENSIONS OF PBOPOSITIONS 17—19 84 

BECTANGLES UNDEB SEGMENTS OF INTEBSECTING 

CHORDS 06 

HABMONIC PBOPEBTIES OF POLES AND POLABS 102 

INTEBCEPTS MADE ON TWO TANGENTS BY A THIBD . 109 

FOCAL PBOPEBTIES OF CENTBAL CONICS .... 118 

THE LOCUS WITH BESPECT TO THBEE LINES ETC. 119 

INTEBSECTING CONICS 126 

NOBBfALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA 139 

PBOPOSITIONS LEADING IMMEDIATELY TO THE DETEB- 

MINATION OF THE EVOLUTS 168 

CONSTBUCTION OF NOBBfALS 180 

OTHEB PBOPOSITIONS BESPECTING MAXIMA AND BUNIMA 187 

EQUAL AND SIMILAB CONICS 197 

PBOBLEMS 209 

VALUES OF CEBTAIN FUNCTIONS OF THE LENGTHS OF 

CONJUGATE DIAMETEBS 221 



INTEODUCTION. 



PART I 

THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONIC SECTIONS 

AMONG THE GREEEIS. 

CHAPTER I. 

THE DISCOVERT OF CONIC SECTIONS: MENAECHIIUS. 

Thbrb ia perhaps no question that ocoapies, comparatively, a 
larger space in the history of Greek geometry than the problem of 
the Doubling of the Cube. The tradition concerning its origin is 
given in a letter from Eratosthenes of Cyrene to King Ptolemy 
Energetes quoted by Eutocius in his commentary on the second 
Book of Archimedes' treatise On the Sphere and Cylinder^ ; and the 
following is a translation of the letter as far as the point where we 
find mention of Menaechznas, with whom the present subject 
begins. 

"Eratosthenes to King Ptolemy greeting. 

"There is a story that one of the old tragedians represented 

Minos as wishing to erect a tomb for Glaucus and as saying, when 

he heard that it was a hundred feet every way, 

Too small tby plan to bound a royal tomb. 
Let it be double; yet of its fair form 
Fail not, but haste to doable every sidef. 

* In quotations from Archimedes or the commentaries of Eutodus on his 
works the references are thronc^oot to Heiberg*s edition {Arekimedii opera 
omnia eum eommentarii$ Eutocii, 8 vols. Leipzig, 1880-1). The reference here 
is m. p. 102. 

^ivKiffiOt iarta' roO koKoO di fiii ff^aXtlt 
Slr\a^* tucurrw kuIKop iw rdxti ra^v. 

Valekenaer {Diatribe de fragm. Eurip.) suggests that the venes are from the 
H. C. 6 



XVIU THE EARLIER HISTORY OF C0NIC8. 

But he was clearly in error ; for, when the sides are doubled, the area 
becomes four times as great, and the solid content eight times 
as great. Geometers also continued to investigate the question in 
what manner one might double a given solid while it remiuned in 
the same form. And a problem of this kind was called the doubling 
of the cube ; for they started from a cube and sought to double it. 
While then for a long time everyone was at a loss, Hippocrates of 
Chios was the first to observe that, if between two straight lines of 
which the greater is double of the less it were discovered how to find 
two mean proportionals in continued proportion, the cube would be 
doubled ; and thus he turned the difficulty in the original problem* 
into another difficulty no less than the former. Afterwards, they 
say, some Delians attempting, in accordance with an oracle, to 
double one of the altars fell into the same difficulty. And they sent 
and begged the geometers who were with Plato in the Academy to 
find for them the required solution. And while they set themselves 
energetically to work and sought to find two means between two 
given straight lines, Archytas of Tarentum is said to have dis- 
covered them by means of half-cylinders, and Eudoxus by means 
of the so-called curved lines. It is, however, characteristic of them 
all that they indeed gave demonstrations, but were unable to make 
the actual construction or to reach the point of practical application, 
except to a small extent Menaechmus and that with difficulty." 

Some verses at the end of the letter, in commending Eratosthenes' 
own solution, suggest that there need be no resort to Archytas' 
unwieldy contrivances of cylinders or to ** cutting the cone in the 
triads of Menaechmus t." This last phrase of Eratosthenes appears 



Pohfidui of Euripides, bat that the words after ff^Xtlt (or ^-^oX^) are 
Eratosthenes* own, and that the Terses from the tragedy are simply 

tuKp6p y jfXe^at poffiKucov arigbv riu^v 

It woold, however, be strange if Eratosthenes had added words merely for the 
porpose of correcting them again : and Naock {Tragieorum Qraeeorum Fragmejita, 
Leipzig, 1889, p. 874) gives the three verses as above, bat holds that they do not 
belong to the PolyidtUt adding that they are no doabt from an earlier poet than 
Euripides, perhaps Aesehylos. 

* t6 dw6fnifia airoG is translated by Heiberg ''haesitatio eias," which no 
doabt means '* hi» difficulty." I think it is better to regard adroO as neater, and 
as referring to the problem of doubling the cube. 



MENAECHHUS. XIZ 

again, by way of oonfirmatory evidence, in a passage of Proclus*, 
where, quoting (>eminas, he says that the conic sections were 
discovered by Menaechmus. 

Thus the evidence so far shows (1) that Menaechmus (a pupil of 
Eudozus and a contemporary of Plato) was the discoverer of the 
conic sections, and (2) that he used them as a means of solving the 
problem of the doubling of the cuba We learn further from 
Eutociust that Menaechmus gave two solutions of the problem of 
the two mean proportionals, to which Hippocrates had reduced the 
original problem, obtaining the two means first by the intersection 
of a certain parabola and a certain rectangular hyperbola, and 
secondly by the intersection of two parabolas}. Assuming that a, h 
are the two given unequal straight lines and as, y the two required 
mean proportionals, the discovery of Hippocrates amounted to the 
discovery of the fact that from the relation 

^=^=1 (1) 

it follows that ( - j = r , 

and, if a = 26, a" = 2«». 

The equations (1) are equivalent to the three equations 

«' = «y. y^^bx, xy^ab (2), 

and the solutions of Menaechmus described by Eutocius amount to the 
determination of a point as the intersection of the curves represented 
in a rectangular system of Cartesian coordinates by any two of the 
equations (2). 

Let AOf BO be straight lines placed so as to form a right angle 
at Of and of length a, h respectively §. Produce BO to x and AO 
to y, 

* Comm, on Euel, i., p. Ill (ed. Friedlein). The paaaage is quoted, with 
the eontext, in the work of Bretachneider, Die Oeametrie und die Oeotneter vor 
Euklide*, p. 177. 

t Commentary on Arehimedet (ed. Heiberg, m. p. 92 — 98). 

X It must be borne in mind th*t the words parabola and hyperbola conld not 
have been used by Menaeohmus, as will be seen later on ; but Uie phraseology is 
(hat of Eutodos himself. . 

I One figure has been substituted for the two given by Eatooios, so as to 
make it serve for both solutions. The figure is identieal with that attached to 
the second solution, with the sole addition of the portion of the rectangular 
hyperbola used in the first solution. 

It is a curious ciroumstance that in Eutocius' second figure the straight line 

62 



XX 



THE EARLIER HISTORY OF C0NIC8. 



The firui solution now consists in drawing a parabola, with 
vertex and axis Ox^ such that its parameter is equal to BO or 6, 
and a hyperbola with Ox^ Oy as asymptotes such that the rectangle 
under the distances of any point on the curve from Ox^ Oy respec- 
tively is equal to the rectangle under AO^ BOy i.e. to a6. If P be 




the point of intersection of the parabola and hyperbola, and PN^ PM 
be drawn perpendicular to Ox^ Oy, Le. if PN, PM be denoted by 
y, Xf the coordinates of the point P, we shall have 



and 



whence 



y'^^h.ON^b.PM^bx 
xy^PM.PN^ab 

?=- = ? 
X y~ b' 



}• 



In the second solution of Menaechmus we are to draw the 
parabola described in the first solution and also the parabola whose 



xepresenting the length of the parameter of each parabola is drawn in the same 
straight line with the axis of the parabola, whereas ApoUomos always draws the 
parameter as a line starting from the vertex (or the end of a diameter) and 
perpendicular to the axis (or diameter). It is possible that we may have here 
an additional indication that the idea of the parameter as ipBla or the latu$ 
tectum originated with Apollonins; though it is also possible that the selection 
of the directions of AO^ BO was due to nothing more than accident, or may 
have been made in order that the snccessiye terms in the continued proportion 
might appear in the figure in cyclic order, which corresponds moreover to their 
relative positions in the mechanical solution attributed to Plato. For this solu- 
tion see the same passage of Eutodus (Arehimedei, ed. Heiberg, lu. p. 66 — ^70). 



MEKA£CHMtJ& XZl 

vertex is O, axis Oy and parameter equal to a. The point P where 
the two parabohis intersect is given by 



X y 



whence, as before, - = _ = ^. 

X y b 



We have therefore, in these two solutions, the parabola and the 
rectangular hyperbola in the aspect of loci any points of which 
respectively fulfil the conditions expressed by the equations in (2); 
and it is more than probable that the discovery of Menaechmus was 
due to efforts to determine loci possessing these characteristic 
properties rather than to any idea of a systematic investigation of 
the sections of a cone as such. This supposition is confirmed by 
the very special way in which, as will be seen presently, the conic 
sections were originally produced from the right circular cone; 
indeed the special method is difficult to explain on any other 
assumption. It is moreover natural to suppose that^ after the 
discovery of the convertibility of the cube-problem into that of 
finding two mean proportionals, the two forms of the resulting 
equations would be made the subject of the most minute and 
searching investigation. The form (1) expressing the equality of 
three ratios led naturally to the solution attributed to Plato, in which 
the four lines representing the successive terms of the continued pro- 
portion are placed mutually at right angles and in cyclic order round 
a fixed point) and the extremities of the lines are found by means of 
a rectangular frame, three sides of which are fixed, while the fourth 
side can move freely parallel to itself. The investigation of the 
form (2) of the equations led to the attempt of Menaechmus to 
determine the loci corresponding thereto. It was known that the 
locus represented by }^-x^x^, where y is the perpendicular from 
any point on a fixed straight line of given length, and Xy^ x^ are the 
segments into which the line is divided by the perpendicular, was a 
circle ; and it would be natural to assume that the equation y* = (as, 
differing from the other only in the fact that a constant is sub- 
stituted for one of the variable magnitudes, would be capable of 
representation as a locus or a continuous curve. The only difficulty 
would be to discover its form, and it was here that the cone was 
introduced. 

If an explanation is needed of the circumstance that Menaech- 



xxu 



TH£ EAKUER HISTORY OF CX)NICS. 



mu8 should have had recourse to any solid figure, and to a cone in 
particular, for the purpose of producing a plane locus, we find it in 
the fact that solid geometry had already reached a high state of 
development, as is shown by the solution of the problem of the two 
mean proportionals by Archytas of Tarentum (bom about 430 ac). 
This solution, in itself perhaps more remarkable than any other, 
determines a certain point as the intersection of three surfaces of 
revolution, (1) a right cone, (2) a right cylinder whose base is a 
circle on the axis of the cone as diameter and passing through the 
apex of the cone, (3) the surface formed by causing a semicircle, 
whose diameter is the same as that of the circular base of the cylinder 
and whose plane is perpendicular to that of the circle, to revolve 
about the apex of the cone as a fixed point so that the diameter of 
the semicircle moves always in the plane of the circle, in other words, 
the surface consisting of half a split ring whose centre is the apex of 
the cone and whose inner diameter is indefinitely small. We find that 
in the course of the solution (a) the intersection of the surfaces (2) and 
(3) is said to be a certain curve (ypo^i/v riva), being in fact a curve of 
double curvature, (6) a circular section of the right cone is used in 
the proof, and (c), as the penultimate step, two mean proportionals 
are found in one and the same plane (triangular) section of the cone*. 

* The solation of Arohjtas is, like the others, given by Eatodas (p. 98 — 102) 
and is so instraotive that I cannot forbear to qaote it. Suppose that AC,AB are 
the straight lines between which two mean proportionals are to be fonnd. AC 
is then made the diameter of a circle, and AB is placed as a chord in the oircle. 




A semicircle is drawn with diameter AC bat in a plane perpendioolar to that 
of ABC, and reTolves aboat an axis throagh A peipendicolar to the plane of ABC, 



• • • 



MENAECHMUS. XXIU 

Thus the introduction of cones by Menaechmus should not in itself 
be a matter for surprise. 

Concerning Menaechmus' actual method of deducing the proper- 
ties of the conic sections from the cone we have no definite 
information ; but we may form some idea of his probable procedure 

A half -cylinder (right) is now erected with ABC as base: this will oat the 
surCaoe described by the moving semicircle APC in a certain cnrye. 

Lastly let CD, the tangent to the circle ABC at the point C, meet AB 
prodaced in D ; and sappose the triangle ACD to levolve about AC as axis. 
This will generate the sorlace of a right circalar cone, and the point B will 
describe a semicircle BQE peipendicalar to the plane of ABC and having its 
diameter BE at right angles io AC. The sarfiace of the cone will meet in some 
point P the conre described on the cylinder. Let APC be the conesponding 
position of the reyolving semicircle, and let AC meet the circle ABC in U, 

Drawing PM perpendicolar to the plane of ABCt we see that it most meet the 
drcmnferenoe of the circle ABC because P is on the cylinder which stands on 
ABC as base. Let AP meet the cironmference of the semicircle BQE in Q, and 
let AC meet its diameter BE in N. Jom PC, QAf, QN. 

Then, since both semicircles are perpendicular to the plane ABC, so is their 
line of intersection QN. Therefore QN is perpendicular to BE. 

Hence Qlin=^BN.NE=AN.NM. 

Therefore the angle AQM is a right angle. 

Bat the angle CPA is also right : therefore MQ is parallel to CP. 

It follows, by similar triangles, that 

CA : AP^AP : AM^AM : AQ. 

That is, AC : AP=^AP : AM=AM : AB, 

and AB, AM, AP, AC are in con tinned proportion. 

Li the language of analytical geometry, if ilC7 is the axis of x, a line through 
A perpendicular to AC in the plane of ABC the axis of y, and a line through 
A parallel to PM the axis of s, then P is determined as the intersection of the 
surfaces 

ar«+y«+j>=^x> (1), 

x'-fy*sax (2), 

4r«+y«+««=ai,/x«+y« (8), 

where ACssa, AB=b, 

From the first two eqaations 
and from this equation and (8) we have 

or AC : AP»AP : AM^AM : AB. 



xxiv THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICa 

if we bear in mind (1) what we are told of the manner in which the 
earlier writers on oonics produced the three carves from particular 
kinds of right circular cones, and (2) the course followed by Apol- 
lonius (and Archimedes) in dealing with sections of any circular cone, 
whether right or oblique. 

Eutocius, in his commentary on the Conies of ApoUonius, quotes 
with approval a statement of Geminus to the effect that the ancients 
defined a cone as the surface described by the revolution of a right- 
angled triangle about one of the sides containing the right angle, and 
that they knew no other cones than right cones. Of these they dis- 
tinguished three kinds according as the vertical angle of the cone 
was less than, equal to, or greater than, a right angle. Further 
they produced only one of the three sections from each kind of cone, 
always cutting it by a plane perpendicular to one of the generating 
lines, and calling the respective curves by names corresponding to 
the particular kind of cone; thus the "section of a right-angled 
cone '' was their name for a parabola, the " section of an acute-angled 
cone " for an ellipse, and the " section of an obtuse-angled cone ** for 
a hyperbola. The sections are so described by Archimedes. 

Now clearly the parabola is the one of the three sections for the 
production of which the use of a right-angled cone and a section at 
right angles to a generator gave the readiest means. Ji N he a 
point on the diameter BC of any circular section in such a cone, and 
if NF be a straight line drawn in the plane of the section and perpen- 
dicular to BC^ meeting the circumference of the circle (and therefore 
the surface of the cone) in P, 

PN^=BN.I^C. 

Draw AN in the plane of the axial triangle OBC meeting the 
generator OB at right angles in A, and draw AD parallel to BC 
meeting OC in D; let DEF^ perpendicular ix> AD or BC, meet BC 
in E and AN produced in F. 

Then AD ia bisected by the axis of the cone, and therefore AF 
is likewise bisected by it. Draw CG perpendicular to BC meeting 
AF produced in 0, 

Now the angles BA N, BCO are right ; therefore B, A, C, are 
concyclic, and 

BN.NC = AN.NG. 
But AN^CD^FO; 



MENAECHMUS. 

therefore, if ili^ meets the axis of the cooe in Z, 

N0^AF^2AL. 
Hence PN^^BN.NC 

^2AL.AN, 
and, if il is fixed, 2ALia constant. 



XXV 




Thus P satisfies the equation 

j^ = 2AL.x, 
where y = PiT, x - AN. 

Therefore we have only to select il as a point on OB such that 

AL (or AO) = ^f and the curve corresponding to the equation 

y' = te is found. 

The * parameter ' of the parabola is equal to twice the distance 
between A and the point where AN meets the axis of the cone, or 
a iiirXiuria ra^ f^xpc rov 0^1^09, as Archimedes calls it*. 

The discovery that the hyperbola represented by the equation 
xy^ab, where the asymptotes are the coordinate axes, could be 
obtained by cutting an obtuse-angled cone by a plane perpendicular 
to a generator was not so easy, and it has been questioned whether 
Menaechmus was aware of the fact The property, xy = (const), for 
a hyperbola referred to its asymptotes does not appear in Apollonius 
until the second Book, after the diameter-properties have been 
proved. It depends on the propositions (1) that every series of 
parallel chords is bisected by one and the same diameter, and 
(2) that the parts of any chord intercepted between the curve and 
the asymptotes are equal. But it is not necessary to assume that 

* Cf. On Conoidt and Spheroidt, 3, p. 804. 



XXVI 



THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICS. 



MenaechmuB was aware of these general propositions. It is more 
probable that he obtained the equation referred to the asymptotes 
from the equation referred to the cuces ; and in the particular case 
which he uses (that of the rectangular hjrperbola) this is not difficult. 




Thus, if P be a point on the curve and PK, PK' be perpendicular 
to the asymptotes CR^ CR' of a rectangular hyperbola, and if 
RPNR' be perpendicular to the bisector of the angle between the 



asymptotes, 


PK.PK'^the rect CKPK' 




s the quadrilateral CRPE, 


since 


£^CEK' ^ £^PRK. 


Hence 


PK.PK'^ ARCJf- £^PBN 




^^{cjm-pm) 




_ai»-y» 



where x^ y are the coordinates of P referred to the axes of the 
hyperbola. 

We have then to show how Menaechmus could obtain from an 
obtuse-angled cone, by a section perpendicular to a generator, the 
rectangular hyperbola 

a'-y" = (oonst.) = -j , say. 



or 



where Xi, x^ are the distances of the foot of the ordinate y from the 
points il, A' respectively, and AA' = a. 



MENAECHMUS. 



XXVll 



Take an obtuse-angled cone, and let BC be the diameter of any 
drcnlar section of it. Let A be any point on the generator OB, and 
throagh A draw AN at right angles to OB meeting CO produced in 
A' and BC in N. 

Let y be the length of the straight line drawn from N perpen- 
dicular to the plane of the axial triangle OBC and meeting the 
surfiM)e of the cone. Then y vrill be determined by the equation 

^^BN,NC. 



\ Ji 




P 


B>/\ 


h 


N 




\ 

F 


E 

\ 



Let AD be drawn, as before, parallel to BC and meeting OC in 
Z>, and let OZ, />/*, CO be drawn perpendicular to BC meeting AN 
produced in L^ F, G respectively. 

Then, since the angles BAG, BOG are right, the points B, A, C, O 

are concyclic ; 

.-. y'^BN.NC^AN.NG. 

But NG : AF= CN : AD, by similar triangles, 

= A'N:AA\ 



Hence 



A F 
y'^AN.^^.A'N 

2AL 

and the locus of the extremity of y for different positions of the 
circular section, or (in other words) the section of the cone by a 
plane through J ^perpendicular to the plane of the axial triangle, 

2AL 



satisfies the desired condition provided that 



AA' 



1. 



XXVIU THE EARUER HISTORY OF CONICS. 

This relation, together with the fact that the angle AOLu equal 
to half the supplement of the angle A'OA^ enables us to determine 
the position of the apex 0^ and therefore the vertical angle, of the 
desired cone which is to contain the rectangular hyperbola. 

For suppose determined, and draw the circle circumscribing 
AOA'; this will meet LO produced in some point if, and OA' will 
be its diameter. Thus the angle A'KO is right ; 

.'. z. AA'K= complement of l ALK= l AOL = l LOG = l A'OK, 
whence it follows that the segments AK^ A!K are equal, and 
therefore K lies on the line bisecting AA* vX right angles. 

But, since the angle A'KL is right, K also lies on the semicircle 
with A'L eA diameter. 

K is therefore determined by drawing that semicircle and then 
drawing a line bisecting A A' at right angles and meeting the 
semicircle. Thus, K being found and KL joined, is determined. 

The foregoing construction for a rectangular hyperbola can be 

equally well applied to the case of the hyperbola generally or of an 

2AL 
ellipse ; only the value of the constant -j-p will be different from 

unity. In every case 2ALis equal to the parameter of the ordinates 
to AA\ or the parameter is equal to twice the distance between the 
vertex of the section and the axis of the cone, ol SivXtKria rSs ^^t 
rov 0^1^09 (as Archimedes called the principal parameter of the 
parabola). 

The assumption that Menaechmus discovered all three sections 
in the manner above set forth agrees with the reference of 
Eratosthenes to the ** Menaechmean triads," though it is not im- 
probable that the ellipse was known earlier as a section of a right 
cylinder. Thus a passage of Euclid's Phaenomena says, " if a cone 
or cylinder be cut by a plane not parallel to the base, the resulting 
section is a section of an acute-angled cone which is similar to a 
$vpw" showing that Euclid distinguished the two ways of pro- 
ducing an ellipse. Heiberg (LitterargeachichUiehe Stvdien iiber 
Efiklidf p. 88) thinks it probable that Ovpto^ was the name by which 
Menaechmus called the curve*. 

It is a question whether Menaechmus used mechanical contriv- 

* The expression ^ toO BvpeoO for the ellipse oooors seyeral times in Proclus 
and partioalarly in a passage in which Geminas is quoted (p. Ill); and it 
would seem as though this name for the ourve was more common in Geminus* 
time than the name ** ellipse.'* [Bretschneider, p. 176.] 



MENAECHMUS. XXIX 

anoes for effecting the construction of his curves. The idea that he 
did so rests (1) upon the passage in the letter of Eratosthenes* to 
the effect that all who had solved the problem of the two mean pro- 
portionals had written theoretically but had not been able to effect 
the actual construction and reduce the theory to practice except, to 
a certain extent, Menaechmus and that only with difficulty, (2) upon 
two well known passages in Plutarch. One of these latter states 
that Plato blamed Eudoxus, Archytas and Menaechmus for trying 
to reduce the doubling of the cube to instrumental and mechanical 
constructions (as though such methods of finding two mean pro- 
portionals were not legitimate), arguing that the good of geometry 
was thus lost and destroyed, as it was brought back again to the world 
of sense instead of soaring upwards and laying hold of those eternal 
and incorporeal images amid which Qod is and thus is ever Gkxlt ; 
the other passage (Vita MarceUi 14, § 5) states that^ in consequence 
of this attitude of Plato, mechanics was completely divorced from 
geometry and, after being neglected by philosophers for a long time, 
became merely a part of the science of war. I do not think it 
follows from these passages that Menaechmus and Archytas made 
machines for effecting their constructions; such a supposition would 
in fact seem to be inconsistent with the direct statement of 
Eratosthenes that, with the partial exception of Menaechmus, the 
three geometers referred to gave theoretical solutions only. The words 
of Eratosthenes imply that Archytas did not use any mechanical 
contrivance, and, as regards Menaechmus, they rather suggest such 
a method as the finding of a large number of points on the curve {. 
It seems likely therefore that Plato's criticism referred, not to the 

* See the passage from Eratosthenes, translated above, p. xviii. The Greek 
of the sentence in qaestion is : avii^p^Kt di ranp adroit drodeurriirwt ytypa^ai, 
X»po vp yifaai M Ktd c/r XP*^ refftiw fi^ 6^aa$ai r\^p ivl fipax^ n rcO Mtrdx/t^v 
Kol ravrs dvax^P^* 

t Ac^ Kol nXdrwr aMs iiUii^aro rodt rtpl Etfdo^or koX 'A/>xi^<v gal MhaiXM^p 
c/t 6pyawuciLS koI fiJ/Xfu^iKiiS icaroo'irevdt t6p tov or€p€oG 5ir\affiaff/i/^p drdytuf 
irix«ipo(fPTat {itffTtp Teipia/jJpovt did \6yov [scr. dc* d\6yov] iuo fUcat dydXo7or /i^ 
[ser. j] ropefffoc Xa/Scii'). dwbWvcdoi ')dp oirv xoi dia^€lp€ir$ai rh y€UfttTplat 
iiya$6^, aiSis ivl rd aloBTfrh, roKipdpofUfvaift koI fiti ^pofUpjft drw, firii* drnXa/i* 
fi«»9ftinit rtop di3<wr icai dcrufidTitw tUb^vp, rp^ cdffvtp up 6 Bcbt ael Otht icri. 
{QuaeU, eomviv. Yin. 2. 1.) 

X This is partly suggested by Eatooias* commentary on Apollonias i. 20, 21, 
where it is remarked that it was often necessary for want of instruments to 
describe a conic by a continaons series of points. This passage is quoted by 
Dr Taylor, Ancient and Modem Oeometry of Conies^ p. zzxiii. 



XXX THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICS. 

use of machines, bat simply to the introduction of mechanical 
eonaideratioiu in each of the three solutions of Archytas, Eudoxus, 
and MenaechmuB. 

Much has been written on the difficulty of reconciling the 
censure on Archytas and the rest with the fact that a mechanical 
solution is attributed by Eutocius to Plato himself. The most 
probable explanation is to suppose that Eutocius was mistaken in 
giving the solution as Plato's ; indeed, had the solution been Plato's, 
it is scarcely possible that Eratosthenes should not have mentioned 
it along with the others, seeing that he mentions Plato as having 
been consulted by the Delians on the duplication problem. 

Zeuthen has suggested that Plato's objection may have referred, 
in the case of Menaechmus, to the fact that he was not satisfied to 
regard a curve as completely defined by a fundamental plane property 
such as we express by the equation, but must needs give it a geo- 
metrical definition as a curve arrived at by cutting a cone, in order to 
make its form realisable by the senses, though this presentation of 
it was not made use of in the subsequent investigations of its 
properties ; but this explanation is not so comprehensible if applied 
to the objection to Archytaa* solution, where the curve in which the 
revolving semicircle and the fixed half-cylinder intersect is a curve 
of double curvature and not a plane curve easily represented by an 
equation. 



CHAPTER 11. 

ARISTAEUS AND EUCLID. 

Wb come next to the treatises which Aristaeos ' the elder' and 
Enolid are said to have written ; and it will be convenient to deal 
with these together, in view of the manner in which the two names 
are associated in the description of Pappus, who is our authority 
upon the contents of the works, both of which are lost. The passage 
of Pappus is in some places obscure and some sentences are put in 
brackets by Hultsch, but the following represents substantially its 
effect*. "The four books of Euclid's conies were completed by 
ApoUonius, who added four more and produced eight books of eonies. 
Aristaeus, who wrote the still extant five books of solid loci con- 
nected with the conies, called one of the conic sections the section 
of an acute-angled cone, another the section of a right-angled cone 
and the third the section of an obtuse-angled cone.... ApoUonius 
says in his third book that the ' locus with respect to three or four 
lines' had not been completely investigated by Euclid, and in fact 
neither ApoUonius himself nor any one else could have added in the 
least to what was written by Euclid with the help of those properties 
of conies only which had been proved up to Euclid's time; ApoUonius 
himself is evidence for this fact when he says that the theory of 
that locus could not be completed without the propositions which 
he had been obliged to work out for himsell Now EucUd — regard- 
ing Aristaeus as deserving credit for the discoveries he had already 
made in conies, and without anticipating him or wishing to construct 
anew the same system (such was his scrupulous fairness and his 
exemplary kindliness towards aU who could advance mathematical 
science to however smaU an extent), being moreover in no wise con- 
tentious and, though exact, yet no braggart like the other — ^wrote so 
much about the locus as was possible by means of the conies of 
Aristaeus, without claiming completeness for his demonstrations. 

• See Pappas (ed. Holtsoh), pp. 673—678. 



XXXU THE EARUER HISTORY OF COKICS. 

Had he done so he would certainly have deserved censare, but, as 
matters stand, he does not by any means deserve it, seeing that 
neither is Apollonius called to account, though he left the moet part 
of his enniea incomplete Apollonius, too, has been enabled to add 
the lacking portion of the theory of the locus through having become 
familiar beforehand with what had already been written about it by 
Euclid and having spent a long time with the pupils of Euclid in 
Alexandria, to which training he owed his scientific habit of mind. 
Now this Mocus with respect to three and four lines,' the theory of 
which he is so proud of having added to (though he should rather 
acknowledge his obligations to the original author of it), is arrived at 
in this way. If three straight lines be given in position and from 
one and the same point straight lines be drawn to meet the three 
straight lines at given angles, and if the ratio of the rectangle 
contained by two of the straight lines so drawn to the square of the 
remaining one be given, then the point will lie on a solid locus given 
in position, that is on one of the three conic sections. And, if 
straight lines be drawn to meet, at given angles, four straight lines 
given in position, and the ratio of the rectangle under two of the 
lines so drawn to the rectangle under the remaining two be given, 
then in the same way the |>oint will lie on a conic section given in 
position.'' 

It is necessary at this point to say a word about the solid locus 
(oTcpc^ roiros). Proclus defines a locus (roiros) as " a position of a 
line or a surface involving one and the same property" (ypa/ifji^ ^ 
liri^avcias Oitri^ woicMra tv fcal ra^ov avfjumafjui), and proceeds to say 
that loci are divided into two classes, line-loci (rdiroc irpof ypa/ifuus;) 
and surfitce-lod {mroi irpo9 ^irc^i^cuus). The former, or loci which 
are lines, are again divided by Proclus into plane loci and solid loci 
(roiroi lircVcSoc and rairoc crrcpcoc), the former being simply generated 
in a plane, like the straight line, the latter from some section of a 
solid figure, like the cylindrical helix and the conic sections. 
Similarly Eutocius, after giving as examples of the plane locus 
(1) the circle which is the locus of all points the perpendiculars 
from which on a finite straight line are mean proportionals between 
the segments into which the line is divided by the foot of the 
perpendicular, (2) the circle which is the locus of a point whose 
distances from two fixed points are in a given ratio (a locus investi- 
gated by Apollonius in the roiros dvaXvoficvos), proceeds to say that 
the so-called solid loci have derived their name from the fact that 



ARISTAEUS AND EUCLID. XXXlll 

they arise from the catting of solid figures, as for instanoe the 
sections of the cone and several others*. Pappus makes a further 
division of those line-loci which are not plane locif i.e. of the class 
which Proclus and Eutocius call by the one name of solid loei^ into 
solid loci {mptol Torot) and linear loci {rowoi ypaf^iiKoC). Thus, he 
says, plane lod may be generally described as those which are 
straight lines or circles, solid loci as those which are sections of 
cones, i.e. parabolas or ellipses or hjrperbolas, while linear loci are lines 
such as are not straight lines, nor circles, nor any of the said three 
conic sections t. For example, the curve described on the cylinder in 
Archytas* solution of the problem of the two mean proportionals is 
a linear locus (being in fact a curve of double curvature), and such 
a locus arises out of, or is traced upon, a locus which is a surface 
{rotm irpo9 hru^vtiq). Thus linear loei are those which have a 
more complicated and unnatural origin than straight lines, circles 
and conies, "being generated from more irregular surfaces and 
intricate movements |." 

It is now possible to draw certain conclusions from the passage 
of Pappus above reproduced 

1. The work of Aristaeus on solid lod was concerned with those 
loci which are parabolas, ellipses, or hyperbolas ; in other words, it 
was a treatise on conies regarded as loci. 

2. This book on solid loci preceded that of Euclid on conies 
and was, at least in point of originality, more important. Though 
both treatises dealt with the same subject-matter, the object 
and the point of view were different; had they been the same, 
Euclid could scarcely have refrained, as Pappus says he did, from an 
attempt to improve upon the earlier treatise. Pappus' meaning 
must therefore be that, while Euclid wrote on the general theory of 
conies as ApoUonius did, he yet confined himself to those properties 
which were necessary for the analysis of the solid loci of Aristaeus. 

3. Aristaeus used the names ''section of a right-angled, acute- 
angled, and obtuse-angled cone," by which up to the time of 
ApoUonius the three conic sections were known. 

4. The three-iine and four-line locus must have been, albeit 
imperfectly, discussed in the treatise of Aristaeus ; and Euclid, in 

* ApollonioB, Vol. ii. p. 184. f Pappus, p. 662. 

X Pappus, p. 270 : ypatifMi yiip irtpai rapii rdt €l(nitUpat elt r^ KaroffKtv^ 
Xofi^Sdrorroi rouaXttripcaf Ix^'v^^ ^ yhwi9 koX ptfiuLatiiir/fif /xaXXor, i^ arcurro- 
WpttP irt/^a^ttOw koX KuHjatutf inrer'Ktyfidvttif ytifPiifuvai. 

H. C. C 



XXxiv THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICS. 

dealing synthetically with the same locus, was unable to work out 
the theory completely because he only used the conies of Aristaeus 
and did not add fresh discoveries of his own. 

5. The Conies of Euclid was superseded by the treatise of 
Apollonius, and, though the Solid Loci of Aristaeus was still extant 
in Pappus' time, it is doubtful whether Euclid's work was so. 

The subject of the three-line and /our4ine locus will be discussed 
in some detail in connexion with Apollonius; but it may be 
convenient to mention here that Zeuthen, who devotes some bril- 
liant chapters to it, conjectures that the imperfection of the 
investigations of Aristaeus and Euclid arose from the absence of 
any conception of the hyperbola with two branches as forming 
one curve (which was the discovery of Apollonius, as may be in- 
ferred even from the fulness with which he treats of the double- 
hyperbola). Thus the proposition that the rectangles under the 
segments of intersecting chords in fixed directions are in a constant 
ratio independent of the position of the point of intersection is 
proved by Apollonius for the double-hyperbola as well as for the 
single branch and for the ellipse and parabola. So far therefore as 
the theorem was not proved for the double-hyperbola before Apollo- 
nius, it was incomplete. On the other hand, had Euclid been in 
possession of the proof of the theorem in its most geneinl form, 
then, assuming e.g. that the three-line or four-line locus was reduced 
by Aristaeus' analysis to this particular property, Euclid would 
have had the means (which we are told that he had not) of 
completing the synthesis of the locus also. Apollonius probably 
mentions Euclid rather than Aristaeus as having failed to complete 
the theory for the reason that it was Euclid's treatise which was on 
the same lines as his own ; and, as Euclid was somewhat later in 
time than Aristaeus, it would in any case be natural for Apollonius 
to regard Euclid as the representative of the older and defective 
investigations which he himself brought to completion. 

With regard to the contents of the Conies of Euclid we have the 
following indications. 

1. The scope must have been generally the same as that of the 
first three Books of Apollonius, though the development of the 
subject was more systematic and complete in the later treatise. 
This we infer from Apollonius' own preface as well as from the 
statement of Pappus quoted above. 

2. A more important source of information, in the sense of 



ARISTARUS AND EUCLID. XXXV 

giving more details, is at hand in the works of Archimedes, who 
frequently refers to pi'opositions in conies as well known and not 
requiring proof. Thus 

(a) The fundamental pi*operty of the ellipse, 

PN* : AN. NA' = P'N'* : AN' . NA' = BC^ : AC, 

that of the hjrperbola, 

FN* : AN . NA' = P'N'' : AN' . NA\ 

and that of the parabola, 

PN^:^p^.AN, 

are assumed, and must therefore presumably have been contained in 
Euclid's work. 

{b) At the beginning of the treatise on the area of a 
parabolic segment the following theorems are simply cited. 

(1) IfPFbea diameter of a segment of a parabola and 
QVq A chord parallel to the tangent at P, QV= Vq. 

(2) If the tangent at Q meet VP produced in 1\ PV= PT. 

(3) If QVq, Q'V'q' be two chords parallel to the tangent 
at P and bisected in F, F', 

PV iPV' = QV*:Q'r\ 

**And these proposituyns are j)roved in the elenienla of conies " (Le. in 
Euclid and Aristaeus). 

(c) The third proposition of the treatise On Conoids and 
Spheroids begins by enunciating the follo¥ring theorem : If straight 
lines drawn from the same point touch any conic section whatever, 
and if there be also other straight lines drawn in the conic section 
parallel to the tangents and cutting one another, the rectangles 
contained by the segments (of the chords) will have to one another 
the same ratio as the squares of the (parallel) tangents. " And this 
is proved in the elements qfeonics,** 

((2) In the same proposition we find the following property of 

the parabola : If />« be the parameter of the ordinates to the axis, 

and QQ' be any chord not perpendicular to the axis such that the 

diameter PV bisects it in F, and if QD be drawn perpendicular 

to PF, then (says Archimedes), supposing p to he such a length 

that 

QV:QJ>^=p:p,, 

the squares of the ordinates to PF (which are parallel to QQ') are 
equal to the rectangles applied to a straight line equal to p and of 

c2 



XXXVl THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICS. 

width equal to the respective intercepts on PF towards P, **For 
this JuM been proved in the conies" 

In other words, if p^, p are the parameters corresponding 
respectively to the axis and the diameter bisecting QQ\ 

p:pa^QV*:QD\ 

(For a figure and a proof of this property the reader is referred 
to the chapter on Archimedes p. liii.) 

Euclid still used the old names for the three conic sections, but 
he was aware that an ellipse could be obtained by cutting a cone in 
any manner by a plane not parallel to the base (assuming the 
section to lie wholly between the apex of the cone and its base), and 
also by cutting a cylinder. This is expressly stated in the passage 
quoted above (p. xxviii) from the Phaenomena. But it is scarcely 
possible that Euclid had in mind any other than a right cone ; for, 
had the cone been oblique, the statement would not have been true 
without a qualification excluding the circular sections suboontrary 
to the base of the cone. 

Of the contents of Euclid's Surface4oci^ or tcmtoc irfi^ lirt^vccigi, 
we know nothing, though it is reasonable to suppose that the 
treatise dealt with such loci as the surfaces of cones, spheres and 
cylinders, and perhaps other surfaces of the second degree. But 
Pappus gives two lemmas to the Surfaee-loeif one of which (the 
second) is of the highest importance*. This lemma states, and 
gives a complete proof of, the proposition that the loeus of a point 
whose distance from a given point is in a given ratio to its distance 
from afioced line is a conic section, and is an ellipse^ a parabola, or a 
hyperbola according as the given ratio is less than, equal to, or greater 
than, unity. 

The proof in the case where the given ratio is different from 
unity is shortly as follows. 

Let S be the fixed point, and let SX be the perpendicular from S 
on the fixed line. Let P be any point on the locus and PN perpen- 
dicular to SX, so that SP \& U> NX in the given ratio. Let e be 
this ratio, so that 

^ NX^ ' 

Now let JT be a point on the line SX such that 

. Sin 

NX*' 
* Pappus (ed. Holtacb) p. 1006 seqq. 



ARISTAEUS AND EUCUD. 



XXXVU 



then, if Z' be another point so taken that NK » NK\ we shall have 

. PUT ^ SIP SN* _ PIT PN' 

^" NX^ NK*" NX^-yR^' XK.XK'' 

The position of the points iT, JT, K' changes with the position of P. 
If we suppose ii to be the point on which N falls when K coincides 
with JT, we have 

SA SN 

AX"^" NX' 



± 



K A N SIC 



A' 



J — I 




K N 1^ 



A' 



AX NK 
It follows that -^ , ^ are both known and equal, and therefore 

SX SK 

SA ' ^ ^'^ ^^ known and equal. Hence either of the latter 

expressions is equal to 



SXj-SK 

SA^SN' 

which is therefore known 



or 



XK 

AN* 



r SX , n 



XXXVm THE EARLIEK HISTORY OF CONICS. 

In like manner, if il' be the point on which If falli} when K' 
coincides with X^ we have -^ s e ; and in the same way we shall 

find that the ratio -rq^ is known and is equal to 



ii[-a- 



XK XK' 

Hence, by multiplication, the ratio .jJ .,^ has a known value. 

PN* 
And, since y*> y jr* = «*i itom. above, 

This is the property of a central conic, and the conic will be an 
ellipse or a hyperbola according as e is less or greater than 1 ; for in 
the former case the points A , A' will lie on the same side of X and 
in the latter case on opposite sides of iT, while in the former case 
N will lie on AA* and in the latter N will lie on AA' produced. 

The case where <; = 1 is ea»y, and the proof need not be given 
here. 

We can scarcely avoid the conclusion that Euclid must have 
used this proposition in the treatise on $ur/ace4oei to which Pappus' 
lemma refers, and that the necessity for the lemma arose out of the 
fact that Euclid did not prove it. It must therefore have been 
assumed by him as evident or quoted as well known. It may 
therefore well be that it was taken from some known work*, not 
impossibly that of Aristaeus on solid loci. 

That Euclid should have been acquainted with the property of 
conies referred to the focus and directiix cannot but excite surprise 

* It is interesting to note in this connexion another passage in Pappus 
where he is disoassing the varioas methods of trisecting an angle or ciroolar 
arc. He gives (p. 284) a method which " some ** had nsed and which involves 
the construction of a hyperbola whose eccentricity is 2. 

Suppose it is a segment of a circle which has to be divided into three equal 




parts. Sappose it done, and let SP be one-third of the arc SPR. Join RP, SP, 
Then the angle R8P is equal to twice the angle 8RP, 



AK18TAEUS AND EUCLID. XXXIX 

seeing that this property does not appear at all in A|K)lloniu8, and 
the focus of a parabola is not even mentioned by him. The ex- 
planation may be that, as we gather from the preface of ApoUonius, 
he does not profess to give all the properties of conies known to 
him, and his third Book is intended to give the means for the 
synthesis of solid loci, not the actual determination of them. The 
focal property may therefore have been held to be a more suitable 
subject for a treatise on solid loci than for a work on conies proper. 
We must not assume that the focal properties had not, up to 
the time of ApoUonius, received much attention. The contrary 
is indeed more probable, and this supposition is supported by a 
remarkable coincidence between ApoUonius' method of determining 
the foci of a central conic and the theorem contained in Pappus' 
3l8t lemma to Euclid's Porisms, 

This theorem is as follows : Let A' A be the diameter of a semi- 
circle, and from A\ A let two straight lines be drawn at right angles 
to A' A. Let any straight line BE' meet the two perpendiculars 
in By R' respectively and the semicircle in 7. Further let YS be 
drawn perpendicular to RR\ meeting A' A produced in S, 

It is to be proved that 

AS.SA=^AR.A'R, 

i.e. that SAiAR=^ A'R' : A'S. 

Now, since R', A\ F, S are concydic, the angle A'SR is equal to 
the angle A'YR in the same segment. 



Let SE bisect the angle /{5P, meeting RP in E and draw EX^ PN perpen- 
dicular to RS, 

Then the angle ERS is eqoal to the angle ESR, so that RE^ES ; 

.*. RX—XSt and X is given. 

Also RS : SP= RE :EP=RXi XN; 

.-. RS : RX=zSP : NX. 

Bat RS=2RX; 

.-. SP=2NX, 

whence SP*=^X\ 

or PN*-¥SN*-iNX^, 

*' Since then the two points S, X are given, and PN is perpendicular to SX, 

whUe the ratio of NX* to PN*+SN* is given, P lies on a hyperbola.'* 

This is obviously a particular case of the lemma to the rfnroi wpot iwi^wd^^ 

NX* 
and the ratio pj^-^ — ^^rr^ is stated in the same form in both oases. 



xl 



THE SAitLIER HISTOKY OP CONICU. 



SiiuiUrljr, the angle AJiS ii equal to the angle ATS. 
But, aince A'YA, RTSanhofh n^t a.ng\ea, 
LA'TJf=i.ATS; 
.: ., A'SS- = J. ARS ; 
hence, by sunilar triaogles, 

A'Jf:A'S^SA:AR, 
or AS.SA' = AJi.A'ie. 




• It follows of course from this that, if the rectangle AB.A'R ia 
constant, AS. SA is also coiutant and ^ is a fixed pc^t. 

It will be observed that in ApoUonlns, IIL 45 [Prop. 69], the 
complete circle ia used, AR, A'R are tangents at the extremities of 
the axis AA' of a conic, and RR' is an; other tangent to the oonic. 
He has already proved, iit. 42 [Prop. 66], that in this cue 
AR.A'R = BC', and he nov takes two points iS^, S' on the axis 
or the axis produced such that 

AS.SA' = AS'.S'A-mm]'. 
He then proves that RR' subtends a right angle at each of the 
points S, S', and proceeds to deduce other focal properties. 

Thus Apollonitis' procedure is exaoti; similar to that in the 
lemma to Euclid's Poriami, except that the latter does not bring in 
the conic. This fact goes tar to support the view of Zeuthen as to 
the origin and aim of Euclid's Porienu, namely, that they were 
partly a sort of by-product in the investigation of oonio sections and 
partly a means devised for the further development of the subject. 



CHAPTER III. 



ABCHIMEDES. 



No survey of the history of conic sections could be complete 
without a tolerably exhaustive account of everything bearing on the 
subject which can be found in the extant works of Archimedes. 

There is no trustworthy evidence that Archimedes wrote a 
separate work on conies. The idea that he did so rests upon no more 
substantial basis than the references to Kiavucd aroixua (without any 
mention of the name of the author) in the passages quoted above, 
which have by some been assumed to refer to a treatise by Archi- 
medes himself. But the assumption is easily seen to be unsafe when 
the references are compared with a similar reference in another 
passage* where by the words iv t§ oTOixccoxrct the EUinenU 
of Euclid are undoubtedly meant. Similarly the words "this is 
proved in the elements of conies " simply mean that it is found in 
the text-books on the elementary principles of conies. A positive 
proof that this is so may be drawn from a passage in Eutocius' 
.commentary on Apollonius. Heracleidest, the biographer of Archi- 
medes, is there quoted as saying that Archimedes was the first to 
invent theorems in conies, and that Apollonius, having found that 
they had not been published by Archimedes, appropriated them | ; 

* On t/ie Sphere and Cylinder ^ i. p. 24. The propositioD quoted is Eool. xn. 2. 

t The name appears in the passage referred to as *HpdirX€(Of. Apollonius 
(ed. Heiberg) Vol ii. p. 168. 

t Heradeides' statement that Archimedes was the first to *' invent" 
(hruf^^oi) theorems in conies is not easy to explain. Bretsohneider (p. 156) 
pnts it, as well as the charge of plagiarism levelled at Apollonius, down to the 
malice with which small minds would probably seek to avenge themseWes for 
the contempt in which they would be held by an intelleotoal giant like 



xlii THE EAULI£U HISTORY OF CONICS. 

and Eutocius subjoins the remark that the allegation is iu hiH 
opinion not true, ** for on the one hand Archimedes appears in many 
passages to have referred to the elements of oonics as an older 
treatise (cJs TroXotorcpas), and on the other hand Apollonios does not 
profess to be giving his oMm discoveries.'' Thus Eutocius regarded 
the reference as being to earlier expositions of the elementary 
theory of conies by other geometers: otherwise, i.e. if he had 
thought that Archimedes referred to an earlier work of his own, he 
would not have used the word waXaioripai but rather some expression 
like rrpoTtpov ^icScSo/icvi/s. 

In searching for the various propositions in conies to be found 
in Archimedes, it is natural to look, in the first instance, for indica- 
tions to show how far Archimedes was aware of the possibility of 
producing the three conic sections from cones other than right cones 
and by plane sections other than those perpendicular to a generator 
of the cone. We observe, first, that he always uses the old names 
"section of a right-angled cone*' &c, employed by Aristaeus, and 
there is no doubt that in the three places where the word cXXci^is 
appears in the Mss. it has no business there. But, secondly, at the 
very beginning of the treatise On Conoids and Spheroids we find the 
following : " If a cone be cut by a plane meeting all the sides of the 
cone, the section will be either a circle or a section of an acute- 
angled cone" [i.e. an ellipse]. The way in which this proposition was 
proved in the case where the plane of section is at right angles to the 
plane of symmetry can be inferred from propositions 7 and 8 of the 
same treatise, where it is shown that it is possible to Jind a cone of 
which a given ellipse is a section and whose apex is on a straight 
line drawn from the centre of the ellipse (1) perpendicular to the 
plane of the ellipse, (2) not perpendicular to its plane, but lying in 
a plane at right angles to it and passing through one of the axes 
of the ellipse. The problem evidently amounts to determining the 



Apollonias. Heiberg, on the other hand, thinks that this is unfair to Hera- 
oleides, who was probably misled into making the charge of plagiarism by finding 
many of the propositions of Apollonios already quoted I7 Archimedes as known. 
Heibeig holds also that Heradeides did not intend to ascribe the actual 
invention of oonics to Archimedes, but only meant that the elementary theory of 
conic sections as formnlated by Apollonius was due to Archimedes ; otherwise 
Eatocias' contradiction would have taken a different form and he would not 
have omitted to point to the well-known fact that Menaeohmus was the 
discoverer of the conic sections. 



AltCHIMEDES. 



xlui 



cirvulur iiectioiut uf the cone, and this is what ArchimedeM proceeds 
to do. 

(1) Conceive ui ellipse with BB' as its minor axis and 
lying in a. plane perpendicular to the plane of the paper : suppose 
the line CO drawn perpeodicnlar to the plane of the ellipBe, and 



/ 


k 


/\ 


r\\'\„ 


; 


W/a \ 




"\^ 



let be the apex of the required cone. Produce OB, OC, Off, and 
in the same plane with them draw BED meeting OC, OS produced 
in E, D respectively, and in such a direction that 

nB.ED:EO^''CA':GO' 



(where CA ia half the major axi 
And this is possible, since 



. of the ellipse). 



BE. ED : BO'>BC.CK : Cif: 

[Both the construction and this hut proposition aiv aasumed as 
known.] 

Now conceive n circle with BD as diameter drawn in a plane 
perpendicular to that of the paper, and describe a cone passing 
through this circle and having for its apex. 

We have then to prove that the given ellipse is a section of this 
cone, or, if P is any point on the ellipse, that P lies on the surface 
of the oone. 

Draw PS perpendicular to BS. Join ON, and produce it to 
meet BD in M, and let MQ be drawn in the plane of the circle on 
BD aa diameter and perpendicular to BD, meeting the circumference 
of the circle in Q. Also draw FG, HK through E, M respectively 
each parallel to BB. 



xliv THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICS. 

Now <J^* •.HM.ME=BM.MD:HM.MK 

= BE.SD:FS.BG 
= {BS.BD:BO*).{BO*:FE.Ba) 
= {CA* : GO*) . {CO* : BG . Gff) 
= CA*.BG,CS 
^Pm-.BS.SB. 
.-. QM*.F&* = HM.MK.BN.Nff 

= oir:02n, 

whence, since PS^, QM ore parallel, OPQ is a itnight line. 

But Q is on the circumference of the circle on BD as diamet«r ; 
therefore OQ is a generator of the cone, and therefore P lie* on the 
cone. 

Thus the none passee through all points of the given ellipse. 

(2) Let OG not be perpendicular to AA', one of the axes of 
the given ellipse, and let the plane of the paper be that containing 
A A' and OG, so that the plane of the ellipee is perpendicular to that 
plane. Let BB be the other axis of the ellipee. 




Now OA, OA' are unequal Produce OA' to /) so that OA = 
Join AD, and dmw FO through C parallel to it. 



ARCHIBfEDES. xlv 

Conceive a plane through AD perpendicular to the plane of the 

pai>er, and in it describe 

either (a), if CJ5* = FC . CG, a circle with diameter AD, 

or (6), if not, an ellipse on AD &s axis such that if li be the other 

axis 

d^iAD'^CB'iFC.CG. 

Take a cone with apex and passing through the circle or 
ellipse just drawn. Tliis is possible even when the curve is an 
ellipse, because the line from to the middle point of AD is perpen- 
dicular to the plane of the ellipse, and the construction follows that 
in the preceding case (1). 

Let P be any point on the given ellipse, and we have only to 
prove that P lies on the surface of the cone so described. 

Draw PI^ perpendicular to AA\ Join ON, and produce it to 
meet AD m M, Through M draw HK parallel to A* A, Lastly, draw 
MQ perpendicular to the plane of the paper (and therefore perpen- 
dicuhir to both HK and AD) meeting the ellipse or circle about AD 
(and therefore the surface of the cone) in Q. 

Then 

QM' : HM. MK=(QM* : DM. MA) . {DM. MA : EM. MK) 

= (rf» : AD*).(FC.CG : AV.CA) 
= {CB^ :FC. CG).{FC.CG : AV. CA) 
^CB'i AV.CA 
^PN^iA'N.NA. 
:. QW'.PN^^HM.MK'.A'N.NA 

= OM^ : 0N\ 

Hence OPQ is a straight line, and, Q being on the surface of the 
cone, it follows that P is also on the surface of the cone. 

The proof that the three conies can be produced by means of 
sections of any circular cone, whether right or oblique, which are 
made by planes perpendicular to the plane of symmetry, but not 
necessarily perpendicular to a generating line of the cone, is of course 
essentially the same as the proof for the ellipse. It is therefore to 
be inferred that Archimedes was equally aware of the fact that the 
parabola and the hyperbola could be found otherwise than by th 
old method. The continued use of the old names of the curves is of 
no importance in this connexion because the ellipse was still called 
the " section of an acute-angled cone " after it was discovered that 



xlvi THE EARLIER HISTORY OF OONICa 

it could 1)6 produced by means of a plane cutting all the generating 
lines of any cone, whatever its vertical angle. Heiberg concludes 
that Archimedes only obtained the parabola in the old way 
because he describes the parameter as double of the line between 
the %'ertex of the parabola and the axis of the cone, which is only 
correct in the case of the right-angled cone ; but this is no more 
an objection to the continued use of the term as a well-known 
description of the parameter than it is an objection to the con- 
tinued use by Archimedes of the term ''section of an acute-angled 
cone'' that the ellipse had been found to be obtainable in a different 
manner. Zeuthen points out, as further evidence, the fact that we 
have the following propositions enunciated by Archimedes without 
proof {On Conoids cmd SpIieroidSf 11) : 

(1) "If a right-angled conoid [a paraboloid of ravolution] be 
cut by a plane through the axis or parallel to the axis, the section 
will be a section of a right-angled cone the same as that compre- 
hending the figure (d avra rf irtptXafiPayova^ to o^fia). And its 
diameter [axis] will be the common section of the plane which 
cuts the figure and of that which is drawn through the axis perpen- 
dicular to the cutting plane. 

(2) " If an obtuse-angled conoid [a hyperboloid of revolution] be 
cut by a plane through the axis or parallel to the axis or through 
the apex of the cone enveloping {vtpUxovrtt^) the conoid, the section 
will be a section of an obtuse-angled cone: if [the cutting plane 
passes] through the axis, the same as that comprehending the figure : 
if parallel to the axis, similar to it : and if through the apex of the 
cone enveloping the conoid, not similar. And the diameter [axis] of 
the section will be the common section of the plane which cuts the 
figure and of that drawn through the axis at right angles to the 
cutting plane. 

(3) "If any one of the spheroidal figures be cut by a plane 
through the axis or parallel to the axis, the section will be a section of 
an acute-angled cone : if through the axis, the actual section which 
comprehends the figure : if parallel to the axis, similar to it." 

Archimedes adds that the proofs of all these propositions are 
obvious. It is therefore tolerably certain that they were based 
on the same essential principles as his earlier proofe relating to the 
sections of conical surfaces and the proofs given in his later investi- 
gations of the elliptic sections of the various surfaces of revolution. 
These depend, as will be seen, on the proposition that, if two chords 



ARCHIMRDES. 



:lvii 



drawn in fixed directions intersect in a point, the ratio of the rect- 
angles under the segments is independent of the position of the 
point. This corresponds exactly to the use, in the above proofs with 




regard to the cone, of the proposition that, if straight lines /Yr, IIK 
are drawn in fixed directions between two lines forming an angle, 
and if FG, HK meet in any point J/, the ratio FM . MG : mf.MK 
is constant; the latter property being in fact the particular case 
of the former where the conic reduces to two straight lines. 

The following is a reproduction, given by way of example, of the 
proposition (13) of the treatise On Conoids and Spheroids which proves 
that the section of an obtuse-angled conoid [a hyperboloid of i*e- 
volution] by any plane which meets all the generators of the en- 
veloping cone, and is not perpendicular to the axis, is an ellipse 
whose major axis is the part intercepted within the hyperboloid of 
the line of intersection of the cutting plane and the plane through 
the axis perp>endicular to it. 







1 


r 








/^ 


A 


N 


<. 


wP 


/ 


N 


V 


X 


e/ 








Nr^ 


'^ \ 


7 




D 




M^ 


\ 



Suppose the plane of the paper to be this latter plane, and the 
line BC to be its intersection with the plane of section which is 
perpendicular to the plane of the paper. Let Q be any point on 
the section of the hyperboloid, and draw QAf perpendicular to BC, 



xlviii THE EABLIER HISTOBT OF C0NIC8. 

Let EAFhe the hyperbolic section of the hyperlwloid made by 
the plane of the paper and AD Ob axis. Through M in this plane 
draw EDF at right angles to AD meeting the hyperbola in E, F. 

Then the section of the hyperboloid by the plane through EF 
perpendicular to AD ib & circle, QM lies in its plane, and Q is a 
point on it. 

Therefore QAT = EM . MF. 

Now let FT be that tangent to the hyperbola which is parallel 
to BC, and let it meet the axis in T and the tangent at A in 0. 
Draw Fy perpendicular to AD. 

Then QM^ : BM. MC=EM.MF:BM. MC 

= OA^ : 0P\ 

which is constant for all positions of Q on the section through BC. 
Also OA < OPf because itiaa property qfhyperbolaa thai 

AT< AN, and therefore 0T< OP, 

whence aforttori OA < OP. 

Therefore Q lies on an ellipse whose major axis is BC. 

It is also at once evident that all parallel elliptic sections are 
similar. 

Archimedes, it will be seen, here assumes two propositions 
(a) that the ratio of the rectangles under the segments of 
intersecting chords in fixed directions is equal to the constant ratio 
of the squares on the parallel tangents to the conic, and 
{h) that in a hyperbola AN^ AT. 

The first of these two propositions has already been referred to 
as having been known before Archimedes' time [p. xxxv] ; the second 
assumption is also interesting. It is not easy to see how the latter 
could be readily proved except by means of the general property 
that, if PP' be a diameter of a hyperbola and from any point Q on 
the curve the ordinate QF be drawn to the diameter, while the 
tangent QT meets the diameter in T, then 

TP:TF^PV\FV, 

so that we may probably assume that Archimedes was aware of this 
property of the hyperbola, or at least of the particular case of it 
where the diameter is the axis. 

It is certain that the corresponding general proposition for the 
parabola, PV = FT, was familiar to him ; for he makes frequent use 
of it. 



ARCHIMEDES. xlix 

As a preliminary to collecting and arranging in order the other 
properties of conies either assumed or proved by Archimedes, it may 
be useful to note some peculiarities in his nomenclature as compared 
with that of Apollonius. The term diameter^ when used with 
reference to the complete conic as distinguished from a segment, is 
only applied to what was afterwards called the axis. In an dlipse 
the major axis is 6. fict^oiv Stafierpo^ and the minor axis d iXda-a-tav 
iuifL€Tpo9. For the hyperbola, by the ' diameter ' is only understood 
that part of it which is within the (single-branch) hyperbola. This we 
infer from the fact that the ' diameter ' of a hyperbola is identified 
with the axis of the figure described by its revolution about the 
diameter, while the axis of the hjrperboloid does not extend outside 
it, as it meets (anrcrcu) the surface in the vertex (icopv^a), and the 
distance between the vertex and the apex of the enveloping cone 
[the centre of the revolving hyperbola] is ' the line adjticent to the 
axis ' (d irorcov<ra rt^ a(ovi). In the parabola diameters other than 
the axis are called Hhe lines parcUlel to the diameter*; but in a 
ie^^ment of a parabola that one which bisects the base of the segment 
is called the diameter of the aegmerU (tov r/iafuiTos). In the ellipse 
diameters other than the axes have no special name, but are simply 
' lines drawn through the centre.' 

The term axis is only used with reference to the solids of 
revolution. For the complete figure it is the axis of revolution ; for 
a segment cut off by a plane it is the portion intercepted within the 
segment of the line, (1) in the paraboloid, drawn through the vertex 
of the segment parallel to the axis of revolution, (2) in the hyper- 
boloid, joining the vertex of the segment and the apex of the 
enveloping cone, (3) in the spheroid, joining the vertices of the ttoo 
segments into which the figure is divided, the vertex of any segment 
being the point of contact of the tangent plane parallel to the base. 
In a spheroid the 'diameter' has a special signification, meaning 
the straight line drawn through the centre (defined as the middle 
point of the axis) at right angles to the axis. Thus we are told 
that "those spheroidal figures are called similar whose axes have 
the same ratio to the diameters*." 

The two diameters (axes) of an ellipse are called conjugate 
(avlvytU). 

The asymptotes of a hyperbola are in Archimedes the straight 
lines nearest to the section of the obtuse-angled cone (ai €yyiara 

* On Conoids and Spheroids, p. 282. 

H. c. d 



I THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICS. 

cMcuu raf rov dfc^Xvyunov kwvov rofiaf), while what we call the 
centre of a hyperbola is for Archimedes the point in whiek the 
nearest lines meet (to <ra/xcibi^, xaff i al tyyurra avfkvhmvri). 
Archimedes never speaks of the ' centre ' of a hjrperbola : indeed the 
use of it implies the conception of the two branches of a h3rperbola 
as forming one curve, which does not appear earlier than in 
Apollonius. 

When the asymptotes of a hyperbola revolve with the curve 
round the axis they generate the cone enveloping or comprehending 
the h3rperboloid, (rov il kQvov rov ircpiXa^tfcvra viro rav iyyurra ra« 
rov dfi.pXvyiavi€v kuovov ro/iA9 vcpi^ovra ro icoivoctS^s icaXcurtfoi). 

The following enumeration* gives the principal properties of 
conies mentioned or proved in Archimedes. It will be convenient 
to divide them into classes, taking first those propositions which are 
either quoted as having been proved by earlier writers, or assumed 
as known. They fall naturally under four heada 

I. General. 

1. The proposition about the rectangles under the segments of 
intersecting chords has been already mentioned (p. xxxv and xlviii). 

2. Similar conies. The criteria of similarity in the case of 
central conies and of segments of conies are practically the same as 
those given by Apollonius. 

The proposition that cUl parabolas are similar was evidently 
familiar to Archimedes, and is in fact involved in his statement that 
all paraboloids of revolution are similar (ra fUv oSv 6p6oyti¥ui 
«cc0Koci8«a irdvra 8/iOia hm)» 

3. Tangents at the extremities of a * diameter' (axis) are 
perpendicular to it. 

II. The Ellipse. 

1. The relations 

PJP : AN. A'ir= FN'^ : AN' . A'N' 

= BB'^:AA'^ or CJfiCA^ 

* A word of aoknowledgement is doe here to Heiherg for the valuable 
■ammaiy of ** Die KenDtnisse dee Arcbimedes iiber die Kegelsdmitte," contained 
in the ZeiUehrift fUr Mathematik und Phynk {Hittorueh-literariicheAhtheawig) 
1880, pp. 41—67. This article is a complete guide to the relevant passages in 
Archimedes, though I have of coarse not considered myself ezcQeed in any 
instance from referring to the original. 



ARCHIBfEDES. H 

are constantly used as expressing the fundamental property and the 
criterion by which it is established that a curve is an ellipse. 

2. The more general proposition 

Qr*:PV.P'V=:Q^ F« : PV . FT 
also occurs. 

3. If a circle be described on the major axis as diameter, and 
an ordinate PN to the axis of the ellipse be produced to meet the 
circle in p, then 

;)iV:PiV= (const). 

4. The straight line drawn from the centre to the point of 
contact of a tangent bisects all chords parallel to the tangent. 

5. The straight line joining the points of contact of parallel 
tangents passes through the centre ; and, if a line be drawn through 
the centre parallel to either tangent and meeting the ellipse in two 
points, the parallels through those points to the chord of contact of 
the original parallel tangents will touch the ellipse. 

6. If a cone be cut by a plane meeting all the generators, the 
section is either a circle or an ellipse. 

Also, if a cylinder be cut by two parallel planes each meeting all 
the generators, the sections will be either circles or ellipses equal 
and similar to one another. 

III. The Hyperbola. 

1. We find, as fundamental properties, the following, 

PN^ : P'N'* = AN, AN : AN' . A'N\ 

gyt . Q'V^Pr. PT : Pr.PT; 

but Archimedes does not give any expression for the constant ratios 
PN* : AN. A'N and ©F* : P7. PT, from which we may infer that 
he had no conception of diameters or radii of a hyperbola not 
meeting the curve. 

If (7 be the point of concourse of the asymptotes, A' is arrived at by 
producing AC and measuring CA' along it equal to CA ; and the same 
procedure is used for finding P\ the other extremity of the diameter 
through P : the lengths AA\ PP' are then in each case double of the 
line adjacent to the axis [in one case of the whole surface, and in the 
other of a segment of which P is the ' vertex *]. This term for AA\ 
PP' was, no doubt, only used in order to avoid mention of the cone of 

d2 



lii THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICS. 

which the hyperbola is a section, as the introdoction of this cone 
might have complicated matters (seeing that the enveloping cone also 
appears); for it is obvious that A A* appeared first as the distance 
along the principal diameter of the hyperbola intercepted between 
the vertex and the point where it meets the surface of the opposite 
half of the double cone, and the notion of the as3rmptote8 came 
later in the order of things. 

2. If from a point on a hyperbola two straight lines are drawn 
in any directions to meet the asymptotes, and from another point 
two other straight lines are similarly drawn parallel respectively to 
the former, the rectangles contained by each pair will be equal*. 

3. A line through the point of concourse of the asymptotes and 
the point of contact of any tangent bisects all chords parallel to the 
tangent. 

4. If FN^ the principal ordinate from P, and FT^ the tangent 
at P, meet the axis Ssa N^T respectively, then 

AN>AT. 

5. If a line between the as3rmptotes meets a hyperbola and is 
bisected at the point of concourse, it will touch the hyperbola t* 

IV. The Parabola. 

1. Pir.P'N'^^ANiAN' 
and QV^i^r^^PV'.Pr 

We find also the forms 

PN'^Pa.AN\ 

qr^^p.pv r 

p^ (the principal parameter) is called by Archimedes the parameUr 
of the ordinates (parallel to the tangent at the vertex), irap* ai^ 
fiiWvrai al diro ran rofjua^, and is also described as the double of the line 
extending [from the vertex] to the axis [of the cone] cL hirksuria ra.% 

fuxpi' Tov a(ovos. 

The term ' parameter ' is not applied by Archimedes to p, the 
constant in the last of the four equations just given, p is simply 
described as the line to which the rectangle equal to QV* and of 
width equal to PF is applied. 

2. Parallel chords are bisected by one line parallel to the axis ; 

* This proposition and its converse appear in a fragment given hy Eatocius 
in his note on the 4th proposition of Book n. On the Sphere and Cylinder. 
t This is also used in the fragment quoted by Entooiui. 






ARCHIMEDES. 



liii 




TA 



and a line parallel to the axis bisects chords parallel to the tangent 
at the point where the said line cuts the parabola. 

3. If QD be drawn perpendicular to the diameter PV bisecting 
the chord Q VQ!^ and if p be the parameter 

of the ordinates parallel to Q^^ while f^ 
is the principal parameter, 

[This proposition has already been 
mentioned above (p. xxxv, xxxvi). It is 
easily derived from Apollonlus' proposi- 
tion I. 49 [Prop. 22]. If PF meet the 
tangent at A in E^ and FT^ AE intersect 
in Oy the proposition in question proves 
that 

OP iPE=pi2PT, 
and OP=^lPT\ 

:. PT^^p.PE 

^p.AN. 
Thus Q P : QD" = PT* : PN\ by simUar triangles, 

= p.AN^ ipa.AN' 

4. If the tangent at Q meet the diameter PF in 7*, and QF be 
an ordinate to the diameter, 



PY^PT. 



5. By the aid of the preceding, tangents can be drawn to a 
parabola (a) from a point on it, (6) parallel to a given chord. 

6. In the treatise On JlocUing bodies (ircpi rCiy dxovfUyiav), ll. 5, 
we have this proposition : If JT be a point on the axis, and KF be 
measured along the axis away from the vertex and equal to half the 
principal parameter, while KH is drawn perpendicular to the 
diameter through any point P, then Fff is perpendicular to the 
tangent at P. (See the next figure.) 

It is obvious that this is equivalent to the proposition that the 
subnormal at any point P is constant and equal to half the principal 
parameter. 



Hv 



THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CX)NICK. 



7. If QAQ' be a segment of a parabola such that QQ' is 
perpendicular to the axis, while QVq^ 

parallel to the tangent at P, meets the q 

diameter through P in F, and if J^ be 
any other point on the curve the ordinate 
from which RffK meets PV m H and 
the axis in K^ then {M being the middle 
point of QQ') 

FY.FE^^MK'.KA, 



or= 



/ 1 


H v/ 


A ^"- 


X 


AVM Q K/O F 



**/ar tiiia is proved " (On floating bodies^ 
II. 6.) 

[There is nothing to show where or 
by whom the proposition was demon- 
strated, but the proof can be supplied 
as follows : 

PV MK 
We have to prove that p^ - ^ is jwsitive or zero. 

Let Qq meet AM in 0. 

PV MK PV.AK-PH.MK 



Now 



PH KA" PU.KA 

_ AK . PV ^ (AK ^ AN) {AM •• AK) 

AK.PU 

AK*-^AK{AM-^AN-PV) + AM.A N 

AK.PH 



AK'^-AK.OM^AM.AN 



AK.PU 



(since iliV=iir). 



But 



OM NT 
QM" PN' 

OM' iAN' 



whence 



or 



' Pa.AM Pa. AN' 

OM'^iAM.AN, 

,^ ,^ OM' 
AM.AN=^^ . 



It follows that 

AK' - AK. OM + AM. AN= AK' - AK. OM + 



OM' 



ARCHIMEDES. Iv 

which is a complete square, and therefore cannot be negative ; 

whence the proposition follows.] 

8. If any three similar and similarly situated parabolic seg- 
ments have one extremity {B) of their bases common and their 
bases BQ^^ BQ^, BQ^ lying along the same straight line, and if EO 




be drawn parallel to the axis of any of the segments meeting the 
tangent at i9 to one of them in Ej the common base in 0, and each 
of the three segments in B^j E^, R^^ then 

[This proposition is given in this place because it is (utumed 
without proof {On floating bodies, ii. 10). But it may well be that 
it is assumed, not because it was too well known to need proof, but 
as being an easy deduction from another proposition proved in the 
QHodriUwe of a parabola which the reader could work out for 
himself. The latter proposition is given below (No. 1 of the next 
group) and demonstrates that, if EB be the tangent at i? to the 
segment BRfi^ , 

ER^'.Rfi^BOiOQ^. 

To deduce from this the property enunciated above, we observe 
first that, if F,, F^, F, be the middle points of the bases of the three 



Ivi THE EARLIER UISTORY OF CONICS. 

segments and the (parallel) diameters through F,, F^, K, meet the 
respective segments in F^, P^^ P,, then, since the segments are 
similar, 

BV,. BY,: BV, = PJr- P,y^•■P^y^. 

It follows that B, Pj , P^, P, are in one straight line. 

But, since BE is the tangent at J? to the segment BRyQ^^ 
T^P^ = P, V^ (where V^P^ meets BE in T^). 

Therefore, if F^,, F^, meet BE in r„ r,, 

rp sP F 
and r^.^P.F., 

and j9i? is therefore a tangent to all three segments. 
Next, since ER^ : Rfl = BO : OQ^ , 

ER, :EO:^BO:BQ^. ) 
Similarly ER, :EO = BOi BQ^, 

and ER^ .EO^BOx BQ^. 

From the first two relations we derive 



^#=^^ 



U«. £q) 



_BO.^fi, 
~BQ,.BQ/ 

Similarly ^ - ^^^ • ^'^' 

Similarly SO - BQ,. BQ/ 

From the last two results it follows that 

B,R,~ £Q,' Qfi'J' 

9. If two similar parabolic segments with bases BQ^, BQ^ be 
placed as described in the preceding proposition, and if BR^R^ be any 




ARCHIMEDES. Ivii 

straight line through B cutting the segments in i^,, H^ respectively, 
then 

[Let the diameter through R^ meet the tangent at B in E^ the 
other s^pnent in R, and the common base in 0. 
Then, as in the last proposition, 

ER^iEO^BOxBQ^, 

and ER:EO = BO:BQ^; 

.-. ER : ER^ = BQ^ : BQ,. 

But, since ^, is a point within the segment BRQ^, and ERR^ is the 
diameter through R^, we have in like manner 

ER : ER^ = BR, : BR^. 

Hence BQ, : BQ^ = BR, : ^jB,.] 

10. Archimedes assumes the solution of the problem of placing, 
between two parabolic segments, similar and similarly situated as 
in the last case, a straight line of a given length and in a direction 
parallel to the diameters of either parabola. 

[Let the given length be ^ and assume the problem solved, RR, 
being equal to L 

Using the last figure, we have 

BO ER, 



BQ, " EO ' 

BO^ER 
BQ^'EO' 



and 

Subtracting, we obtain 

BO^^Q, ^ RR, . 
BQ, . BQ, " EO ' 

whence BO.OE^l.^-^^^', 

which is known. 

And the ratio BO : OE is given. 

Therefore B0\ or OE*, can be found, and therefore 0. 

Lastly, the diameter through determines RR,.^ 

It remains to describe the investigations in which it is either 
expressed or implied that they represent new developments of the 
theory of conies due to Archimedes himself. With the exception of 



Iviii THE KARLIER UlSTORV OF CONICS. 

certain ptxjpoBitioiis relating to the areas of ellipses, his cUsooveries 
mostly have reference to the parabola and, in particular, to the 
determination of the area of any parabolic segment. 

The preface to the treatise on that subject (which was called by 
Archimedes, not rerpaywvurfws irapafiok^^^ but V€pl r^i rov 6fi6oytaviov 
Kwvov TOfi^) is interesting. After alluding to the attempts of the 
earlier geometers to square the circle and a segment of a circle, he 
proceeds: "And after that they endeavoured to square the area 
bounded by the section of the whole cone* and a straight line, 
assuming lemmas not easily conceded, so that it was recognised by 
most people that the problem was not solved. But I am not 
aware that any one of my predecessors has attempted to square the 
segment bounded by a straight line and a section of a right-angled 
cone, of which problem I have now discovered the solution. For 
it is here shown that eveiy segment bounded by a straight line and 
a section of a right-angled cone is four-thirds of the triangle which 
has the same base and an equal altitude with the segment, and for 
the demonstration of this fact the following lemma is assumed f : 
that the excess by which the greater of (two) unequal areas exceeds 
the less can, by being added to itself, be made to exceed any given 
finite area. The earlier geometers have also used this lemma ; for it 
is by the use of this same lemma that they have shown that circles 
are to one another in the duplicate ratio of their diameters, and that 
spheres are to one another in the triplicate ratio of their diameters, 
and further that every pyramid is one third part of the prism having 
the same base with the pyramid and equal altitude : also^ that every 
cone is one third part of the cylinder having the same base as 
the cone and equal altitude they proved by assuming a certain 
lemma similar to that aforesaid. And, in the result, each of the 
aforesaid theorems has been accepted^ no less than those proved 

* There seems to be some corruption here : the expression in the text is rat 
0Xov rov Kiifov rofiat, and it is not easy to give a natural and intelligible meaning 
to it. The section of ' the whole cone ' might perhaps mean a section catting 
right through it, i.e. an ellipse, and the 'straight line' might be an axis or 
a diameter. Bat Heiberg objects to the suggestion to read rat d(iry«#r(ov iridrov 
ro/i&f, in view of the addition of kcU tOBdat^ on the ground that the former 
expression always signifies the whole of an ellipse, never a segment of it 
{QuaestiotUM Arehinudeae, p. 149). 

t The lemma is used in the mechanical proof only (Prop. 16 of the treatise) 
and not in the geometrical proof, which depends on End. x. 1 (see p. Ixi, Iziii). 

X The Greek of this passage is : ^vftfiabu M rwr wpoiipri/Ui^uw Bdapfift/irta^ 



ARCHIMEDES. lix 

without the lenima. As therefore my work now published has 
satisfied the same test as the propositions referred to, I have 
written out the proof of it and send it to you, first as investigated 
by means of mechanics and next also as demonstrated by geometry. 
Prefixed are, also, the elementary propositions in conies which are of 
service in the proof '* (arroixtia Kiovuca xpttav txpvra i^ rav diroSct^tv). 

The first three propositions are simple ones merely stated without 
proof. The remainder, which are given below, were apparently not 
considered as forming part of the elementary theory of conies ; and 
this fact, together with the circumstance that they appear only as 
subsidiary to the determination of the areas of parabolic s^ments, 
no doubt accounts for what might at first seem strange, viz. that 
they do not appear in the Conies of Apollonius. 

1. If Qq be tlie base of any aeffmetU of a paraholcty and P the 
vertex^ of the segment, and if Hie diameter through any other point R 
on the curve meet Qq in 0, QP in F, and the tangent at Q in £, then 

(1) QV.70 = 0FiFR, 

(2) QO:Oq^ER:RO\. 



,t^.. 



iKcurrctf iLfijUw ^c<ro9 rcSr &¥€v ro&rov toO Xi^fiftarot dxoS€d€iyfUr<ap wtwurrevKiwai, 
Here it would seem that xeTttrrfvir^rcu must be wrong and that the Paesiye 
should haye been used. 

* Aooording to Archimedes* definition the height ((^ot) of the segment is 
**the greatest perpendicular from the curve upon the base,** and the vertex 
(iro/>v0a) '*the point (on the carve) from which the greatest perpendicular 
is drawn.** The vertex is therefore P, the extremity of the diameter 
bisecting Qq. 

t These results are used in the mechanical investigation of the area of 
a parabolic segment. The mechanical proof is here omitted both because it is 
more lengthy and because for the present purpose the geometrical proof given 
below is more germane. 



Ix THE EARLIER BI8TORY OF CONICS. 

To prove (1), we draw the ordinate BW to PV, meeting QF 
in K. 

Now FViPWrrQViBJr; 

therefore, by paralleb, 

PQ : PK =- PQ* : PF\ 

In other word^, PQ^ PF, PK are in continued proportion ; 

/. PQ:FF=FF:FK 

^FF^-PQ.PK^PF 
= QF:KF; 
therefore, by parallels, 

QV: VO^OF'.FR. 

To prove (2), we obtain from the relation just proved 

QV:qO = OF\ OR. 

Also, since TP^PV, EF^ OF. 

Accordingly, doubling the antecedents in the proportion, 

Qq.qO^OE: OR, 

or QO'.Oq^ER: RO. 

It is clear that the equation (1) above is equivalent to a change 
of axes of coordinates from the tangent and diameter to the chord 
Qq (as axis of x, say) and the diameter through Q (as the axis of y). 



a« 



For, if <?F=a,PF = J, 

and if QO^x, RO = y, 

we have at once from (1) 

a OF 



aj-a OF-y' 



a 

OF "•' 



2a ^x y y ' 

whence 1^ = ^ (2« - a?). 

Zeuthen points out (p. 61) that the results (1) and (2) above can 
be put in the forms 

RO.OV^FR.qO (1) 

and RO.OQ^ER.qO (2) 



ARCHIMEDES. 



Ixi 



and either of these equations represents a particuUr case of the 
parabola as a "locus with respect to four lines.*' Thus the first 
represents the equality of the rectangles formed, two and two, from 
the distances of the movable point R taken in fixed directions from 
the fixed lines Qq, PV, PQ and Gq (where Gq is the diameter 
through q)'y while the second represents the same property with 
respect to the lines Qq^ QD (the diameter through Q\ QT and Gq, 

2. If RM he a diameter hxaecting QV in My and RW he the 
ordinate to PV from R, then 

PV=iRM. 

For PViPW^QViRW 

^iRWiRW; 

:. PV^iPW, 

and PV^^RM. 

3. The triangle PQq is greater than 
half the segment PQq. 

For the triangle PQq is equal to half 
the parallelogram contained by Qq, the 
tangent at P, and the diameters through Q^ q. It is therefore 
greater than half the segment 

GoR. It follows that a polygon can he inscribed in the segment 
such that the remaining segments are together less than any (usignahle 
areck 

For, if we continually take away an area greater than the hal^ 
we can clearly, by continually diminishing the remainders, make 
them, at some time, together less than any given area (EucL x. 1). 

4. JTf^ the same assumptions as in No. 2 above, the triangle PQq 
is equal to eight times the triangle RPQ. 

RM bisects Q F, and therefore it bisects PQ (in F, say). 
Therefore the tangent at i? is parallel to PQ. 




Now 


PV=^RM, 


and 


pr=2rif; 




.: YM=2RY, 


and 


aPQM=2£).PRQ. 


Hence 


/^PQr=iAPSQ, 


80 that 


A PQq = 8 A PJiQ. 



Ixii 



THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONIC& 



Also, it EW produced meet the curve again in r, 

A PQq = 8 A Prq, similarly. 

5. If there be a aeries ofareae A, B, C, 2>... each o/tohich is/our 
times the next in order , and if the largest^ A^ is equal to ike triangle 
PQq, then t/ie sum of aU the areas A, By C, 2>... unU he l4ss than the 
area of (he parabolic segment PQq. 

For, since A PQq = SaPQR = 8 A P^, 

A PQq ^i{^PQR + A Pqr) ; 

therefore, since A PQq = -4, 

A PQR -^ A Pqr ^B. 

In like manner we can prove that the triangles similarly in- 
scribed in the remaining segments are together equal to the area C, 
and so on. 

Therefore il + i? + C-f/) + ... 

is equal to the area of a certain inscribed polygon, and therefore less 
than the area of the segment. 

6. Given the series A^ B^ (7, D..,just described, \f Z he the last 

of the series, then 

A + B-hC-^ ,..-¥Z-^^Z=zi^A. 



A 


m 




B 






C 


D 










ARCHIMEDES. 


Let 








d = J A And so on 


Then, since 








b = iB, 


and 






B 


+ 6-JX. 


Similarly 


B 


+ C + 


C 


+ Cm^B, 


Therefore 


D-h 


... + Z+b + e + d + 



Ixiii 



But 6 + c + £/+...+y = J(^ + C + i)+... + F); 

.'. ^ + C + 2>+... + -^+« = ^il, 

or J 4. B + C + 2) + ... + Z4. JZ= Ji4. 

7. Every segment bounded by a parabola and a chord is 
four-thirds of the triangle which has the same base and equal 
altitude. 

Let K^^.^PQq, 

and we have then to prove that the segment is equal to K. 

NoWy if the segment is not equal to iT, it must be either greater 
or less. 

Firstj suppose it greater. Then, continuing the construction 
indicated in No. 4, we shall finally have segments remaining whose 
sum is less than the area by which the segment PQq exceeds K 
[No. 3, Cor.]. 

Therefore the polygon must exceed K : which is impossible, for, 
by the last proposition, 

where A = ^ i^Qq* 

Secondly f suppose the segment less than K. 

If ^PQq = A, B=\A, C = JJ?, 

and so on, until we arrive at an area Z such that X is less than the 
difference between K and the segment. 



Ixiv THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICS. 

Now, since K exceeds i4 -f i9 4- (7 4- ... -»- JT by an area less than 
X^ and the segment by an area greater than JT, it follows that 

il + j? + (7+ ... -^-X 

is greater than the segment : which is impossible, by No. 4 above. 

Thus, since the segment is neither greater nor less than JT, it 

follows that 

the segment = A' = ^ . a FQq- 

8. The second proposition of the second Book of the treatise On 
the equilibrium of planes {hrmStov txrt^ppowwv) gives a special term 
for the construction of a polygon in a parabolic segment after the 
manner indicated in Nos. 2, 4 and 5 above, and enunciates certain 
theorems connected with it, in the following passage : 

" If in a segment bounded by a straight line and a section of a 
right-angled cone a triangle be inscribed having the same base as 
the segment and equal altitude, if again triangles be inscribed in the 
remaining s^pnents having the same bases as those segments and 
equal altitude, and if in the remaining segments triangles be 
continually inscribed in the same manner, let the figure so produced 
be said to be inscribed in tlie recognised manner {yvtapifiiat lyypa^ccrdai) 
in the segment. 

And it is plain 

(1) that ifie lines joining ifie two angles of the figure so inscribed 
which are nearest to tfte vertex of tlie segment^ and the neoct pairs of 
angles in order ^ unll be parallel to the base oftlie segment^ 

(2) th<U the said lines unll be bisected by the diameter of the 
segment, and 

(3) ^Mt they unll cut the diameter in the proportions of the 
successive odd numbers, the number one liaving reference to [the 
length adja^cerU to\ the vertex of Hie segment. 

And these properties will have to be proved in their proper 
places {h toIs niffo-iv)." 

These propositions were no doubt established by Archimedes by 
means of the above-mentioned properties of parabolic segments ; and 
the last words indicate an intention to collect the propositions in 
systematic order with proofs. But the intention does not appear to 
have been carried out, or at least we know of no lost work of 
Archimedes in which they could have been included. £utocius 
proves them by means of ApoUonius' Conies, as he does not appear 
to have seen the work on the area of a parabolic segment ; but the 
first two are easily derived from No. 2 above (p. Ixi). 



ARCHIMEDES. 



Ixv 



The third may be proved as follows. 

H Qfififix^^iWz^A ^ * figure yvwpCfjLm iyyrypafifiiyov, we have, 
since Q^g^t Q^q^ ... are all parallel and bisected by PK,, 

= 1:4:9: 16 : 




whence it follows that 

9. IfQQ' he a chord of a parabola bisected in V by the diameter 
PVf and if py i» of constant lengthy then Hie areas of t/ie tria/ngU 
PQQ' and of t/ie segment PQQ' are both constant tvhatever be the 
direction ofQQ', 




H. C. 



Ixvi THE EARLIER HISTORY OF CONICS. 

If BAB be the particular segment whose vertex is ii, so that 
BB' is bisected perpendicularly by the axis at the point N where 
AN^FVy and if QD be drawn perpendicuUr to PF, we have (by 
No. 3 on p. liii) 

Also, since AN -FV^ 

:. BN^QD. 

Hence BN.AN^QD.PV, 

and £^ABB'^£^FQQ'. 

Therefore the triangle PQQ' is of constant area provided that P7 
is of given length. 

Also the area of the segment PQQ' is equal to ^ . £^PQQ' ; 

[No. 7, p. Ixiii]. 

therefore the area of the s^pnent is also constant under the same 
conditions. 

10. The area of any ellipee is to that of a circle whoee diameter 
is equal to the major axis of the ellipse as the minor cuds is to the 
major {or the diatneter of the circle). 

[This is proved in Prop. 4 of the book On Conoids and SpheroidsJ] 

11. The area of an ellipse whose axes are a^ b is to that of a 
circle whose diameter is d^ as (tb to d\ 

[On Conoids and Spheroids, Prop. 5.] 

12. The areas qf ellipses are to one another as the rectangles 
tmder their axes ; and hence similar ellipses are to one another as the 
squares of corresponding axes, 

[On Conoids and Spheroids, Prop. 6 and Cor.] 

It is not within the scope of the present work to give an account 
of the applications of conic sections, by Archimedes and others, 
e.g. for the purpose of solving equations of a d^ree higher than the 
second or in the problems known as vcuccis*. The former application 

* The word ptOcit, commonly ineUnatio in Latin, is diffionlt to translate 
Batiallaotorily. Its meaning is best gathered from Fappne' explanation. He 
says (p. 670) : ** A line is said to verge (yevctr) towards a point if, being prodaced, 
it reaehes the point." As particular cases of the general form of the problem he 
gives the following : 

«• Two lines being given in position, to place between them a straight line 
given in length and verging towards a given point." 

" A semioircle and a straight line at right angles to the base being given in 



ARCHIMEDES. Ixvii 

is involved in Prop. 4 of Book II. On the Sphere and Cylinder, where 
the problem is to cut a given sphere (by a plane) so that the 
segments may bear to one another a given ratia The book On 
Spirals contains propositions which assume the solution of certain 
vcvtrctf, e.g. Props. 8 and 9, in which Archimedes assumes the 
following problem to be effected : If ^^ be any chord of a circle 
and any point on the circumference, to draw through a 
straight line ODP meeting AB in D and the circle again in P 
and such that DP is equal to a given length. Though Archimedes 
does not give the solution, we may infer that he obtained it by 
means of conic sections*. 

A full account of these applications of conic sections by the 
Greeks will be found in the 11th and 12th chapters of Zeuthen's 
work, Die Lehre wm den Kegelachnitien im AUertum, 

position, or two semioircleB with their bases in a straight line, to place between 
the two lines a straight line given in length and verging towards a comer of the 
semidrole." 

TboB a line has to be laid across two given lines or carves so that it passes 
through a given point and the portion intercepted between the lines or curves is 
equal to a given length. 

Zeathen translates the word ptOfftt by *' Einschiebung/' or as we might say, 
** interpolation " ; bat this fails to express the condition that the required line 
mast pass through a given point, jast as the Latin incUnatio (and for that 
matter the Greek term itself) does not explicitly express the other requirement 
that the intercepted portion of the line shall be of given length. 

* Cf. Pappus, pp. 298—302. 



e2 



PART 11. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE CONICS OF APOLLONIU& 

CHAPTER I. 

THE AUTHOR AND HIS OWN ACCOUNT OF THE COXICS. 

Wb possess only the most meagre information about Apo^lonius, 
viz. that he was bom at Perga^ in Pamphylia, in the reign of 
Ptolemy Euergetes (247-222 B.O.), that he flourished under Ptolemy 
Philopator, and that he went when quite young to Alexandria, where 
he studied under the successors of Euclid. We also hear of a visit 
to Pergamum, where he made the acquaintance of Eudemus, to 
whom he dedicated the first three of the eight Books of the Conies, 
According to the testimony of Oeminus, quoted by Eutocius, he was 
greatly held in honour by \m contemporaries, who, in admiration of 
his marvellous treatise on conies, called him the '* great geometer*." 

Seven Books only out of the eight have survived, four in the 
original Greek, and three in an Arabic translation. They were 
edited by Halley in 1710, the first four Books being given in Greek 
with a Latin translation, and the remaining three in a Latin 
translation from the Arabic, to which Halley added a conjectural 
restoration of the eighth Book. 

The first four Books have recently appeared in a new edition by 
J. L. Heiberg (Teubner, Leipzig, 1891 and 1893), which contains, in 
addition to the Greek text and a Latin translation, the fragments 
of the other works of Apollonius which are still extant in Greek, 
the commentaries and lemmas of Pappus, and the commentaries of 
Eutocius. 

* The quotation is from the sixth Book of Oemiuns* tQp fiaBrffidrvp Betapla, 
See Apollonius (ed. Heiberg) Vol. ii. p. 170. 



THE AUTHOR AND HIS OWN ACCOUNT OF THE C0NIC8, kix 

No additional light has been thrown on the Arabic text of 
Books y. to VII. since the monumental edition of Halley, except as 
regards the preface and the first few propositions of Book V., of 
which L. M. Ludwig Nix published a Grerman translation in 1889*. 

For fuller details relating to the MSS. and editions of the 
C<mic8 reference should be made to the Prolegomena to the second 
▼olume of Heiberg's edition. 

The following is a literal translation of the dedicatory letters in 
which Apollonius introduces the various Books of bis Conica to 
Eudemus and Attalus respectively. 

1. Book I. General prefkce. 

" Apollonius to Eudemus, greeting. 

** If you are in good health and circumstances are in other 
respects as you wish, it is well ; I too am tolerably well. When 
I was with you in Pergamum, I observed that you were eager to 
become acquainted with my work in conies ; therefore I send you 
the first book which I have corrected, and the remaining books 
I will forward when I have finished them to my satisfaction. I 
daresay you have not forgotten my telling you that I undertook 
the investigation of this subject at the request of Naucrates the 
geometer at the time when he came to Alexandria and stayed 
with me, and that, after working it out in eight books, I 
communicated them to him at once, somewhat too hurriedly, 
without a thorough revision (as he was on the point of 
sailing), but putting down all that occurred to me, with the 
intention of returning to them later. Wherefore I now take 
the opportunity of publishing each portion from time to time, 
as it is gradually corrected. But, since it has chanced that 
some other persons also who have been with me have got the 
first and second books before they were corrected, do not be 
surprised if you find them in a different shape. 

* This appeared in a dissertation entitled Da$ fi'mjU Buck der Conica da 
ApoUoniui von Perga in der arabiicJien Uebenetzung da Thabit ihn Corrah 
(Leipzig, 1889), which however goes no farther than the middle of the 7th 
propoflitian of Book v. and ends on p. 82 in the middle of a sentence with the 
words ** gleioh dem Quadrat von " 1 The fragment is nevertheless valuable in 
that it gives a new translation of the important prefaoe to Book v., part of which 
Halley appears to have misunderstood. 



Ixx INTRODUCTION TO AP0LL0N1U8. 

" Now of the eight books the fii'st four form an elemeutaiy 
introduction; the first contains the modes of producing the 
three sections and the opposite branches [of the hyperbola] 
(t&p dvTiK€ifi€PO}v) and their fundamental properties worked 
out more fully and generally than in the writings of other 
authors ; the second treats of the properties of the diameters and 
axes of the sections as well as the asymptotes and other things of 
general importance and necessary for determining limits of pos- 
sibility (irpo^ T0V9 SiopuTfiov^)*, and what I mean by diameters 
and axes you will learn from this book. The third book 
contains many remarkable theorems useful for the synthesis 
of solid loci and determinations of limits; the most and 

* It is not possible to express in one word the meaning of Siopc^/i^there. In 
explanation of it it will perhaps be best to qnote Entocios who speaks of '* that 
[dtopiff/»At] which does not admit that the proposition is general, bnt sajrs when 
and how and in how many ways it is possible to make the reqoized oonstmetion, 
like that which occurs in the twenty-second proposition of Endid's Elements, 
From tluree itraight UneB, wldeh are equal to three given Btraight lineB, to 
eotutrvet a triangle; for in this case it is of course a necessary condition 
that any two of the straight lines taken together must be greater than 
the remaining one," [Comm, on ApoU. p. 178]. In like manner Pappus 
[p. 80], in explaining the distinction between a * theorem' and a * problem,* 
says : '* Bnt he who propounds a problem, eyen though he requires what is for 
some reason impossible of realisation, may be pardoned and held free from 
blame ; for it is the business of the man who seeks a solution to determine at 
the same time [koI toOto diopt^ai] the question of the possible and the impossible, 
and, if the solution be possible, when and how and in how many ways it is 
possible.*' Instances of the diopta/tAt are common enough. Of. Euclid vi. 27, 
which gives the criterion for the possibility of a real solution of the proposi- 
tion immediately following; the dtoptff/iSf there expresses the fact that, for a real 

solution of the equation a; (a - ;r) = Ir^, it is a necessary condition that d'f f ^ j . 

Again, we find in Archimedes, On tlie Splure and Cylinder [p. 214], the remark 
that a certain problem ''stated thus absolutely requires a &opi^/bi^t, but, if 
certain conditions here existing are added, it does not require a UtofMiiM,^* 

Many instances will be found in ApoUonius' work ; but it is to be observed 
that, as he uses the term, it frequently involves, not only a necessary condition, 
as in the cases just quoted, but, closely connected therewith, the determination 
of the nwmber of solutions. This can be readUy understood when the use of the 
word in the preface to Book iv. is considered. That Book deals with the 
number of possible points of intersection of two conies ; it follows that, when 
e.g. in the fifth Book hyperbolas are used for determining by their intersections 
with given conies the feet of normals to the latter, the number of solutions comes 
to light at the same time as the conditions necessary to admit of a solution. 



THE AUTHOR AND HIS OWN ACCOUNT OF THE COXICS, Ixxi 

prettiest of these theorems are new, and, when I had discovered 
them, I observed that Euclid had not worked out the synthesis of 
fche locus with respect to three and four lines, but only a chance 
portion of it and that not successfully: for it was not possible that 
the synthesis could have been completed without my additional 
discoverie& The fourth book shows in how many ways the 
sections of cones meet one another and the circumference of a 
circle ; it contains other matters in addition, none of which has 
been discussed by earlier writers, concerning the number of points 
in which a section of a cone or the circumference of a circle meets 
[the opposite branches of a hyperbola]*. 

"The rest [of the books] are more by way of surplusage f 
(ireptoutnaanKoirepa) : one of them deals somewhat fully {M 
irXiov) with minima and maadma, one with equal and similar 
sections of cones, one with theorems involving determination of 
limits {SiopuTTiK&v Oeo^prffiaTtov), and the last with determinate 
conic problems. 

* The reftding here translated is Heiberg's xtiifw roft^ ij k6k\ov repi^peia 
<ra<t dirrifrei/t^ra(t> «rard wo^a arifieia ^v/ifidXKowri. Halley had read Kij^pov 
TOftif 19 m^icXov Tipi^ipeia xal Irt dpTiKtlftiPai dpriKtifiivatt Kard r^a 
fffffUia avfi^dWovvi. Heiberg thinks HaUey*B longer interpolation unneoessary, 
but I cannot help thinking that Halley gives the tmer reading, for the following 
reasons. (1) The contents of Book it. show that the sense is not really 
complete withoat the mention of the number of intersections of a double-branch 
hyperbola with another double-branch hyperbola as well as with any of the 
single-branch conies; and it is scarcely conceivable that Apollonius, in 
describing what was new in his work, should have mentioned only the less 
complicated question. (2) If Heiberg*s reading is right we should hardly haye 
the plural ^v/ifiaWovat after the disjunctive expression *' a section of a cone or 
the circumference of a circle." (8) There is positive evidence for koX dwrucel- 
tupoi in Pappus* quotation from tbis preface [ed. Hultsoh, p. 676], where the 
words are icc^ov roft^ ki^kXw rtpi^pelq, koI drriKtlfiOfoi imK€iftiv€uit '* a section of 
a cone with the circumference of a circle and opposite branches with opposite 
branches.*' Thus to combine the reading of our text and that of Pappus would 
give a satisfactory sense as follows : ** in how many points a section of a cone 
or a circumference of a circle, as well as opposite branches, may [respectively] 
intersect opposite branches.'* See, in addition, the note on the corresponding 
passage in the preface to Book nr. given below. 

t refMvaiaffTiKtirripa has been translated ** more advanced/' but literally it 
implies extensions of the subject beyond the mere essentials. Hultsch 
translates ** ad abundantiorem scientiam pertinent," and Heiberg less precisely 
*'alterius progredinntur." 



Ixxil INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

" When all the books are published it will of oouraie be open 
to those who read them to judge them as they individually 
please. Farewell." 

2. Prefkce to Book II. 

" Apollonius to Eudemus, greeting. 

'' If you are in good health, it is well ; I too am moderately 
well. I have sent my son Apollonius to you with the second 
book of my collected conies. Peruse it carefully and com- 
municate it to those who are worthy to take part in such 
studiea And if Philonides the geometer, whom I introduced 
to you in Ephesus, should at any time visit the neighbourhood 
of Pergamum, communicate the book to him. Take care of 
your health. Farewell" 

3. Preiku^e to Book IV. 

" Apollonius to Attains, greeting. 

"Some time ago, I expounded and sent to Eudemus of 
Pergamum the first three books of my conies collected in eight 
books ; but, as he has passed away, I have resolved to send the 
remaining books to you because of your earnest desire to 
possess my works. Accordingly I now send you the fourth 
book. It contains a discussion of the question, in how many 
points at most it is possible for the sections of cones to meet 
one another and the circumference of a circle, on the sup- 
position that they do not coincide throughout, and further in 
how many points at most a section of a cone and the. circum- 
ference of a circle meet the opposite branches [of a hyperbola]* 

* Here again Halley adds to the text as above translated the words koI in 
dtrructlfuvtu dmK€itt4pait. Heiberg thinks the addition nnnecessaiy as in the 
similar passage in the first preface above. I cannot bat think that Halley is 
right both for the reasons given in the note on the earlier passage, and 
because, without the added words, it seems to me impossible to explain satis- 
Caotorily the distinction between the three separate questions referred to in the 
next sentence. Heiberg thinks that these refer to the intersections 

(1) of conic sections with one another or with a circle, 

(2) of sections of a cone with the double-branch hyperbola, 
(8) of circles with the double-branch hyperbola. 

But to specify separately, as essentially distinct questions, Heiberg's (2) and 



THE AUTHOR AND HIS OWN ACCOUNT OF THE COyWS. Ixxiii 

and^ besides these questions, not a few others of a similar 
character. Now the first-named question C!onon expounded to 
Tbrasydaeus, without however showing proper rnasteiy of the 
proofe, for which cause Nicoteles of Cyrene with some reason 
fell foul of him. The second matter has merely been mentioned 
by Nicoteles, in connexion with his attack upon Conon, as one 
capable of demonstration; but I have not found it so de- 
monstrated either by himself or by any one else. The third 
question and the others akin to it I have not found so much as 
noticed by any one. And all the matters alluded to, which I 
have not found proved hitherto, needed many and various 
novel theorems, most of which I have already expounded in the 
first three books, while the rest are contained in the present 
one. The investigation of these theorems is of great service 
both for the synthesis of problems and the determinations of 
limits of possibility {trpc^ t€ tcL^ t&v irpo/SXrffidrayv aiwOitrei^ 
Kol Toi)9 Siopicfiov^). On the other hand Nicoteles, on account 
of his controversy \vith Conon, will not have it that any use 
can be made of the discoveries of Conon for determinations 
of limits : in which opinion he is mistaken, for, even if it is 
possible, without using them at all, to arrive at results re- 
lating to such determinations, yet they at all events afford a 
more ready means of observing some things, e.g. that several 

(8) is altogether incoDsistent with the scientifio method of ApoUomus. When 
he mentions a circle, it is always as a mere appendage to the other oorres 
{ircppoK^ 4 cXXeif it rj k6k\ov rcpc^pcca is his usual phrase), and it is impossible, 
I think, to imagine him drawing a serious distinction between (2) and (8) or 
treating the omission of Nicoteles to mention (8) as a matter worth noting. t6 
rplrof should surely be something essentiaUy distinct from, not a particular ease 
of, TO 9€VT€pow, I think it certain, therefore, that ro rptrw is the case of the 
intersection of two double-branch hyperbolas with one another; and the 
adoption of Halley's reading would make the passage intelligible. We should 
then haTe the foUowing three distinct cases, 

(1) the intersections of single-branch conies with one another or with 
a circle, 

(2) the intersections of a single-branch conio or a circle with the double- 
branch hyperbola, 

(3) the intersections of two double-branch hyperbolas ; 

and dXXa oOk 6\lya 6fioia rmh-ocf may naturally be taken as referring to those 
oases e.g. where the curves touch at one or two points. 



Ixxiv INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

solutions are possible or that they are so many in number, 
and again that no solution is possible; and such previous 
knowledge secures a satisfactory basis for investigations, while 
the theorems in question are further useful for the analyses 
of determinations of limits (irpo^ ra^ dvoKvaet^ Sk r&v hio- 
puTfiwv). Moreover, apart from such usefulness, they are 
worthy of acceptance for the sake of the demonstrations 
themselves, in the same way as we accept many other things in 
mathematics for this and for no other reason." 

4. Prefkce to Book V*. 

" Apollonius to Attains, greeting. 

" In this fifth book I have laid down propositions relating 
to maximum and minimum straight lines. You must know 
that our predecessors and contemporaries have only superficially 
touched upon the investigation of the shortest lines, and have 
only proved what straight lines touch the sections and, con- 
versely, what properties they have in virtue of which they are 
tangents. For my part, I have proved these properties in the 
first book (without however making any use, in the proo&, of 
the doctrine of the shortest lines) inasmuch as I wished to 
place them in close connexion with that part of the subject in 
which I treated of the production of the three conic sections, in 
order to show at the same time that in each of the three 
sections numberless properties and necessary results appear, as 
they do with reference to the original (transverse) diameter. 
The propositions in which I discuss the shortest lines I have 
separated into classes, and dealt with each individual case by 
careful demonstration ; I have also connected the investigation 
of them with the investigation of the greatest lines above 
mentioned, because I considered that those who cultivate this 
science needed them for obtaining a knowledge of the analysis 
and determination of problems as well as for their synthesis, 
irrespective of the fact that the subject is one of those which 
seem worthy of study for their own sake. Farewell." 

* In the translation of this preface I hare followed pretty closely the 
German translation of L. M. L. Nix abo?6 referred to [p. Iziz, note]. The 
prefaces to Books ti. and vn. are translated from Halley. 



THE AirrUOR AND HI8 OWN ACCOUNT OF THE CONICS, IxXV 

5. Prefkce to Book VI. 

" Apollonius to Attalus, greeting. 

" I send you the sixth book of the conies, which embraces 
propositions about conic sections and segments of conies equal 
and unequal, similar and dissimilar, besides some other matters 
left out by those who have preceded me. In particular, you 
will find in this book how, in a given right cone, a section is to 
be cut equal to a given section, and how a right cone is to be 
described similar to a given cone and so as to contain a given 
conic section. And these matters in truth I have treated 
somewhat more fully and clearly than those who wrote before 
our time on these subjects. Farewell." 

6. Prefkce to Book VII. 

" ApoUonius to Attalus, greeting. 

'' I send to you with this letter the seventh book on conic 
sections. In it are contained very many new propositions 
concerning diameters of sections and the figures described upon 
them ; and all these have their use in many kinds of problems, 
and especially in the determination of the conditions of their 
possibility. Several examples of these occur in the determinate 
conic problems solved and demonstrated by me in the eighth 
book, which is by way of an appendix, and which I will take 
care to send you as speedily as possible. Farewell." 

The first point to be noted in the above account by ApoUonius 
of his own work is the explicit distinction which he draws between 
the two main divisions of it The first four Books contain matters 
which £all within the range of an elementary introduction (irrnraMcv 
tU aycoy^v (rrotxcui>&7), while the second four are extensions beyond 
the mere essentials (ircpiou(riaoTiJcci{rcpa), or (as we may say) mora 
'* advanced," provided that we are careful not to understand the 
relative terms "elementary" and "advanced" in the sense which 
we should attach to them in speaking of a modern mathematical 
work. Thus it would be wrong to regard the investigations of the 
fifth Book as more advanced than the earlier Books on the ground 
that the results, leading to the determination of the evolute of any 
conic, are such as are now generally obtained by the aid of the 



Ixxvi INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUH. 

differential calculus ; for the investigation of the limiting conditions 
for the possibility of drawing a certain number of normals to a 
given conic from a given 'point is essentially similar in character to 
many other ^purfioC found in other writers. The only difference is 
that, while in the case of the parabola the investigation is not very 
difficult) the corresponding propositions for the hyperbola and ellipse 
make exceptionally large demands on a geometer's acuteness and 
grasp. The real distinction between the first four Books and the 
fifth consists rather in the fact that the former contain a connected 
and scientific exposition of the general theory of conic sections as 
the indispensable basis for further extensions of the subject in 
certain special directions, while the fifth Book is an instance of such 
specialisation ; and the same is true of the sixth and seventh Books. 
Thus the first four Books were limited to what were considered the 
essential principles; and their scope was that prescribed by tradi- 
tion for treatises intended to form an accepted groundwork for 
such special applications as were found e.g. in the kindred theory of 
solid loci developed by Aristaeus. It would follow that the subject- 
matter would be for the most part the same as that of earlier 
treatises, though it would naturally be the object of ApoUonius to 
introduce such improvements of method as the state of knowledge 
at the time suggested, with a view to securing greater generality 
and establishing a more thoroughly scientific, and therefore more 
definitive, system. One effect of the repeated working-up, by suc- 
cessive authors, of for the most part existing material would be to 
produce crystallisation, so to s{)eak ; and therefore we should expect 
to find in the first four Books of Apollonius greater conciseness than 
would be possible in a treatise where new ground was being broken. 
In the latter case the advance would be more gradual, precautions 
would have to be taken with a view to securing the absolute impreg- 
nability of each successive position, and one result would naturally 
be a certain diffuseness and an apparently excessive attention to 
minute detail. We find this contrast in the two divisions of 
ApoUonius' Coiiics; in fact, if we except the somewhat lengthy 
treatment of a small proportion of new matter (such as the 
properties of the hyperbola with two branches regarded as one 
conic), the first four Books are concisely put together in comparison 
with Books v.— VII. 

The distinction, therefore, between the two divisions of the work 
is the distinction between what may be called a text-book or com- 



THE AUTHOR AND HIS OWN ACCOUNT OF THE COXICS, Ixxvii 

pendium of conic sections and a series of monographs on special 
portions of the subject. 

For the first four Books it will be seen that Apollonius does not 
claim originality except as regards a number of theorems in the 
third Book and the investigations in the fourth Book about inter- 
secting conies; for the rest he only claims that the treatment 
is more full and general than that contained in the earlier works on 
conies. This statement is quite consistent with that of Pappus that 
in his first four Books Apollonius incorporated and completed 
{avairXripdaai) the four Books of Euclid on the same subject. 

Eutocius, however, at the beginning of his commentary claims 
more for Apollonius than he claims for himself. After quoting 
Geminus' account of the old method of producing the three conies 
from right cones with different vertical angles by means of plane 
sections in every case perpendicular to a generator, he says (still 
purporting to quote Geminus), '*But afterwards Apollonius of 
Perga investigated the general proposition that in every cone, 
whether right or scalene, all the sections are found, according as the 
plane [of section] meets the cone in different ways." Again he says, 
"Apollonius supposed the cone to be either right or scalene, and 
made the sections different by giving different inclinations to the 
plane." It can only be inferred that, according to Eutocius, 
ApoUonius^^wag^e first Ijiscoverer of the fact that other sections 
than those perpendicular to a generator, and sections of cones other 
than right cones, had the same properties as the curves produced in 
iiie old way. But, as has already been pointed out, we find (1) that 
Euclid had already declared in the Pliaenomeiia that, if a cone 
(presumably right) or a cylinder be cut by a plane not parallel to 
the base, the resulting section is a '^ section of an acute-angled cone," 
and Archimedes states expressly that all sections of a cone which 
meet all the generators (and here the cone may be oblique) are 
either circles or " sections of an acute-angled cone." And it cannot 
be supposed that Archimedes, or whoever discovered this proposition, 
could have discovered it otherwise than by a method which would 
equally show that hyperbolic and parabolic sections could be pro- 
duced in the same general manner as elliptic sections, which 
Archimedes singles out for mention because he makes special use of 
them. Nor (2) can any different conclusion be drawn from the 
continued use of the old names of the curves even after the more 
general method of producing them was known; there is nothing 



Ixxviii iNTRODUcrroN to APOLLONIUa 

unnatural in this because, firniy hesitation might well be felt in 
giving up a traditional definition associated with certain standard 
propositions, determinations of constants, dsc., and Hcondly^ it is not 
thought strange, e.g. in a modem text-book of analytical geometry, 
to define conic sections by means of simple properties and equations, 
and to adhere to the definitions after it is proved that the curves 
represented by the general equation of the second degree are none 
other than the identical curves of the definitions. Hence we must 
conclude that the statement of Eutocius (which is in any case too 
general, in that it might lead to the supposition that wtry hyperbola 
could be produced as a section of any cone) rests on a misappre- 
hension, though perhaps a natural one considering that to him, 
living so much later, conies probably meant the treatise of Apollo- 
nius only, so that he might easily lose sight of the extent of the 
knowledge possessed by earlier writers*. 

At the same time it seems clear that, in the generality of his 
treatment of the subject from the very beginning, Apollonius was 
making an entirely new departure. Though Archimedes was aware 
of the possibility of producing the three conies by means of sections 
of an oblique or scalene cone, we find no sign of his having used 
sections other than those which are perpendicular to the plane of 
symmetry ; in other words, he only derives directly from the cone 
the fundamental property referred to an oarw, Le. the relation 

FN* : AN. A'N^P'N"* : AN. A'N\ 

and we must assume that it was by means of the equation referred 
to the axes that the more general property 

eP:PF.P'F = (oonst) 

was proved. Apollonius on the other hand starts at once with 

* There seeme also to have been some oonfosion in Eutooins* mind aboat the 
ezaet basis of the names parabola^ ellip$e and hyperbola, thoogh, as we shall see, 
Apollonins makes this clear enough by connecting them immediately with 
the method of applUation of arean, Thas Eutocins speaks of the hyperbola 
as being so called because a certain pair of angles (the vertical angle of an 
obtase-angled ri^t cone and the right angle at which the section, made in the 
old way, is inclined to a generator) together exceed (OrepjSoXXecy) two right 
angles, or becaase the plane of the section passes beyond (^re^dXXeiy) the apex 
of the cone and meets the half of the doable cone beyond the apex ; and he gives 
similar explanations of the other two names. Bot on this interpretation the 
nomendatore would have no significance ; for in each case we could choose 
different angles in the figure with equal reason, and so vary the names. 



THE AUTHOR AND HIS OWN ACCOUNT OF THE CONICS, IxxiX 

the most general section of an oblique cone, and proves directly 
from the cone that the conic has the latter general property with 
reference to a particular diameter arising out of his construction, 
which however is not in general one of the principal diameters. 
Then, in truly scientific fashion, he proceeds to show directly that 
the same property which was proved true with reference to the 
original diameter is equally true with reference to any other 
diameter, and the axes do not appear at all until they appear as par- 
ticular cases of the new (and arbitrary) diameter. Another indica- 
tion of the originality of thb fuller and more general working-out of 
the principal properties (ra apxuia avfurrtofiaTa ivX irXcov xai KaOoKov 
fiaXXov ^^cipyao-ficm) is, I think, to be found in the preface to Book V. 
as newly translated from the Arabic. Apollonius seems there to imply 
that minimum straight lines (i.e. normals) had only been discussed 
by previous writers in connexion with the properties of tangents, 
whereas his own order of exposition necessitated an early introduc- 
tion of the tangent properties, independently of any questions about 
normals, for the purpose of efiecting the transition from the original 
diameter of reference to any other diameter. This is easily under- 
stood when it is remembered that the ordinary properties of 
normals are expressed with reference to the axes, and Apollonius 
was not in a position to use the axes until they could be brought in 
as particular cases of the new and arbitrary diameter of reference. 
Hence he had to adopt a difierent order from that of earlier works 
and to postpone the investigation of normals for separate and later 
treatment. 

All authorities agree in attributing to Apollonius the designation 
of the three conies by the names parabola, ellipae and hyperbola; 
but it remains a question whether the exact ybrm in which their 
fundamental properties were stated by him, and which suggested the 
new names, represented a new discovery or may have been known 
to earlier writers of whom we may take Archimedes as the repre- 
sentative. 

It will be seen from Apollonius 1. 1 1 [Prop. 1] that the fundamental 
property proved from the cone for the parabola is that expressed by 
the Cartesian equation f^=pxy where the axes of coordinates are 
any diameter (as the axis of x) and the tangent at its extremity (as 
the axis of y). Let it be assumed in like manner for the ellipse and 
hyperbola that y is the ordinate drawn from any point to the 
original diameter of the conic, x the abscissa measured from one 



IXXX INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUR 

extremity of the diameter, while x^ is the absciBsa measured from the 
other extremity. Apollonius' procedure is then to take a certain 
length (p, say) determined in a certain manner with reference to the 
cone, and to prove, Jiratf that 

y* : x.oc^^p : d (1), 

where d is the length of the original diameter, and, secondly^ that, 
if a perpendicular be erected to the diameter at that extremity of it 
from which x is measured and of length p^ then y* is equal to a 
rectangle of breadth x and " applied " to the perpendicular of length 
p, but falling short (or exceeding) by a rectangle similar and similarly 
situated to that contained by p and d ; in other words, 

or y*=jpa:+V«^ (2). 

Thus for the ellipse or hyperbola an equation is obtained which 
differs from that of the parabola in that it contains another term, 
and y* is less or greater than px instead of being equal to it. The 
line 2^ ^ called, for all three curves alike, the parameter or hUue 
rectum corresponding to the original diameter, and the characteristics 
expressed by the respective equations suggested the three names. 
Thus the parabola is the curve in which the rectangle which is equal 
to 2^ is applied to p and neither falls short of it nor overlaps it, 
the eUipee and hyperbola are those in which the rectangle is applied 
to p but falls short of it, or overlaps it, respectively. 

In Archimedes, on the other hand, while the parameter duly 
appears with reference to the parabola, no such line is anywhere 
mentioned in connexion vrith the ellipse or hyperbola, but the 
fundamental property of the two latter curves is given in the form 

it being further noted that, in the ellipse, either of the equal ratios 

is equal to -| in the case where the equation is referred to the axes 

and a, b are the major and minor semi-axes respectively. 

Thus Apollonius' equation expressed the equality of two areas, 
while Archimedes' equation expressed the equality of two propor- 



THB AUTHOR AND HIS OWN ACCOUNT OF THE OONIOS. Ixxxi 

tioM ; and the question is whether Archimedes and his predecessors 
were acquainted with the equation of the central conic in the form 
in which Apollonius gives it, in other words, whether the special use 
of the parameter or laiiu rectum for the purpose of graphicallj 
constructing a rectangle having x for one side and equal in area to 
^ was new in Apollonius or not. 

On this question Zeuthen makes the following observations. 

(1) The equation of the conic in the form 



x.x^ 



= (const.) 



had the advantage that the constant could be expressed in any shape 
which might be useful in a particular case, e.g. it might be expressed 
either as the ratio of one area to another or as the ratio of one 
straight line to another, in which latter case, if the consequent in 
the ratio were assumed to be the diameter d^ the anftecedent would 
be the parameter p, 

(2) Although Archimedes does not, as a rule, connect his 
description of conies with the technical expressions used in the 
well-known method of application of areas^ yet the practical use of 
that method stood in the same close relation to the formula of 
Archimedes as it did to that of Apollonius. Thus, where the axes 
of reference are the axes of the conic and a represents the major or 
transverse axis, the equation 

^^= (const.) =sX (say) 
is equivalent to the equation 

ai?? = ^ («)' 

and, in one place (On Conoids and Spheroids, 25, p. 420) where 

Archimedes uses the property that -^^ has the same value for all 

X. x^ 

points on a hyperbola, he actually expresses the denominator of the 
ratio in the form in which it appears in (3), speaking of it as an 
area applied to a line equal to a but exceeding by a square figure 
(vrcpjSaAAov ciSci rcrpaycJi^), in other words, as the area denoted 
by ax -^9?, 

(3) The equation = (const) represents y as a mean pro- 

X . X. 

portional between x and a certain constant multiple of x^^ which 
H.O. / 



Ixxxii INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUa 

last can easilj be expressed as the ordinate F, corresponding to the 
abscissa a:, of a point on a certain straight line passing through the 
other extremity of the diameter (i.e. the extremity from which a^i is 
measured). Whether this particular line appeared as an auxiliary 
line in the figures used by the predecessors of ApoUonius (of which 
there is no sign), or the well-known constructions were somewhat 
differently made, is immaterial 

(4) The differences between the two modes of presenting the 
fundamental properties are so slight that we may regard ApoUonius 
as in reality the typical representative of the Greek theory of conies 
and as giving indications in his proofa of the train of thought which 
had led his predecessors no less than himself to the formulation of 
the various propositions. 

Thus, where Archimedes chooses to use proportiona in investiga- 
tions for which ApoUonius prefers the method of applicaiion of 
areas which is more akin to our algebra, Zeuthen is most inclined 
to think that it Ib Archimedes who is showing individual pecuH- 
arities rather than ApoUonius, who kept closer to his Alexandrine 
predecessors: a view which (he thinks) is supported by the 
circumstance that the system of applying areas as found in EucHd 
Book II. is decidedly older than the EucUdean doctrine of pro- 
portions. 

I cannot but think that the argument just stated leaves out of 
account the important fact that, as wiU be seen, the Archimedean 
form of the equation actuaUy appear$ <u an intermediate step in the 
proof which ApoUonius gives of hi? own fundamental equation. 
Therefore, as a matter of fact, the Archimedean form can hardly 
be regarded as a personal variant from the normal statement of 
the property according to the Alexandrine method. Further, to 
represent Archimedes' equation in the form 

~~ = (const.), 

and to speak of this as having the advantage that the constant may 
be expressed differently for different purposes, implies rather more 
than we actuaUy find in Archimedes, who never uses the constant at 
aU when the hyperbola \b in question, and uses it for the eUipse only 
in the case where the axes of reference are the axes of the eUipse, 

and then only in the single form -| . 



THE AUTHOR AND HIS OWN ACCOUNT OF THE OONJCS. Ixxxiii 

Now the equation 

_£ V 

ax — Tf a" ' 

or y" = — . 05 ^,7r. 

^ a a 

does not give an easy means of exhibiting the area ^ as a simple 
rectangle applied to a straight line but Mling short by another 

6" 
rectangle of equal breadth, unless we take some line equal to — 

and erect it perpendicularly to the abscissa x at that extremity of 
it which is on the curva Therefore, for the purpose of arriving at 
an expression for ^ corresponding to those obtained by means of 
the principle of application of areas, the essential thing was the 
determination of the pan^meter p and the expression of the con- 
stant in the particular form ~, which however does not appear in 

Archimedes. 

Again, it is to be noted that, though Apollonius actually sup- 
plies the proof of the Archimedean form of the fundamental property 
in the course of the propositions i. 12, 13 [Props. 2, 3] establishing 
the basis of his definitions of the hyperbola and ellipse, he reirtiees 
his steps in I. 21 [Prop. 8], and proves it again as a deduction from 
those definitions: a procedure which suggests a somewhat forced 
adherence to the latter at the cost of some repetition. This slight 
awkwardness is easily accounted for if it is assumed that Apollonius 
was deliberately supplanting an old form of the fundamental 
property by a new one ; but the facts are more difficult to explain 
on any other assumption. The idea that the form of the equation 
as given by Apollonius was new is not inconsistent with the fact 
that the principle of applicalian of areas was older than the 
Euclidean theory of proportions; indeed there would be no cause 
for surprise if so orthodox a geometer as Apollonius intentionally 
harked back and sought to connect his new system of conies with 
the most ancient traditional methods. 

It is curious that Pappus, in explaining the new definitions of 
Apollonius, says (p. 674) : *' For a certain rectangle applied to a 
certain line in the section of an acute-angled cone becomes deficient 
by a square {IKXwirov T€rpayiivif)f in the section of an obtuse-angled 
cone exceeding by a square, and in that of a right-angled cone 
neither deficient nor exceeding." There is evidently some confusion 

/2 



Ixxxiv INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

here, because in the definitions of Apollonius there is no question 
of exceeding or falling-short by a square^ but the' rectangle which is 
equal to y* exceeds or falls short by a rectangle similar and similarly 
situated to that contained by the diameter and the latus rectum. 
The description '< deficient, or exceeding, by a square" recalls 
Archimedes' description of the rectangle x . a?, appearing in the 
equation of the hyperbola as vircp)3aXXov ctSci rcrpayoMtp ; so that it 
would appear that Pappus somehow confused the two forms in 
which the two writers give the fundamental property. 

It will be observed that the "opposites," by which are meant 
the opposite branches of a hyperbola, are specially mentioned as 
distinct from the three sections (the words used by Apollonius 
being rw rpi^v rofiMv koL twv dyriKttfiiyiav). They are first intro- 
duced in the proposition i. 14 [Prop. 4], but it is in i. 16 [Prop. 6] 
that they are for the first time r^;arded as together forming one 
curve. It is true that the preface to Book IV. shows that other 
writers had already noticed the two opposite branches of a hyper- 
bola, but there can be no doubt that the complete investigation 
of their properties was reserved for Apollonius. This view is 
supported by the following evidence. (1) The words of the first 
preface promise something new and more perfect with reference to 
the double-branch hyperbola as well as the three single-branch 
curves; and a comparison between the works of Apollonius and 
Archimedes (who does not mention the two branches of a hyper- 
bola) would lead us to expect that the greater generality claimed by 
Apollonius for his treatment of the subject would show itself, if 
anywhere, in the discussion of the complete hyperbola. The words, 
too, about the '* new and remarkable theorems " in the third Book 
point unmistakeably to the extension to the case of the complete 
hyperbola of such properties as that of the rectangles under the 
segments of intersecting chords. (2) That the treatment of the two 
branches as one curve was somewhat new in Apollonius is attested 
by the fact that, notwithstanding the completeness with which he 
establishes the correspondence between their properties and those of 
the single branch, he yet continues throughout to speak of them as 
two independent curves and to prove each proposition with regard 
to them separately and subsequently to the demonstration of it for 
the single curves, the result being a certain difiuseness which might 
have been avoided if the first propositions had been so combined as 



THE AUTHOR AND HIS OWN ACCOUNT OF THE C0NIC8. IxxXV 

to prove each property at one and the same time for both double- 
branch and single-branch conies, and if the farther developments 
had then taken as their basis the generalised property. As it is, 
the diffoseness marking the separate treatment of the double 
hyperbola contrasts strongly with the remarkable ingenuity shown 
by ApoUonius in compressing into one proposition the proof of a 
property common to all three conies. This facility in treating the 
three curves together is to be explained by the fact that, as 
successive discoveries in conies were handed down by tradition, 
the general notion of a conic had been gradually evolved ; whereas, 
if ApoUonius had to add new matter with reference to the double 
hyperbola, it would naturally take the form of propositions supple- 
mentary to those affecting the three single-branch curves. 

It may be noted in this connexion that the proposition l 38 
[Prop. 15] makes use for the first time of the Becondary diameter (ef) 
of a hyperbola regarded as a line of definite length determined by 
the relation 

d''d' 

where d is the transverse diameter and p the parameter of the 
ordinates to it. The actual definition of the secondary diameter in 
this sense occurs earlier in the Book, namely between i. 16 and 
I. 17. The idea may be assumed to have been new, as also the 
determination of the conjugate hyperbola with two branches as the 
complete hyperbola which has a pair of conjugate diameters common 
with the original hyperbola, with the difference that the secondary 
diameter of the original hyperbola is the transverse diameter of the 
conjugate hyperbola and vice verad. 

The reference to Book II. in the preface does not call for any 
special remark except as regards the meaning given by ApoUonius 
to the terms diameter and axis. The words of the preface suggest 
that the terms were used in a new sense, and this supposition agrees 
with the observation made above (p. xlix) that with Archimedes 
only the axee are diameters. 

The preface speaks of the "many remarkable theorems" con- 
tained in Book III. as being useful for "the synthesis of soUd 
loci," and goes on to refer more particularly to the "locus with 
respect to three and four lines." It is strange that in the Book 
itself we do not find any theorem stating in terms that a particular 
geometrical locus is a conic section, though of course we find 



Ixxxvi INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

theorems stating conversely that all points on a oonic have a 
certain property. The explanation of this is probably to be found 
in the fact that the determination of a locus, even when it was a 
oonic section, was not regarded as belonging to a synthetic treatise 
on eaniea, and the ground for this may have been that the subject 
of such lod was extensive enough to require a separate book. This 
oox\jecture is supported by the analogy of the treatises of Euclid and 
Aristseus on conies and solid loci respectively, where, so far as we 
can judge, a very definite line of demarcation appears to have been 
drawn between the determination of the loci themselves and the 
theorems in conies which were useful for that end. 

There can be no doubt that the brilliant investigations in Book 
y. with reference to normals regarded as tnaximufn and minimum 
straight lines from certain points to the curve were mostly, if not 
altogether, new. It will be seen that they lead directly to the 
determination of the Cartesian equation to the evolute of any conic. 

Book VL is about similar conies for the most part, and Book YII. 
contains an elaborate series of propositions about the magnitude of 
various functions of the lengths of conjugate diameters, including 
the determination of their maximum and minimum values. A 
comparison of the contents of Book YIL with the remarks about 
Book YIL and YIII. in the preface to the former suggests that the 
lost Book Yin. contained a number of problems having for their 
object the finding of coi^jugate diameters in a given conic such that 
certain functions of their lengths have given values. These 
problems would be solved by means of the results of Book YIL, 
and it is probable that Bailey's restoration of Book -YHI. represents 
the nearest conjecture as to their contents which is possible in the 
present state of our knowledge. 



CHAPTER II. 



GENERAL CHARACTEBISTICa 



i 1. Adherence to Euclidean form, conceptions and 
Ian gn age. 

The accepted form of geometrical proposition with which Euclid's 
EUmenta more than any other book has made mathematicians 
familiar, and the regular division of each proposition into its com- 
ponent parts or stages, cannot be better described than in the words 
of Proclus. He says*: *< Every problem and every theorem which 
is complete with all its parts perfect purports to contain in itself all 
of the following elements : enunciation (irponuris), 9etting-atU (lic^co'19), 
definition^ (Scopur/ios), construction {KaracrKtviJDy proof (airoSci^i?), 
concluiion (<n;/iir^xurfui). Now of these the enunciaUon states what 
is given and what is that which is sought, the perfect enunciation 
consisting of both these parts. The setting-otU marks off what is 
given, by itself and adapts it beforehand for use in the investigation. 
The definition states separately and makes clear what the particular 
thing is which is sought. The conetruction adds what is wanting to 
the datum for the purpose of finding what is sought. The proof 
draws the required inference by reasoning scientifically from ac- 
knowledged facts. The conclusion reverts again to the enwficiaHonj 
confirming what has been demonstrated. These are all the parts of 
problems and theorems, but the most essential and those which are 
found in all are enunciation^ P^f^oof conclusion. For it is equally 
necessary to know beforehand what is sought, and that this should 
be demonstrated by means of the intermediate steps and the de- 
monstrated fact should be inferred; it is impossible to dispense 

* Proclus (ed. Friedlem), p. 208. 

t The word definition is used for want of a better. As will appear from 
what follows, StofMfUt really means a closer deteriptiont by means of a oonorete 
figure, of what the enonoiation states in general terms as the property to be 
proved or the problem to be solved. 



Ixxxviii INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

with any of these three things. The remaining parts are often 
brought in, but are often left out as serving no purpose. Thus 
there is neither setHng-atU nor definUian in the problem of con- 
structing an isosceles triangle having each of the angles at the base 
double of the remaining angle, and in most theorems there is no 
construction because the setting-out suffices without any addition 
for demonstrating the required property from the data. When then 
do we say that the setting-out is wanting t The ajiswer is, when 
there is nothing given in the enunciation] for, though the enun- 
ciation is in genera] divided into what is given and what is sought, 
this is not always the case, but sometimes it states only what is 
sought, La what must be known or found, as in the case of the 
problem just mentioned. That problem does not, in fact, state 
beforehand with what datum we are to construct the isosceles 
triangle having each of the equal angles double of the remaining 
one^ but (simply) that we are to find such a triangle.... When, 
then, the enunciation contains both (what is given and what 
is sought), in that case we find both definition and setting-out^ but, 
whenever the datum is wanting, they too are wanting. For not only 
is the setting-out concerned with the datum but so is the d^nition 
also, as, in the absence of the datura, the definition will be identical 
with the enunciation. In fact, what could you say in defining the 
object of the aforesaid problem except that it is required to find an 
isosceles triangle of the kind referred tot But that is what the 
enuneicUion stated. If then the enunciation does not include, on the 
one hand, what is given and, on the other, what is sought, there is 
no setting-out in virtue of there being no datum, and the definition 
is left out in order to avoid a mere repetition of the enundcUion." 

The constituent parts of an Euclidean proposition will be readily 
identified by means of the above description without further details. 
It will be observed that the word Siopur/jui^ has here a different 
signification from that described in the note to p. Ixx above. Here 
it means a closer definition or description of the object aimed at, by 
means of the concrete lines or figures set out in the ^ic^co-is instead 
of the general terms used in the enunciation ; and its purpose is to 
rivet the attention better, as indicated by Proclus in a later passage, 
rpoTTOv riva irpoacxcta? ioTiy atrtos d Scopur/tds. 

The other technical use of the word to signify the limitations to 
which the possible solutions of a problem are subject is also described 
by Proclus, who speaks of Siopur/xoc determining ** whether what is 



GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. Ixxxix 

sought is impossible or possible, and how far it is practicable and in 
how many ways*" ; and the 3iopur/xos in this sense appears in the 
same form in Euclid as in Archimedes and Apollonius. In ApoUo- 
nius it is sometimes inserted in the body of a problem as in the 
instance ii. 50 [Prop. 50] given below ; in another case it forms the 
subject of a separate preliminary theorem, ii. 52 [Prop. 51], the 
result being quoted in the succeeding proposition ii. 53 [Prop. 52] in 
the same way as the 8iopurfu>s in Eucl. vi. 27 is quoted in the 
enunciation of* yl 28 {see p. cviii). 

Lastly, the orthodox division of a problem into arudt/sia and 
aynthesia appears regularly in Apollonius as in Archimedes. Proolus 
speaks of the preliminary analysis as a way of investigating the 
more recondite problems (ra aara(^oTcpa rtav trpoPkr/fiiTtiiv) ; thus it 
happens that in this respect Apollonius is often even more formal 
than Euclid, who, in the Elemental is generally able to leave out all 
the preliminary analysis in consequence of the comparative sim- 
plicity of the problems solved, though the Data exhibit the method 
as clearly as possible. 

In order to illustrate the foregoing remarks, it is only necessary 
to reproduce a theorem and a problem in the exact form in which 
they appear in Apollonius, and accordingly the following propo- 
sitions are given in full as typical specimens, the translation on the 
right-hand side following the Greek exactly, except that the letters 
are changed in order to facilitate comparison with the same propo- 
sitions as reproduced in this work and with the corresponding 
figures. 

III. 54 [Prop. 75 with the first figure]. 

'Eav KtSvov rofujs fj kvkKov ntpt- If two straight lines touching a 

(JHptiat dvo fvStlcu i<f>anr6iupcu <rv/i' section of a cone or the circum- 

ir/irroxri, dc^ dc r»v atf^^v irapaXXi/Xoi fereoce of a circle meet, and through 

axB^iTi raU fffHtaroiiivaiSf Ka\ Sni rwy the points of contact parallels be 

ai(l>»virp6sT6avT6aiifi€iovTfj£ypafififJ£ drawn to the tangents, and from 

diax^ffiy €v$€uu rip-povfrai rat irapaX- the points of contact straight lines 

XiyXovf , TO ntpuxofifvov 6p3oywiov be drawn through the same point of 

vwo Ttiv anoTtfUfOfiivav irpor to awo the curve cutting the parallels, the 

Trj£ fwiCfvywownis rat a<l>as rrrpayw rectangle contained by the inter- 

wov Xoyov l^fc TOP <niyKtiiJL99ov Kk Tt cepts bears to the square on the 

rov, ov l^ci TTJs €ni(fvytnfov<nit Trjv line joining the points of contact 

avfiTrrwuf t£v t^HmTopipudv xal r^y the ratio compounded [1] of that 

htxoToiLiavTritTata<^hsini(isvyvvownii which the square of the inner s^- 

* ProcloB, p. 202. 



xc 



INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 



rh iwroi rySjita trpos rh Xocir^ dv^afiti^ 

M*y frcpicxo/Myor opBoymviov irpos to 
rirapiTOP fi€pos rov oiro rijs ras o^^r 
iin{fvy¥vownis rrrpaywov* 



tfoTtt Ktipov TOfirf ^ jcvxXov vcpi- 
4>€ptta 4 ABr Koi iffKttrroitMwai al AA, 
Ti^ Koi iwt{tvx^m i; AT ical dlxa 
r€T/iif(r^ Korit ro E, xal circ (rvx^» 7 
ABE, Ka\ ffx^ ^o liiv rov A ira^ 
r^v FA i; AZ, hth dc roO T vap^ r^v 
AA 1} m, xal f 2X1}^^ re miftMtov M 
rijt ypafA§iSjt r& O, ical imCtvxBuaai 
al Ae, re iKfi^PkiivBwrwf €w\ rh H, 
Z. Xcya», on r6 viro AZ, m irp^r ro 



ment of the line joining the point 
of oonoourae of tiie tangents and 
the point of bisection of the line 
joining the points of contact bears 
to the square of the remaining seg- 
ment, and [2] of' that which the 
rectangle contained by the tangents 
bears to the fourth part of the 
square on the line joining the 
points of contact 

Let QPQ' be a section of a cone 
or the circumference of a circle and 
QTy Q'T tangents, and let QQ' be 
joined and bisected at 7, and let 
TPV be joined, and let there be 
drawn, from Q, Qr parallel to Q'T 
and, from Q', QY parallel to QT, 
and let any point R be taken on the 
curve, and let QE, QfR be joined 
and produced to /, r. I say that 



TOVf ov tlx^i ro ({iro EB irpor ro dwo 
BA ical t6 viro AAT vp6s to TtrapiTov 
rov atro Ar, rovr/<rri ro iJiro AEr. 



iwh AT tIv ovyMifuvov l^ci Xoyov 4k . the rectangle contained by Qr, Q'r' 

has to the square on QQ^ the ratio 
compounded of that which the 
square on VP has to the square on 
PT and that which the rectangle 
under Q^TQ'* has to the fourth part 
of the square on QQ\ Le. the rect- 
angle under QVQ^. 

For let there be drawn, from &, 
KRWR'K\ and, from P, LPL' 
parallel to QQ' \ it is then clear 
that LL' is a tangent. Now, since 
qV is equal to Vq\ ZP is also 
equal to PL' and KW to WK' and 
RW to WR' and iTi? to R'K\ 
Since therefore ZP, LQ are tan- 
gents, and KRK' is drawn parallel 
to ZP, as the square on QZ is to 
the square on ZP, that is, the rect- 
angle under LPL\ so is the square 
on ^K to the rectangle under R'KR^ 
that is, the rectangle under K'RK. 
And, as the rectangle under L'Q\ 

* rhinth AAF, **the rect. under QTQ'/' means the rectangle Qr.TQ', and 
similarly in other cases. 



Hx^ y^p d^ /Mr rov O vopd t^v 
Ar 17 KeOXA, <liro dc rov B 17 MBN* 
^QMMphv dif, Ih-i ii^anTrrai 1) MN. 
/irc 1 0I9 uni 4fn)» r^ KR r^ EF, Ztn; 
i9T\ ical 17 MB rg BN /col 17 KO T^ OA 
Jtal ii BO ri OX Kn\ ri%B ri XA. 
ciTfl tip i^aarropToi al MB, MA, ml 
fraph Trjv MB f lerac 1) K6A, ^oru^, ms 
Th atro AM vpos to JM MB, rovr/orc 
rh vff-o MBN, ro mro AK vpot rh viro 
VKe, rovrcarc t6 viro ASK. mt di 
ro viro NT, MA vp^f ro mro MA, ro 
iM AT, KA vpht TO air6 KA* dc* 
bov ipOf mt t6 viro NT, MA wpof r& 
vir& NBM, ro viro AF, KA vp^ rh viro 



GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. 



XCI 



A6K. rh dc vwo AF, KA vpit ro vwo 
A6K TOP avyKtlfitPov ?x'^ Xoyov ^k 
Tov rfff TA irpoff A6, rovr/<m rfr ZA 
ir/>^ AFy xal rov r^t AK irpor K6, 
Tovrtari rfjt HF vf>^f FA, or ^oriy <S 
ovrof rf , ov lx*i ro vir^ HF, ZA irpor 
ro diro FA* 0ff Hipa rb iiiro NF, MA 
irpor ro vwb NBM, rd vir^ HF, ZA 
vpor ro iiir& FA. rb dc viro FN, HA 
irpot ro viro NBM rov iWro NAM lUaov 
XofifiatfOfiipov TOV trvyKtintPov ti'j(9i 
Xoyov iK TOV, tv cxcft rh iM FN, AM 
vpor rh viro NAM kbX ro Mi NAM 
irp^ rh viro NBM- rh fya viro HF, 
ZA vphs TO iwo FA r^v ovyKtiftMHUf 
Ixcc Xoyor ^« rov rov vwh FN, AM 
irp^ rh viro NAM xal rov vir^ NAM 
vpor ro thro NBM. <!XX' mt ftiv rh 
viro NF, AM wpotrh vw6 NAM, ro oVo 
EB irpor ro diro BA, «r M ro viro 
NAM irpor ro viro NBM, ro viro FAA 
vpor TO viro.FEA* ro Spa viro HF, AZ 
vpor ro diro AF r^ ovyKtiftMimf tfx't 
Xdyor 4ic rov rod diro BE irp^ ro diro 
BA «ii rov vvo FAA «p6r rh vwi 
FEA. 



LQ is to the squaxe on ZQ, so is the 
rectangle under E'Q', EQ to the 
square on KQ ; therefore «r aequo 
as the rectangle under L'Q'f LQ is 
to the rectangle under L'PL, so is 
the rectangle under E'Q', KQ to the 
rectangle under K'RK. But the 
rectangle under K'Q\ iSTQ has to 
the rectangle imder K'RK the ratio 
compounded of that of Q'K' to K'R, 
that is, of rQ to Qff^ and of that of 
QK to KEi, that is, of r'Q' to Q'Q, 
which is the same as the ratio 
which the rectangle under r'Q', rQ 
has to the squaxe on Q'Q\ hence, 
as the rectangle under L'Q\ LQ is 
to the rectangle under L'PL^ so is 
the rectangle under r'Q\ rQ to the 
squaxe on Q'Q. But the rectangle 
under Q'L\ LQ has to the rectangle 
under L'PL (if the rectangle under 
L'TL he taken as a mean) the ratio 
compounded of that which the rect- 
angle under Q'L\ QL has to the 
rectangle under L'TL and the rect- 
angle under L'TL to the rectangle 
under L'PL; hence the rectangle 
under r'Q\ rQ has to the square on 
Q'Q the ratio compounded of that 
of the rectangle under Q'L\ QL to 
the rectangle under L'TL and of 
the rectangle under L'TL to the 
rectangle under L'PL, But, as the 
rectangle imder L'Q', QL la to the 
rectangle under L'TL, so is the 
square on VP to the square on PT, 
and, as the rectangle under L'TL is 
to the rectangle under ZTZ^ so is the 
rectangle under Q'TQ to the rect- 
angleunder ^ VQ; therefore the rect- 
angle under r'Q', rQhas to the square 
on QQ^ the ratio compounded of that 
of the square on PV to the square 
on PT and of the rectangle under 
Q'TQ to the rectangle under Q' VQ. 



xcu 



INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 



II. 50 [Prop. 50 (Problem)]. 
(So far as relating to the hyperbola.) 



Trjt doBiioTis mwov To/ifjs c^oirro- 
liimip dyayciy, ifnt npos rf (i(oifi 
yoDVioy frotifcrf i ciri ravra r^ TOfij larip 

•» « « * 

"Evtw 1} TOfifj virfp/SoXi}, mil yryo- 
Bvro>, Ka\ loTtt iifxmroiihni 1) TA, Mil 
fiXi^^ ro Kirrpov rfjg rofi^t r& X, 
xal ivtCtvx^^m 1) rX xal KoBrw 4 TE* 
Xi^r ^Mi roO {firh rwr XEA frpor r^ 
dno Tfjs ET io&fU* 6 avrht ydp iari 
rf rrjt irXoy/ar ir^f r^v 6p6ia». rov 
h^ awh rrit FE vf>^ r6 cbr^ r^r EA 
Xoyor iari doBtif do^uro yop tKaripa 
TW vnh FAEi AEP. Xoyor Upa jcol 
rov viro XEA vpht ro mrh r^r EA 
doBtU' 4ar€ xal r^r XE nphg EA 
Xoyoff ^<rrl do&tU, ical do^cura 1; vpor 
rf E* doBtiva Upa «eal 1} irp^ rf ^* 
irp^ d^ BiiTti cv^f if T^ XE ffoi do64m 
rf X di^icra/ rcr 1; FX iv dtdoiiiwg 
ya»if/g* ^cVfc 2pa 1} rX. ^cVfi dc xai 
1; rofiif * doBtP &pa TO r. ical ddJKTM 
i^MnroiUmi 1) FA * Bifm Spa 1} FA. 



^X^* aaviiwrmrot rfr rofi^r 1) ZX* 
4 FA 4pa iKplkifBtiira oi/fivc <rf rrcu r;^ 
a<rvfiirrttry. avfurinT€T» Kara rh Z. 
ftfi{»p apa loTOi 17 viro ZAE ytfyio r^^ 
vvo ZXA. dtifirti ipa tls r^v trvvBttrw 
r^y dfdoiUvtiP o^tay ymplop itMi{opa 
c2mic r^f ij/iurciar r^r irtpttx^lUvrii 
vwh rwv liirv^urrtfrttv. 



To draw a tangent to a given 
section of a cone which shall make 
with the axis towards the same 
parts with the section an angle 

equal to a given acute angle. 

♦ # • ♦ # 

Let the section be a hyperbola, 
and suppose it done, and let PT be 
the tangent, and let the centre C of 
the section be taken and let PC be 
joined and PN be perpendicular; 
therefore the ratio of the rectangle 
contained by CNT to the square on 
NP is given, for it is the same as 
that of the transverse to the erect. 
And the ratio of the square Plf to 
the square on NT is given, for each 
of the angles PTN, TNP is given. 
Therefore also the ratio of the rect- 
angle under CNT to the square on 
NT is given ; so that the ratio of 
CilT to jrr is also given. And the 
angle at JV is given ; therefore also 
the angle at (7 is given. Thus with 
the straight line CN [given] in posi- 
tion and at the given point C a 
certain straight line PC has been 
drawn at a given angle ; therefore 
PC is [given] in position. Also the 
section is [given] in position; there- 
fore P is given. And the tangent 
PT has been drawn; therefore PT 
is [given] in position. 

Let the asymptote LC of the 
section be drawn; then PT pro- 
duced will meet the asymptote. 
Let it meet it in Z ; then the angle 
LTN will be greater than the angle 
LCT. Therefore it will be necessary 
for the synthesis that the given 
acute angle should be greater than 



GENERAL CHARACTERISTICa 



xcm 



ovrrtBifa'tTai di) rh wpo^fnia ov- 

^{«v 6 AB, d<rvfiirrfl»ror dc 1} XZ, i) dc 
do^ffMra ymvla 6(fia iiti{nv ovtra rrjs 
viro T&v AXZ 17 vfr& K6H, «a2 Iotm 
rg viro tAv AXZ Ziny 1) iM KOA, Koii 
Hx^ ^^ ^^ A ^ AB vpof op^^r 1) 
AZ, flkff<ft$» hi n OTjfitlop M, Tfjf HO 

r& H, KOI 9x^ ^' ^'I'f^ ^( ^1^ OK 
mi^rrof 17 HK. ^c 1 ovr loi; fWly 17 
vir6 ZXA r^ viro AOK, tlal di Ka\ al 
wpbs ToU A, K y^Pitu opdai, faruf Sfxty 
iSff 1} XA vp^ AZ, 17 OK irp^ KA. 17 
dc 6K vp^ff KA fuiCopa \6yop tfxti 
Ifwtp npht rfiv HK* itoi j XA irpor AZ 
ipa fUt{opa Xoyoy I'j^ri i][irfp 17 OK 
npog KH. tforc Koi rh oiro XA irpoc 
rh <{]ro AZ /i§l{ova Xoyoy ?;^fi ^vcp ro 
oiro eK irpor ro iifr& KR «r dc r« 
ilfl^ XA irpoff TO chro AZ, 7 irXoy/a 
wpot rijv opBlaw Ka\ 17 nXayia Spa 
npht rriv 6p$iav ftMl{ova \6yop tfxn 
(ftrtp rh oiro OK nphi rh dw6 KH. 
Up d^ woujirwiMMP, oir ro oiro XA wpog 
t6 tarb AZ, ovr»s SXXo re wpot rb 
Airb KH, fUi{op fcrtu rov «Iir6 6K. 
Icrrt* ro viro MK6* koI int^tvxBw fj 
HM. iwtX ovp iitt{6p iari rb awb MK 
rov viro MK6, rb apa awb MK irpor 
ro oiro KH fui{opa Xoyov Ix*^ ^<P ^b 
viro MK6 irpor rb dwb KH, rovrcWi 
rb inb XA irp^r rb awb AZ. xal i^p 
wovfaiofiMPf not ro diro MK irpof ro oiro 
KH, ovr»s rb awb XA irp^r SK\o ri, 
Ibrac irp^ IXorrov rov dwb AZ* leal 1} 
iliro rov X €w\ rb Xit^^v mf/tMlop 
iwi^tvypviUpri tvBtta bfioia woujati rh 
rplympo^ kiu bih rovro fJLti{»p ifmp 1} 
viro ZXA r^r viro HMK. KtiaB» di) 
rj viro HMK uni 17 vir^ AXT* 1) c(pa 
XT rrfici rijp rofujp. rtiu4r» Kara ro 
r, ftoi diri rov F i<f>airrofidpri rfjg rofiSjt 
iJX^^ *} rA, xa2 KoStrot 1} FE * cftoiop 



the half of that contained by the 
asymptotea. 

Thaa the Sjrntheaia of the prob- 
lem will proceed aa follows : let the 
given hyperbola be that of which 
AA'ia the axis and CZ an asymptote, 
and the given acute angle (being 
greater than the angle ACZ) the 
angle FED, and let the angle FEff 
be equal to the angle ACZ^ and let 
AZ be drawn from A at right angles 
to AA\ and let any point D be 
taken on DJST, and let a perpendicu- 
lar DF be drawn from it upon £F. 
Then, sinoe the angle ZCA is equal 
to the angle HEF^ and also the 
angles at J, /* are right, aaCAisio 
AZ, ao IB EF to FE. BntEFhas 
to /'iTa greater ratio than it has to 
FD; therefore also C^l has to AZ& 
greater ratio than EF has to FD. 
Hence also the square on CA has to 
the square on AZ a greater ratio 
than the square on EF has to the 
square on FD, And, aa the square 
on C^ is to the square on AZ, so ia 
the transverse to the erect ; therefore 
also the transverse has to the erect 
a greater ratio than the square on 
EF has to the square on FD. If 
then we make, aa the square on CA 
to the square on AZ, so some other 
area to the square on FD, that area 
will be greater than the square on 
EF. Let it be the rectangle under 
KFE; and let 2>ir be joined. Then, 
since the square on EF is greater 
than the rectangle under EFE, the 
square on KF has to the square on 
FD a greater ratio than the rectangle 
under KFE has to the square on 
FDy that is, the square on CA to 
the square on JZ And if we make, 
aa the square on KF to the square 
on FDf so the square on CA to 



XCIV 



INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 



Spa ^arX ro FXE rplyttwov rf HMK. 
loTty ipiMj mt rh iwh XE vphg ro awo 
Er, ro iifh MK vpht rh airo KH. 
lore h^ ml, tit i) vXoy^ irp&r r^r 
^pBUoff r6 n vw6 XEA vpor ro ^o 
Er Koi TO vir6 MKe irpoff r& air^ KH. 
»il oycbraXiy, »£ ro dir^ FE vpof ro 
vtrh XEAf r& iifr& HK wpot ro 1^0 
MK6* di* 2crov il^ «ff r& oiro XE 
wpot rh vwh XEA, ro aw6 MK vp^ ro 
viro MK6. Kal »r ipa 1} XE vp^ 
EA, 1} MK irpof Ke. ^v ^ icai^ m ij 
rS vphf EX, 1) HK vpof KM- ditrov 
apOf mt 4 TE wp^t EA, 1) HK vpor 
K6. Koi Wcrbr dp^al al vp^ roif E, 
K ympltu* uni Spa tj trpos rf A ywvid 

Tj vw6 Hex. 



another area, [the ratio] will be to a 
smaller area than the square on 
AZi and the straight line joining C 
to the point taken will make the 
triangles similar, and for this reason 
the angle ZCA is greater than the 
axigleDEF. Let the angle il COP be 
made equal to the angle DKF\ 
therefore CP will cut the section. 
Let it cut it at P, and from P let 
PT be drawn touching the section, 
and PN perpendicular; therefore 
the triangle PCN is similar to 
DKP. Therefore^ as is the square 
on CN to the square on NP^ so is 
the square on KF to the square on 

FD. Also^ as the transverse is to 
the erect^ so is both the rectangle 
under CN2 to the square on NP 
and the rectangle under KFE to 
the square on FD. And oonrersely, 
as the square on PN is to the 
rectangle under CNT^ so is the 
square on DF\jo the rectang^ under 
KFE; therefore er aequo^ as the 
square on CN is to the rectangle 
under CNT^ so is the square on KF 
to the rectangle under iTFi^. There- 
fore, as CiV is to NT, so is KF to 

FE. But also, as PJIT is to NC, so 
was DF to FK ; therefore €X aequo^ 
aaPNiaioNT, 90 ia DF to FE. 
And the angles at N^F are right ; 
therefore the angle at ^ is equal to 
the angle DEF. 



In connexion with the propositions just quoted, it may not be 
out of place to remark upon some peculiar advantages of the Greek 
language as a vehicle for geometrical investigations. Its richness 
in grammatical forms is, from this point of view, of extreme import- 
ance. For instance, nothing could be more elegant than the regular 
use of the perfect imperative passive in constructions ; thus, where 
we should have to say 'Uet a perpendicular be drawn" or, more 
peremptorily, ** draw a perpendicular," the Greek expression is IjxOia 



GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. ZCV 

udOfTo^ the former word expressing in itself the meaning " let it have 
been drawn " or '* suppose it drawn," and similarly in all other cases, 
e.g. ycypo^^o), lircCcyx^oi, {ic)3c)3Xi7(r0o>, rcr/ii/o'^o), clXi^^tfoi, d^fnjaOfa 
and the like. Neatest of all is the word ytyovhm with which the 
analysis of a problem begins, " suppose it done." The same form is 
used very effectively along with the usual expression for a propor- 
tion, e.g. ircvoiif(r0ai, »« 17 HK irpos KE, rj NB 'rfio^ BM, which can 
hardly be translated in English by anything shorter than " Let NB 
be so taken that NB is to BM as HK to KE." 

Again, the existence of the separate masculine, feminine and 
neuter forms of the definite article makes it possible to abbreviate 
the expressions for straight lines, angles, rectangles and squares by 
leaving the particular substantive to be understood. Thus 17 HK is 
17 HK (ypofifiiT), ihs line HK; in 17 viro ABF or ij iwo nSv ABF the word 
understood is yoivia and the meaning is the angle ABF (Le. the angle 
eontained by AB and BF) ; to vwb ABF or ro vw6 r^v ABF is rft vvA ABF 
(Xiapiov or 6p$oywyiov), the rectangle earUained by AB, BF ; ri dwh AB 
is rd dwh AB (rcrpayoivov), the square on AB. The result is that much 
of the language of Greek geometry is scarcely less concise than the 
most modem notation. 

The closeness with which Apollonius followed the Eudidean 
tradition is further illustrated by the exact similarity of language 
between the enunciations of Apollonius' propositions about the conic 
and the corresponding propositions in Euclid's third Book about 
circles. The following are some obvious examples. 

Eud m. 1. Ap. n. 4A. 

Tov M4yrot kvxXov to lUvrpw Trji MtUnfs AXf/^i»r 1) vircp* 

tvp€u^, PdKfjt TO ictrrpov tvptu^, 

EucL m. 3. Ap. L 10. 

*B^ kvkXov M rijs wtpt^ptlas *E<br M icdpov TOfjujs Xiy^^ duo 

XiT^^ dvo Tvxorra oijfif ui, 4 M r^ mffUla^ 1; ftip M ra orifUia /rifcvyrv- 

mfftMia irndtvymtiUvri tvBua trrht luvfi tv$€ia ivrht vfovlnu r^r roiLijt^ 

wtaunu roC kvkXov. 17 dc /it' €v3tlas mrrj itcrot. 

EucL m. 4. Ap. n. 2& 

"E^ iv ffvcXy dvo rv^fidi rtfuwo'Uf *Ei» iv iKKni^u tj kvkXov rrpc- 

oXXiTXar fi^ dio rov lUvrpov o3<nu, ov ^pti^ dvo tvMtu Hfumaa^ ilXXipUir 
Hiipowruf dXXiJXar lUxo^ fi^ d<A rov tiirrpov o&roi, ov nfjanvaw 

dXXifXaf dixo* 



XCVl 



INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 



EucL m. 7. 

*Eay KVKkov M rfjf duifUrpov 
\ff<tiBj Ti 07ifi€i0Vf h fuj iirri Ktrrpov 
Tov JcvcXov, anh di rov mjiMMiov vphs 
t6p kvcXov ffpcMTfrtirrtMrcy tvBtlai nyt f , 

Aaxton; di i; Xotsni, rc»y df aXX«»y d§\ 
4 fyyiop Tfjs duk rov K^rrpov Tfjs 
dwrnrtpop iitl{nv iari»f dvo df §topoif 
urai ifrh rov aij/jitlov npotnrtaovvrag 
irpht T^ kvkXop ^* ^Konpa r^t 



Ap. V. 4 and 6. 

(Translated from Halley.) 

If a point be taken on the axis 
of an elltpte whose distance from 
the vertex of the section is equal to 
half the latus rectum, and if from 
the point any straight lines what- 
ever be drawn to the section, the 
least of all the straight lines drawn 
from the given point will be that 
which is equal to half the latus 
rectum, the greatest the remaining 
part of the axis, and of the rest 
those which are nearer to the least 
will be less than those more re- 
mote. 



As an instance of ApoUonius' adherence to the eoneepiianB of 
Euclid's ElemenUf those propositions of the first Book of the Conies 
may be mentioned which first introduce the notion of a tangent. 
Thus in I. 17 we have the proposition that, if in a conic a straight 
line be drawn through the extremity of the diameter parallel to the 
ordinates to that diameter, the said straight line will fall without 
the conic ; and the conclusion is drawn that it is a tangent. This 
argument recaUs the Euclidean definition of a tangent to a circle as 
" any straight line which meets the circle and being produced does 
not cut the circla" We have also in ApoUonius as well as in Euclid 
the proof that no straight line can fall between the tangent and the 
curve. Compare the following enunciations : 



EucL m. 16. 

'H TJ diOfJiirp^ TOV kvkKov nphs 
opBof (Sir* ^Kpas ayoiUprj iieros frctrc iroi 
rov iKvcXov, ftoi Wr rov furafv ronov 
rrjt r9 €v&€iat ical rrji v€pifl>€ptiat 
Mpa tv^uL ov naptpwiO'tlrm, 



Ap. L 82. 

'E^ Knivov Topfit dia rrjt Kopv^tji 
€v6€ta wapk rrroyphmt luntfyphnpf 
dx^y i^^arrtrai r^r ^^1^9^ Mil tU 
rhv pxToflb t6wop r^r re luipov ropjjt 
Koi Ttjt tvStias Mpa €v6tia ov waptpr 
frtaiirai. 



Another instance of the orthodoxy of ApoUonius is found in the 
fact that, when enunciating propositions as holding good of a circle 
as well as a conic, he speaks of " a hyperbola or an ellipse or the 
drcumferenee qfa circle," not of a eirde simply. In this he follows 
the practice of Euclid based upon his definition of a circle as "a 



GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. XCVIl 

plane figure bounded by one line." It is only very exceptionally 
that the word circle alone is used to denote the circumference of the 
circle, e.g. in Euclid iv. 16 and Apollonius i. 37. 

I 2. Planimetrio character of the treatise. 

Apollonius, like all the Greek geometers whose works have come 
down to us, uses the stereometric origin of the three conies as 
sections of the cone only so far as is necessary in order to deduce 
a single fundamental plane property for each curve. This plane 
property is then made the basis of the further development of the 
theory, which proceeds without further reference to the cone, except 
indeed when, by way of rounding-off the subject, it is considered 
necessary to prove that a cone can be found which will contain any 
given conic. As pointed out above (p. xxi), it is probable that the 
discovery of the conic sections was the outcome of the attempt of 
Menaechmus to solve the problem of the two mean proportionals by 
X)nstructing the plane loci represented by the equations 

md, in like manner, the Greek geometers in general seem to have con- 
lected the conic sections with the cone only because it was in their 
Tiew necessary to give the curves a geometrical definition expressive 
)f their relation to other known geometrical figures, as distinct from 
in abstract definition as the loci of points satisfying certain conditions. 
Bience finding a particular conic was understood as being synonymous 
mth localising it in a cone, and we actually meet with this idea in 
Apollonius I. 52 — 58 [Props. 24, 25, 27], where the problem of 
" finding" a parabola, an ellipse, and a hyperbola satisfying certain 
conditions takes the form of finding a cone of which the required 
curves are sections. Menaechmus and his contemporaries would 
perhaps hardly have ventured, without such a geometrical defini- 
tion, to regard the loci represented by the three equations as being 
really curves. When however they were found to be producible by 
cutting a cone in a particular manner, this fact was a sort of 
guarantee that they were genuine curves ; and there was no longer 
any hesitation in proceeding with the further investigation of their 
properties in a plane, without reference to their origin in the cone. 

There is no reason to suppose that the method adopted in the 
Solid Loci of Aristaeus was di£Perent. We know from Pappus that 
Aristaeus called the conies by their original names ; whereas, if (as 

H. C. g 



XCviii INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

the title might be thought to imply) he had used in his book the 
methods of solid geometry, he would hardly have failed to discover 
a more general method of producing the curves than that implied by 
their old names. We may also assume that the other predecessors 
of Apollonius used, equally with him, the planimetric method ; for 
(1) among the properties of conies which were well-known before 
his time there are many, e.g. the asjrmptote-properties of the 
hyperbola, which could not have been evolved in any natural way 
from the consideration of the cone, (2) there are practically no 
traces of the deduction of the plane properties of a conic from other 
stereometric investigations, even in the few instances where it would 
have been easy. Thus it would have been easy to regard an ellipse 
as a section of a right cylinder and then to prove the property of 
conjugate diameters, or to find the area of the ellipse, by projection 
from the circular sections ; but this method does not appear to have 
been used. 

1 3. Definite order and aim. 

Some writers have regarded the CotUcb as wanting in system and 
containing merely a bundle of propositions thrown together in a 
hap-hazard way without any definite plan having taken shape in the 
author's mind. This idea may have been partly due to the words 
used at the beginning of the preface, where Apollonius speaks of 
having put down everything as it occurred to him ; but it is clear 
that the reference is to the imperfect copies of the Books which 
had been communicated to various persons before they took their 
final form. Again, to a superficial observer the order adopted in the 
first Book might seem strange, and so tend to produce the same 
impression ; for the investigation begins with the properties of the 
conies derived from the cone itself, then it passes to the properties 
of conjugate diameters, tangents, etc., and returns at the end of the 
Book to the connexion of particular conies with the cone, which is 
immediately dropped again. But, if the Book is examined more 
closely, it is apparent that from the beginning to the end a definite 
object is aimed at, and only such propositions are given as are 
necessary for the attainment of that object. It is true that they 
contain plane properties which are constantly made use of after- 
wards ; but for the time being they are simply links in a chain of 
proof leading to the conclusion that the parabolas, ellipses and 
hyperbolas which Apollonius obtains by any possible section of any 



GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. XCIX 

kind of circular cone are identical with those which are produced 
from sections of cones of revolution. 

The order of procedure (leaving out unnecessary details) is as 
follows. First, we have the property of the conic which is the 
equivalent of the Cartesian equation referred to the particular 
diameter which emerges from the process of cutting the cone, and 
the tangent at its extremity, as axes of coordinates. Next, we are 
introduced to the conjugate diameter and the reciprocal relation be- 
tween it and the original diameter. Then follow properties of tangents 
(1) at the extremity of the original diameter and (2) at any other 
point of the curve which is not on the diameter. After these come 
a series of propositions leading up to the conclusion that any new 
diameter, the tangent at its extremity, and the chords parallel to 
the tangent (in other words, the ordinates to the new diameter) 
have to one another the same relation as that subsisting between the 
original diameter, the tangent at its extremity, and the ordinates 
to it, and hence that the equation of the conic when referred to 
the new diameter and the tangent at its extramity is of the same 
/arm as the equation referred to the original diameter and tangent*. 
Apollonius is now in a position to pass to the proof of the 
proposition that the curves represented by his original definitions 
can be represented by equations of the same form with reference to 
rectangular axes, and can be produced by means of sections of right 
cones. He proceeds to propose the problem "to find" a parabola, 
ellipse, or hyperbola, when a diameter, the angle of inclination of its 
ordinates, and the corresponding parameter are given, or, in other 
words, when the curve is given by its equation referred to given 
axes. "Finding" the curve is, as stated above, regarded as 
synonymous with determining it as a section of a right circular 
cone. This Apollonius does in two steps : he first assumes that the 
ordinates are at right angles to the diameter and solves the problem 
for this particular case, going back to the method followed in his 
original derivation of the curves from the cone, and not using any of 
the results obtained in the intervening plane investigations; then, 
secondly, he reduces the case where the ordinates are not perpen- 

* The deflniteness of the design op to this point Is attested by a formal 
reoapitaUtion introdooed by ApoUoniiis himself at the end of i. 61 and 
eoncloding with the statement that ** all the properties whieh have been shown 
to be true with regard to the sections by reference to the original diameters 
will equally resolt when the other diameters are taken.'* 

gi 



C INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUa 

dicular to the diameter to the former case, proving by his procedare 
that it is always possible to draw a diameter which is at right angles 
to the chords bisected by it. Thus what is proved here is not the 
mere converse of the first propositions of the Book. If that had 
been all that was intended, the problems would more naturally have 
followed directly after those propositions. It is clear, however, that 
the solution of the problems as given is not possible without the 
help of the intermediate propositions, and that ApoUonius does in 
fact succeed in proving, concurrently with the solution of the 
problems, that there cannot be obtained from oblique cones any 
other curves than can be derived from right cones, and that all 
conies have axes. 

The contents of the first Book, therefore, so far from being a 
fortuitous collection of propositions, constitute a complete section of 
the treatise arranged and elaborated with a definite intention 
throughout. 

In like manner it will be seen that the other Books follow, 
generally, an intelligible plan; as, however, it is not the object of 
this introduction to give an abstract of the work, the remaining 
Books shall speak for themselves. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE METHODS OF APOLLOKIUS. 

As a preliminary to the consideration in detail of the methods 
employed in the Conies, it may be stated generaUy that they follow 
steadily the accepted principles of geometrical investigation which 
found their definitive expression in the Elements of Euclid. Any 
one who has mastered, the Elements can, if he remembers what 
he gradually learns as he proceeds in his reading of the Conies, 
understand every argument of which ApoUonius makes use. In 
order, however, to thoroughly appreciate the whole course of his 
thought, it is necessary to bear in mind that some of the methods 
employed by the Greek geometers were much more extensively used 
than they are in modem geometry, and were consequently handled 
by ApoUonius and his contemporary readers with much greater 
deftness and facility than would be possible, without special study, 
to a modem mathematician. Hence it frequently happens that 
ApoUonius omits an intermediate step such as a practised mathema- 
tician would now omit in a piece of algebraical work which was 
not intended for the mere beginner. In several such instances 
Pappus and Eutocius think it necessary to supply the omission by a 
lemma. 

1 1. The principal machinery used by ApoUonius as weU as by 
the earlier geometers comes under the head of what has been not 
inappropriately called a geometrioal Algebra; and it wiU be 
convenient to exhibit the part which this plays in the Conies under 
the foUowing important subdivisions. 

(1) The theory of proportions. 

This theory in its most complete form, as expounded in the fifth 
and sixth Books of Euclid, lies at the very root of the system of 



CU INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

Apollonius ; and a very short consideration suffices to show how tar 
it is capable of being used as a substitute for algebraical operations. 
Thus it is obvious that it supplies a ready method of effecting the 
operations of mtUtipltcation and divisum. Again, suppose, for 
example, that we have a series in geometrical progression consisting 
of the terms o^, Oj, a, ... a,^, so that 

Oi ^ ^ " «» * 

We have then ^ = ©'' o*" " =\/j- 

Thus the continued use of the method of proportions enables an 
expression to be given for the sum of the geometrical series (cf. the 
summation in Eucl. ix. 35). 

(2) The application of areas. 

Whether the theory of proportions in the form in which Euclid 
presents it is due to Eudoxus of Cnidus (408 — 355 b.c.) or not, 
there is no doubt that the method of appUeoHon of (Mreas^ to which 
allusion has already been made, was used much earlier still. We 
have the authority of the pupils of Eudemus (quoted by Proclus on 
Euclid L 44) for the statement that "these propositions are the 
discoveries of the Pythagorean muse, the application of areas, their 
exceeding, and their billing short" (i^ re mpaPok^ rwv xiaplfay kol iJ 
wMpfioX^ KoL 17 IXXci^fs), where we find the very terms afterwards 
applied by Apollonius to the three conic sections on the ground of 
the corresponding distinction between their respective fundamental 
properties as presented by him. The problem in Euclid i. 44 is '' to 
apply to a given straight line a parallelogram which shall be equal 
to a given triangle and have one of its angles equal to a given 
rectilineal angle.*' The solution of this clearly gives the means of 
cuUing together or eubtrcKting any triangles, parallelograms, or other 
figures which can be decomposed into triangles. 

Next, the second Book of Euclid (with an extension which is 
found in vi. 27 — 29) supplies means for solving the problems of 
modem algebra so long as they do not involve expressions above the 
second degree, and provided, so far as the solution of quadratic 
equations is concerned, that negative and imaginary solutions are 
excluded; the only further qualification to be borne in mind is 
that, since negative magnitudes are not used in Greek geometry. 



THE MBTTHODS OF APOLLONIUS. 



CUl 



it is often necessary to solve a problem in two parts, with different 
figures, where one solution by algebra would cover both cases. 

It is readily seen that Book ii. of the Elements makes it possible 
to fiivUiply two factors with any number of linear terms in each ; 
and the compression of the result into a single product follows by 
the aid of the a/jp^ico/um-theorem. That theorem itself supplies a 
method of dividing the product of any two linear factors by a third. 
The remaining operations for which the second Book affords the 
means are, however, the most important of all, namely, 

(a) the finding of a square whose area is equal to that of a 
given rectangle [ii. 14], which problem is the equivalent of extract- 
ing the square root, or of the solution of a pure quadratic equation, 

(6) the geometrical solution of a mixed quadratic equation, 
which can be derived from ii. 5, 6. 

In the first case (a) we produce the side AB of the rectangle to 
Ef making BE equal to BC ; then we bisect AE in /*, and, with F 
as centre and radius FE^ draw a circle meeting CB produced in 0. 




Then FG' = FB' + BG'. 

Also FG* = FE' = AB . BE ^ FB', fe:w.c9» XR 

whence, taking away the common FB', 

BG' = AB.BE. 

This corresponds to the equation 

af^ah (1), 

and BO or x is found. 

In the second case (6) we have, if AB is divided equally at C 
and unequally at />, 

AD.DB^CD'^ CB\ [EucL ii. 6.] 

Now suppose AB =» a, DB = x. 



CIV 



INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUa 



Then ax—af^recL AH 

= the gDomon CMF. 
Thus, if the area of the gnomon is given (=6', say), and if a is given 
(= AB\ the problem of solving the equation 

005 — a^ = 6* 

is, in the language of geometry, <'To a given straight line (a) to 
apply a rectangle whicli shall be equal to a given square (6*) and 
d^ficierU by a square^^* i.e. to construct the rectangle Aff, 





t 


1 






A 
K 


/^ 


C 


^VO B 




A 


/, 


L 


/ 


/ 






O 


-/ 


/ 






E 




< 


3 F 



M 



This simply requires the construction of a gnomon, equal in area 
to 6', of which each of the outer sides is given [CB^ ^'^ o) * ^^^ 

we know the area -j (i-^- ^be square CF)y and we know the area of 

part of it, the required gnomon CMF (~ 6') ; hence we have only to 
find the difference between the two, namely the area of the square 
LO^ in order to find CD which is equal to its side. This can be 
done by applying the Pythagorean proposition, i. 47. 

Simson gives the following easy solution in his note on vi. 
28-29. Measure CO perpendicular to AB and equal to 6, produce 

OC to i\r so that Oi\r= CB f or ^ j , and with as centre and radius 

ON describe a circle cutting CB in D. 

Then DB (or x) is found, and therefore the rectangle AH. 

For AD.DB^CD'^CB* 

^OD* 

^OC^^CD\ 
whence AD.DB=^OC\ 
or aa;-aj' = 6' (2). 



THE METHODS OF APOLLONIUS. CV 

It is clear that it is a necessary condition of the possibility of a 

real solution that 6' must not be greater than (-^j , and that the 

geometrical solution derived from Euclid does not differ from our 
practice of solving a quadratic by completing the square on the side 
containing the terms in x* and a;*. 

To show how closely Apollonius keeps to this method and to the old 
terminology connected therewith, we have only to compare his way 
of describing the /oci of a hyperbola or an ellipse. He says, '* Let 
a rectangle equal to one fourth part of the 'figure' [Le. equal to 
CB^] be applied to the axis at either end, for the hyperbola or the 
opposite branches exceeding, but for the ellipse deficient, by a 
square"; and the case of the ellipse corresponds exactly to the 
solution of the equation just given. 

* It will be observed that, while in this case there are two geometrically 
real solationa, Euclid gives only one. It must not however be understood from 
this that he was unaware that there are two solutions. The contrary may be 
inferred from the proposition vi. 27, in which he gives the dto/MfiAt stating the 

necessary condition corresponding to 5^ 4** ( a ) » ^o'* although the separate treat- 
ment, in the text translated by Simson, of the two cases where the base of the 
applied parallelogram is greater and less than half the given line appears to 
be the result of interpolations (see Heiberg*s edition, VoL n. p. 161), the dis- 
tinction is perfectly obvious, and we must therefore assume that, in the case 
given above in the text, Euclid was aware that xssAD satisfies the equation as 
well as x^BD, The reason why he omitted to specify the former solution is no 
doubt that the rectangle so found would simply be an equal rectangle but on BD 
as base instead of AD, and therefore there is no real object in distinguishing 
two solutions. This is easily understood when we regard the equation as a 
statement of the problem of finding two quantities whose sum (a) and product 
{fjp) are given, i.e. as equivalent to the simultaneous equations 

These symmetrical equations have really only one solution, as the. two 
apparent solutions are simply the result of interchanging the values of x and y. 
This form of the problem was known to Euclid, as appears firom Prop. 86 of the 
D(Ua (as translated by Simson) : " If two straight lines contain a parallelogram 
given in magnitude, in a given angle ; if both of them together be given, th^ 
shall each of them be given," 

From Euclid's point of view the equations next referred to in the text 

have of course only one solution. 



CVl 



INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 



Again, from the propodtion in Euclid ii. 6, we have, if ii^ is 
bisected at C and produced to />, 

AD.DB^CB*=^CD\ 



A C 


O 


f\ 






/ 


K L 


/ 


H 



M 



Let us suppose that, in Euclid's figure, AB = a, BD a x. 

Then AD.DB^ax-^x\ 

and, if this is equal to 6' (a given area), the solution of the equation 

oa + 05* = 6* 

is equivalent to finding a gnomon equal in area to 6' and having as 
one of the sides containing the inner right angle a straight line 

equal to the given length CB or ^ . Thus we know f ^ j and 6', and 

we have to find, by the Pythagorean proposition, a square equal to 
the sum of two given squares. 

To do this Simson draws BO at right angles to AB and equal to 
6, joins (70, and describes with centre C and radius CO a circle 
meeting AB produced in D, Thus BD^ or x, is found. 

Now AD.DB^CB'^CD* 

^CO' 

= CB'-^BO\ 

whence AD.DB = BO', 



or 



€tX + X* 



b\ 



This solution corresponds exactly to Apollonius' determination of 
the foci of the hypei'hola. 



THE MiSTHODS OF AP0LL0N1U8. CVU 

The equation a;' — oa; = 6' 

can be dealt with in a similar manner. 

If AB^a, and if we suppose the problem solved, so that 
AD^Xj then 

x' — ax^AM^ the gnomon CMF, 

and, to find the gnomon, we have its area (6*), and the area CB' 

or f ^ j by which the gnomon differs from CD*, Thus we can find 

D (and therefore AD, or x) by the same construction as in the case 
immediately preceding. 

Hence Euclid has no need to treat this case separately, because 
it is the same as the preceding except that here x is equal to AD 
instead of BD, and one solution can be derived from the other. 

So far Euclid has not put his propositions in the form of an 
actual solution of the quadratic equations referred to, though he 
has in ii. 5, 6 supplied the means of solving them. In vi. 28, 29 
however he has not only made the problem more general by 
substituting for the square by which the required rectangle is to 
exceed or fall short a parallelogram similar and similarly situated to 
a given paraUelogram, but he has put the propositions in the form 
of an actual solution of the general quadratic, and has prefixed to 
the first case (the deficiency by a parallelogram) the necessary 
condition of possibility [vi. 27] corresponding to the obvious 
SiopuTfios referred to above in connection with the equation 

OM — X*^ b\ 

Of the problems in vi. 28, 29 Simson rightly says " These two 
problems, to the first of which the 27th prop, is necessary, are the 
most general and useful of all in the elements, and are most 
frequently made use of by the ancient geometers in the solution of 
other problems ; and therefore are very ignorantly left out by Tacquet 
and Dechales in their editions of the Elements^ who pretend that they 
are scarce of any use.* " 

* It is strange that, notwithstanding this observation of Simson's, the three 
propositions vi. 27, 28, 29 are omitted from Todhonter's Eadid, which contains 
a note to this efFect : ** We have omitted in the sixth Book Propositions 27, 28, 
29 and the first eolation which Euclid gives o! Proposition 80, as they appear 
now to be never required and have been condemned as nseless by varions 
modem commentators ; see Austin, Walker, and Lardner.'* 

I would suggest that all three propositions should be at once restored to the 
text-books of Eaelid with a note explaining their mathematical significance. 



cvm INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

The enunciations of these propositions are as follows* : 

VI. 27. **0/ aU the paraUdograms applied to the same straight 
line amd deficient by paraUelograma similar and eimHa/rly situated to 
that which is described upon the half of the line, that which is applied 
to the half, ^^ ^ similar to its defect, is grecntesU 

vi. 28. " To a given straight line to apply a parallelogram equal 
to a given rectilvneal flgrMre and deficient by a parallelogram similar 
to a given paraUelogram : BtU the given rectilineal figure must not be 
greater tJurn the parallelogram applied to half of the given line and 
similar to the dtfect, 

VI. 29. " To a given straight line to apply a parallelogram equal 
to a given rectilineal figure and exceeding by a parallelogram similar 
to a given onsJ* 

Corresponding propositions are found among the Data of Euclid. 
Thus Prop. 83 states that, " 7/* a parallelogram equal to a given 
space be applied to a given straiglU line, deficient by a parallelogram 
given in species, the sides of the defect are given,^ and Prop. 84 states 
the same fact in the case of an excess. 

It is worth while to give shortly Euclid's proof of one of these 
propositions, and vi. 28 is accordingly selected. 




* The iranfllation follows the text of Heiberg's edition of Eaolid (Tenbner, 
1888-8). 



THE METHODS OF APOLLONIUS. CIX 

Let AB be the given straight line, C the given area, D the 
parallelogram to which the defect of the required parallelogram is to 
be similar. 

Bisect AB at S, and on EB describe a parallelogram GBBF 
similar and similarly situated to D [by vi. 18} Then, by the 
Siopurfwf [vi. 27], AO must be either equal to C or greater than it. 
If the former, the problem is solved ; if the latter, it follows that 
the parallelogram BF is greater than C. 

Now construct a parallelogram LKNM equal to the excess of 
EF over C and similar and similarly situated to D [vi. 25]. 

Therefore LKNM is similar and similarly situated to EF^ while, 
if OE^ LK^ and OF^ LM^ are homologous sides respectively, 

QE^LK,wAOF^LM. 

Make QX (along QE) and GO (along OF) equal respectively to 
LK^ LMf and complete the parallelogram XOOP. 

Then OPB must be the diagonal of the parallelogram OB 
[vi. 26]. Complete the figure, and we have 

EF = C + KM^ by construction, 

and XO = KM. 

Therefore the difference, the gnomon EROy is equal to C. 

Hence the parallelogram TS^ which is equal to the gnomon, is 
equal to C. 

Suppose now that AB = a, SP = a;, and that 6 : e is the ratio of 
the sides KN, LK of the parallelogram LKNM to one another ; we 
then have, if m is a certain constant^ 

TB-m.ax, 

SR = fw . -^ . 6c 
c 

h. 

= m . - or, 
c 

so that CUB — ar = — . 

c m 

Proposition 28 in like manner solves the equation 

6 . C 

ax + - «■= — . 
c m 



ex INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUa 

If we compare these equations with those by which Apollonius 
expresses the fundamental property of a central conic, viz. 

it is seen that the only difference is that p takes the place of a and, 
instead of any parallelogram whose sides are in a certain ratio, that 
particular similar parallelogram is taken whose sides are j9, d. 
Further, Apollonius draws p at right angles to d. Subject to these 
differences, the phraseology of the Conies is similar to that of 
Euclid : the square of the ordinate is said to be equal to a rectangle 
" api^ed to " a certain straight line (i.e. p)^ '* having as its width " 
{vXaroi l^^v) the abscissa, and "falling short (or exceeding) by a 
figure similar and similarly situated to that contained by the 
diameter and the parameter." 

It will be seen from what has been said, and from the book 
itself, that Apollonius is nothing if not orthodox in his adherence to 
the traditional method of applicaiion of areaa^ and in his manipula- 
tion of equations between areas such as are exemplified in the 
second Book of Euclid. From the extensive use which is made of 
these principles we may conclude that, where equations between 
areas are stated by Apollonius without proof, though they are not 
immediately obvious, the explanation is to be found in the fact 
that his readers as well as himself were so imbued with the methods 
of geometrical algebra that they were naturally expected to be 
able to work out any necessary intermediate step for themselves. 
And, with regard to the manner of establishing the results assumed 
by Apollonius, we may safely infer, with Zeuthen, that it was 
the practice to prove them directly by using the procedure of the 
second Book of the Elements rather than by such combinations and 
transformations of the restdts obtained in that Book as we find in 
the lemmas of Pappus to the propositions of Apollonius. The 
kind of result most frequently assumed by Apollonius is some 
relation between the products of pairs of segments of a straight 
line divided by points on it into a number of parts, and Pappus' 
method of proving such a relation amounts practically to the pro- 
cedure of modem algebra, whereas it is more likely that Apollonius 
and his contemporaries would, after the manner of geomeiriecU 
algebra, draw a figure showing the various rectangles and squares, 
and thence, in many cases by simple inspection, conclude e.g. that 
one rectangle is equal to the sum of two others, and so on. 



THE METHODS OF APOLLONIUS. 



CXI 



An instanoe will make this clear. In Apollonius IIL 26 
[Prop. 60] it is assumed that, if E^ A, B, C, D he points on a line 
in the order named, and if AB s CD, then 

EC. EB^AB.BD-k- ED.EA. 



B' 











z 





This appears at once if we set off EB' perpendicular and equal 
to EB^ and EA' along EB' equal to EA, and if we complete the 
parallelograms as in the figure*. 

Similarly Eutocius' lemma to iii. 29 [Prop. 61] is more likely to 
represent Apollonius' method of proof than is Pappus' 6th lemma 
to Book III. (ed. Hultsch, p. 949). 

(3) Oraphio representation of areas by means of aoz- 
iliary lines. 

The Greek geometers were fruitful in devices for the compression 
of the sum or difference of the areas of any rectilineal figures into a 
single area ; and in fact the Elements al Euclid furnish the means 
of effecting such compression generally. The Canice of Apollonius 
contain some instances of similar procedure which deserve mention 
for their elegance. There is, firet, the representation of the area of 
the square on the ordinate y in the form of a rectangle whose base 
is the abscissa x. While the procedure for this purpose is, in 

* On the other hand Pappus* method is simply to draw a line with points on 
it, and to piooeed semi-algebraically. Thus in this ease [Lemma 4 to Book m., 
p. 947] he proceeds as follows, first bisecting BC in Z. 

CE.EB'^BZ*=^EZ*, 

and DB.EA'hAZ*^ EZ\ 

whUe AZ*=^CA.AB-\-BZK 

It follows that CE . EB-^BZ^^^DE.EA + CA .AB-^BZ\ 

whence CE.EB^DE.EA-^CA.AB, 

(and CilsBD). 



CXU INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

form, closely connected with the traditional applicaUan of areas^ 
its special neatness is due to the use of a certain auxiliary line. 
The Cartesian equation of a central conic referred to any diameter 
of length d and the tangent at its extremity is (if (£' be the length 
of the conjugate diameter) 

and the problem is to express the right hand side of the equation in 
the form of a single rectangle ocF, in other words, to find a simple 
construction for Y where 

^ d'*^d'* 

Apollonius' device is to take a length p such that 

pd/^ 
d" d" 

(so that p is the parameter of the ordinates to the diameter of 
length d). If PP' be the diameter taken as the axis of x^ and P 
the origin of coordinates, he draws PL perpendicular to PP' and of 
length p, and joins P'L. Then, ii PV=^Xj and if VB drawn parallel 
to PL meets P'Lia B we have (using the figures of Props. 2, 3), by 
similar triangles, 

p_VB VB 

d" P'V^dTx' 

so that VB^pT^x 

a 

"d^d^-" 

= 7, 

and the construction for Y is therefore effected 

Again, in v. 1-3 [Prop. 81], another auxiliary line is used 
for expressing y* in the form of an area standing on a; as base 
in the particular case where y is an ordinate to the axis. AM is 

drawn perpendicular to AA' and of length equal to ^ (where p^ is 

the parameter corresponding to the axis AA')^ and CM is joined. 
If the ordinate PN meets CM in Zf, it is then proved that 

y* -= 2 (quadrilateral MANE). 



THE METHODS OF APOLLONIUS. CXIU 

Apollonios then proceeds in v. 9, 10 [Prop. 86] to give, by means of 
a second auxiliary line, an extremdy elegant construction for an 
area equal to the difference between the square on a normal PG 
and the square on P'O^ where P' is any other point on the curve 
than P', The method is as follows. If PN is the ordinate of P, 
measure NO along the axis away from the nearer vertex so that 

NG : CN^p^ : A£[^Cff : CA*]. 

In the figures of Prop. 86 let PN produced meet CM in ff, as 
before. GH is now joined and produced if necessary, forming the 
second auxiliary line. It is then proved at once that NG = NH^ 
and therefore that 

iTG^ = 2 A NGH, 

and similarly that N'G* = 2 A N'GH\ 

Hence, by the aid of the expression for ^ above, the areas PG* 
and P'G' are exhibited in the figures, and it is proved that 

P'G* - Pe« = 2 A H£H', 

so that we have in the figures a graphic representation of the 
difference between the areas of the two squares effected by means 
of the two fixed auxiliary lines CM^ GH. 

(4) Special use of auxiliary points in Book Vn. 

The seventh Book investigates the values of certain quadratic 
functions of the lengths of any two conjugate diameters PP\ DD ' 
in central conies of different excentricities, with particular reference 
to the maximum and minimum values of those functions. The 
whole procedure of Apollonius depends upon the reduction of the 
ratio CP' : CD' to a ratio between straight lines MH* and MH^ 
where H^ H' are fixed points on the transverse axis of the hyperbola 
or on either axis of the ellipse, and if is a variable point on the 
same axis determined in a certain manner with reference to the 
position of the point P. The proposition that 

PP":DD*'^MH'iMH 

appears in vii. 6, 7 [Prop. 127], and the remainder of the Book is a 
sufficient proof of the effectiveness of this formula as the geometrical 
substitute for algebraical operations. 

The bearing of the proposition may be exhibited as follows, with 
the help of the notation of analytical geometry. If the axes of 

H. C. h 



CXIV INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

coordinates are the principal axes of the conic, and if c^ 6 are the 
lengths of the axes, we have, ag., in the case of the hypetMa^ 



CP 



-.oj,. '("-v^ -{(!)• -(!)•} 



where x^ y are the coordinates of P, 

Eliminating y by means of the equation of the curve, we obtain 






(«-t) 



ApoUonius' procedure is to take a certain fixed point H on the 
axis whose coordinates are {h^ 0), and a variable point M whose 
coordinates are (a/, 0), such that the numerator and denominator of 
the last expression are respectively equal to 2ax\ 2ah ; whence the 

fraction is itself equal to j , and we have 



© 






(1), 



and 00!* = 2 ^2aj" - -J V 

or a(a^ + ?) = 4a:» (2). 

From (1) we derive at once 

ill-*! 

a "a" 
whence AH : A'H -(*:«' 



THE METHODS OP APOLLONIUS. CXV 

Thus, to find J7, we have only to divide AA* in the ratio p^ : AA*, 
This is what is done in vii. 2, 3 [Prop. 124]. 

W is similarly found by dividing A' A in the same ratio p^ : AA\ 
and clearly AH^AH\ A'H^AH\ 
Again, from (2), we have 



^^(*'"^l)"S--^ 



In other words, A A' : A'M= CT : GN 

or A'MiAM^GN'.TN (3). 

If now, as in the figures of Prop. 127, we draw AQ parallel to 
the tangent at P meeting the curve again inQ^ AQ is bisected by 
CP\ and, since A A' is bisected at C, it follows that A'Q is parallel 
toCP. 

Hence, if QM' be the ordinate of Q, the triangles A'QM\ CFN 
are similar, as also are the triangles AQM\ TPN\ 

:. A'M'iAM'^CNiTN. 

Thus, on comparison with (3), it appears that M coincides with 
M' ; or, in other words, the determination of Q by the construction 
described gives the position of J£. 

Since now ZT, H\ M are found, and a;', h were so determined 
that 

CP'-'Ciy'' A' 

it follows that CP^:CD^--x' -^hxT^^h, 

or PF*:DI)^=^MH'.MH. 

The construction is similar for the ellipse except that in that case 
AA* is divided eoctemaUy at H^ H! in the ratio described. 

§ 2. The oae of ooordinates. 

We have here one of the most characteristic features of the 
Greek treatment of conic sections. The use of coordinates is not 
peculiar to Apollonius, but it will have been observed that the same 
point of view appears also in the earlier works on the subject. Thus 
Menaechmus used the characteristic property of the parabola which 
we now express by the equation y* = /X6 referred to rectangular axes. 
He used also the property of the rectangular hyperbola which is 
expressed in our notation by the equation xy = c', where the axes of 
coordinates are the asymptotes. 

A2 



CXVl INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

Archimedes too used the same form of equation for the parabolai 
while his mode of representing the fundamental property of a 
central conic 



X, 07, 



(const) 



can easily be pnt into the form of the Cartesian equation. 

So Apollonius, in denying the three conies from any cone cut in 
the most general manner, seeks to find the relation between the 
coordinates of any point on the curve referred to the original 
diameter and the tangent at its extremity as axes (in general 
oblique), and proceeds to deduce from tiiis relation, when found, the 
other properties of the curves. His method does not essentially differ 
from that of modem analytical geometry except that in Apollonius 
geometrical operations take the place of algebraical calculations. 

We have seen that the graphic representation of the area of y* 
in the form of a rectangle on a; as base, where {x^ y) is any point on 
a central conic, was effected by means of an auxiliary fixed line P'L 
whose equation referred to PP*, PL as rectangular axes is 

That an equation of this form between the coordinates x^ Y repre- 
sents a straight line we must assume Apollonius to have been aware, 
because we find in Pappus' account of the contents of the first Book 
of his separate work on plane loci the following proposition : 

" If straight lines be drawn from a point meeting at given angles 
two straight lines given in position, and if the former lines are in a 
given ratio, or if the sum of one of them and of such a line as bears 
a given ratio to the second is given, then the point will lie on a 
given straight line" ; in other words, the equation 

X'¥ay^h 

represents a straight line, where a, 5 are positive. 

The altitude of the rectangle whose base Ib x and whose area is 
equal to y* is thus determined by a procedure like that of analytical 
geometry except that Y is found by a geometrical construction 
instead of being calculated algebraically from the equation of the 
auxiliary line 



THE METHODS OF AP0LL0NIU8. CXVU 

If it should seem curious that the auxiliary line is determined with 

reference to an independent (rectangular) pair of coordinate axes 

different from the oblique axes to which the conic is itself referred, 

it has only to be borne in mind that, in order to show the area ^ as 

a rectangle^ it was necessary that the angle between x and Y should 

be right. But, as soon as the line P^L was once drawn, the object 

was gained, and the subsidiary axes of coordinates were forthwith 

dropped, so that there was no danger of confusion in the further 

development of the theory. 

Another neat example of the use of an auxiliary line regarded 

from the point of view of coordinate geometry occurs in i. 32 

[Fh>p. 11], where it is proved that, if a straight line be drawn from 

the end of a diameter parallel to its ordinates (in other words, a 

tangent), no straight Ime can fall between the parallel and the 

curve. Apollonius first supposes that such a line can be drawn 

from P passing through JT, a point outside the curve, and the 

ordinate KQV is drawn^ Then, if y^, y be the ordinates of Z*, Q 

respectively, and x their conmion abscissa, referred to the diameter 

and tangent as axes, we have for the central conic (figures on pp. 

23, 24) 

^>y' or xY, 

where F represents the ordinate of the point on the auxiliary line 
PL before referred to corresponding to the abscissa x (with PP^ PL 
as independent rectangular axes). 

Let y" be equal to xY\ so that Y'> F, and let Y' be measured 
along Y (so Uiat, in the figures referred to, VR^Y, and VS== F'). 

Then the locus of the extremity of F for different values of as is 
the straight line P'Z, and the locus of the extremity of Y' for 
different points K on PK is the straight line PS. It follows, since 
the lines PZ, PS intersect, that there is one point (their intersection 
R) where F= F', and therefore that, for the corresponding points 
Q\ M on the conic and the supposed line PK respectively, y-y\^ 
that Q', M are coincident, and accordingly PK must meet the 
curve between P and K. Hence PK cannot lie between the tangent 
and the curve in the manner supposed. 

Here then we have two auxiliary lines used, viz. 

Y^p^^x, 
and FaniOB, 



CXVIU INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIU& 

where m im some oonstant ; and the point of intersection of PK and 
the conic is determined by the point of intersection of the two 
auxiliary lines; only here again the latter point is found by a 
geometrical construction and not by an algebraical calculation. 

In seeking in the various propositions of Apollonius for the 
equivalent of the Cartesian equation of a conic referred to other 
axes different from those originally taken, it is necessary to bear in 
mind what has already been illustrated by tiie original equation 
which forms the basis of the respective definitions, viz. that, where 
the equivalents of Cartesian equations occur, they appear in the 
guise of simple equations between areas. The book contains several 
such equations between areas which can either be directly expressed 
as, or split up into parts which are seen to be, constant multiples of 
a^f aoy, y*, as, and y, where Xj y are the coordinates of any point on 
the curve referred to different coordinate axes ; and we have there- 
fore the equivalent of so many different Cartesian equations. 

Further, the essential difference between the Greek and the 
modem method is that the Greeks did not direct their efforts to 
making the fixed lines of the figure as few as possible, but rather to 
expressing their equations between areas in as short and simple a 
form as possible. Accordingly they did not hesitate to use a number 
of auxiliary fixed lines, provided only that by that means the areas 
corresponding to the various terms in as*, ocy, ... forming the Cartesian 
equation could be brought together and combined into a smaller 
number of terms. Instances have already been given in which such 
compression is effected by means of one or two auxiliary lines. In 
the case, then, where two auxiliary fixed lines are used in addition 
to the original axes of coordinates, and it appears that the properties 
of the conic (in the form of equations between areas) can be equally 
well expressed relatively to the two auxiliary lines and to the two 
original axes of reference, we have clearly what amounts to a 
tran^ormaAwn of coardincUes. 

§ 3. TraaBformatlon of ooordinates. 

A simple case is found as early as i. 15 [Prop. 5], where, for the 
ellipse, the axes of reference are changed from the original diameter 
and the tangent at its extremity to the diameter eanjugate to the 
first and the corresponding tangent This transformation may with 
sufficient accuracy be said to be effected, first, by a simple transference 
of the origin of coordinates from the extremity of the original diameter 



THE METHODS OF APOLLONIUS. CXIZ 

to the centre of the ellipse, and, secondly, by moving the origin a 
second time from the centre to 2), the end of the conjugate diameter. 
We find in fact^ as an intermediate step in the proof, the statement 
of the property that (d being the original diameter and d' its 
conjugate in the figure of Prop. 5) 



yj -y* = the rectangle BT. TE 



where x^ y are the coordinates of the point Q with reference to the 
diameter and its conjugate as axes and the centre as origin; and 
ultimately the equation is expressed in the old form, only with d' 
for diameter and p' for the corresponding parameter, where 

dt p' 

The equation of the hyperbola as well as of the ellipse referred 
to the centre as origin and the original diameter and its conjugate 
as axes is at once seen to be included as a particular case in i. 41 
[Prop. 16], which proposition proves generally that, if two similar 
parallelograms be described on CP, CV respectively, and an equi- 
angular parallelogram be described on QV such that QF is to the 
other side of the parallelogram on it in the ratio compounded of the 
ratio of CP to the other side of the parallelogram on CP and of the 
ratio ^ : d, then the parallelogram on QF is equal to the difference 
between the parallelograms on CP, CV. Suppose now that the 
parallelograms on CP, CV are squares, and therefore that the 
parallelogram on QF is a rectangle ; it follows that 

=^'tr (1). 

ApoUonius is now in a position to undertake the transformation 
to a different pair of axes consisting of any diameter whatever and 
the tangent at its extremity. The method which he adopts is to 
use the new diameter as what has been termed an auxiliary fixed 
line. 

It will be best to keep to the case of the Mipae throughout, in 
order to avoid ambiguities of sign. Suppose that the new diameter 
CQ meets the tangent at P in Ji?, as in the figure of i. 47 [Prop. 21]; 



CXZ INTRODUCTION TO AFOLLONIX7S. 

than, if from any point B on the curve the ordinate BWis drawn 
to PPy it is parmllel to the tangent PB^ and, if it meets CQ in 
Ff the triangles CPB^ CWF are similar, and one angle in eadi 
is that between the old and the new diameters. 

Also, as the triangles CPB^ CWF are the halves of two similar 
parallelograms on C7P, CYT, we can use the relation proved in L 41 
[Prop. 16] for parallelograms, provided that we take a triangle on 
i^lF as base such that BWP is one angle, and the side WU lying 
along WP is determined by the relation 

BWCP p 
WU' PB'T 

ApoUonios satisfies this condition by drawing £17 parallel to QT^ 
the tangent at Q. The proof is as follows. 

From the property of the tangent, i. 37 [Prop. 14], 

QV^ _P 
Cr.VT^d' 

A1k>, by similar triangles, 

QVBW , Q7PB 
7T' WU' *°^ CV'UP' 

rp, , BW PE p 

Therefore WCP = 5' 

or 1^ = -pp . ^ (the required relation). 

Thus it is dear that the proposition i. 41 [Prop. 16] is true of 
the three triangles CPE, CFW, BUW\ that is, 

C^CPE-t^CFW^£::.BUW (2). 

It is now necessary to prove, as is done in i. 47 [Prop. 21], that 
the chord BB parallel to the tangent at Q is bisected by CQ*, in 
order to show that BM is the ordinate to CQ in the same way as 

* This is proved in i. 47 [Prop. 21] as follows : 

Similarly, a CFE - lCF'W'^lR UW, 

By subtraotioii, F'W'WF::^R' W'WR, 

whence, taUng away the figure R'W'WFM from each side, 

nR'F'M^iiRFM, 
and it foUows that RM^RfM. 



THE METHODS OF APOLLONIUS. CZXl 

BWia to CP. It then follows that the two triangles EUW, CFW 
have the same relation to the original axes, and to the diameter 
QQ^, as the triangles BFM, CUM have to the new axes, consisting 
of QQ' and the tangent at Q, and to the diameter FF', respectively. 

Also the triangle CFB has the same relation to the old axes 
that the triangle CQT has to the new. 

Therefore, in order to prove that a like relation to that in (2) 

above holds between three triangles similarly determined with 

reference to CQ, the tangent at Q and the diameter FF^ it has to 

be shown that 

ACQT-ACUM^AFMF. 

The first step is to prove the equality of the triangles CFB^ 
CQTf as to which see note on i. 50 [Prop. 23] and iii. 1 [Prop. 53]. 
We have then, from (2) above, 

aCQT-'ACFW^ ABUW, 
or the quadrilateral QTWF= ABUW, 
therefore, subtracting the quadrilateral MUWF from each side, 

A CQT-- A CUM^ aBMF, 

the property which it was required to prove. 

Thus a relation between areas has been found in exactly the 
same form as that in (2), but with Q^ as the diameter of reference 
in place of FF, Hence, by reversing the process, we can determine 
the parameter q corresponding to the diameter Q^, and so obtain 
the equation of the conic with reference to the new axes in the same 
form as the equation (1) above (p. cxix) referred to FF and its 
conjugate ; and, when this is done, we have only to move the origin 
from C to Q in order to effect the complete transformation to the 
new axes of coordinates consisting of QQ' and the tangent at Q, 
and to obtain the equation 

Now the original parameter p is determined with reference to 
the length {d) of FP by the relation 

p QV* FB OF^qP 2FB 
d'Cr.VT''CF'FT''FT' d ' 

OF 
so that p = -p^.2FB; 



CXXU INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIU8. 

and the corresponding value for q should accordingly be given by 
the equation 

which Apollonius proves to be the case in i. 50 [Prop. 23]. 

No mention of the parabola has been made in the above, because 
the proof of the corresponding transformation is essentially the 
same ; but it may be noted here that Archimedes was familiar with 
a method of effecting the same transformation for the parabola. 
This has been already alluded to (p. liii) as easily deducible from 
the proposition of Apollonius. 

There is another result, and that perhaps the most interesting 
of aU, which can be derived from the foregoing equations between 
areas. We have seen that 

ARUW^ ACPE" aCFW, 

so that AEUW-^ ACFW^ aCPE, 

ie. the quadrilateral CFRU=^ AC PS. 

Now, if PF^ QQ' are Jixed diameters, and E a variable point on 
the curve, we observe that BU^ RF are drawn always in fixed 
directions (pai:allel to the tangents at Q, P respectively), while the 
area of the triangle CPE is constant. 

It follows therefore that, \f PP^ QQ' are two fined diatMtere and 
if from any poitU R on the curve ordinates be drawn to PF^ QQ' 
meeting QQ', PF in F, U respectively, then 

the area of the qtiadrUateral CFRU is constant 

Conversely, if in a quadrilateral CFRU the ttoo sides CU, CF lie 
along fixed straight lines, while the two other sides are drawn from a 
moveable point R in given directions and meeting the fixed lines, and 
if the quadrilateral ?uis a constant area, then the locus qf the point R 
is an ellipse or a hyperbola, 

Apollonius does not specifically give this converse proposition, 
nor in fact any proposition stating that this or that locus is a conic. 
But, as he says in his preface that his work contains *' remarkable 
theorems which are useful for the synthesis of solid loci," we must 
conclude that among them was the proposition which in effect states 
that the area of the quadrilateral CFRU is constant, and that the 
converse way of stating it was perfectly well known to him. 



THE METHODS OF APOLLONIUS. CXXIU 

It will be seen from the note to Prop. 18 that the proposition 
that the area of CFRU is constant is the equivalent of saying that 
the equation of a central conic re/erred to any two diameters as 
axes is 

where a, fi, y, A are constants. 

It is also interesting to observe that this equation is the equiva- 
lent of the intermediate step in the transformation from one diameter 
and tangent to another diameter and tangent as axes; in other 
words, ApoUonius passes frofm the equation r^erred to one pair of 
conjugate diameters to the eqv^ion referred to a second pair of 
conjugate diameters by means of the more general equation of the 
curve referred to axes consisting of one ofeacli pair of conjugates. 

Other forms of the equation of the conic can be obtained, e.g. by 
regarding RF^ BU as fixed coordinate axes and expressing the 
constancy of the area of the quadrilateral CF'RIT for any point R 
with reference to RF^ RU as axes. The axes of reference may 
then be any axes meeting in a point on the curve. 

For obtaining the equation we may use the formula 

CFRU=CF'RU, 
or the other relations derived immediately from it, viz. 

FIRF= lUUR, 
or FJRF'^JV'UR, 

which are proved in iii. 3 [Prop. 55]. 

The coordinates of R would in this case be RI^ RJ, 

Similarly an equation can be found corresponding to the property 

in III. 2 [Prop. 54] that 

A HFQ = quadrilateral HTUR 

Again, iii. 54, 56 [Prop. 75] lead at once to the <' locus with 
respect to three lines," and from this we obtain the well-known 
equation to a conic with reference to two tangents as axes, where 
the lengths of the tangents are A, A, viz. 



(m-o='*(b: 




and, in the particular case of the parabola, 



CZXIV INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

The latter eqaation can also be derived directly from iii. 41 
[Prop. 65], which proves that three tangents to a parabola forming 
a triangle are divided in the same proportion. 

Thus, if a:, y be the coordinates of Q with reference to qR^ qF as 
axes, and if qp = x^f rq ^y^ (cf. the figure of Prop. 65), we have, by 
the proposition, 

«,-« Qp y y, *-«,* 

From these equations we find 



~-l= 1, or «/ = Aaj 

a; 05, 

y..l.*-.l, or ff^'^ky 



\ 



(!)• 



Also, since ->— ^ 

« Vx-y 



I 



?^^.l (2), 

«, yi ^ ' 

therefore by combining (1) and (2) we obtain 

The same equation can equally be derived from the property 
proved by Archimedes (pp. lix, Ix). 

Lastly, we find of course the equation of the hyperbola referred 
to its asymptotes 

and, if ApoUonius had had a relation between the coordinates of a 
point {x^ y) represented to him in a geometrical form equivalent to 
the equation 

ay + oaj + Jy + C-O, 

he would certainly not have failed to see that the locus was a 
hyperbola ; for the nature of the equation would immediately have 
suggested the compression of it into a form which would show that 
the product of the distances of the point (reckoned in fixed 
directions) from two fixed straight lines is constant. 



THE KETHODS OF APOLLONIUS. 



CXXV 



§ 4. Method of flndlntf two mean proportionals. 

It will be remembered that Menaechmus' solutioii of the problem 
of the two mean proportionals was effected by finding the points of 
intersection between any two of the corves 

«* = »y> y * = ^ «y " «*• 

It is clear that the points of intersection of the first two carves 

lie on the circle 

«■ 4 y • — 6aj - ay = 0, 

and therefore that the two mean proportionals can be determined by 
means of the intersection of this circle with any one of the three curves. 

Now, in the construction for two mean proportionals which is 
attributed to Apollonius, we find this very circle used, and we must 
therefore assume that he had discovered that the points of inter- 
section of the two parabolas lay on the circle. 

We have it on the authority of loannes Philoponus* (who 
quotes one Parmenio) that Apollonius solved the problem thus. 

Let the two given unequal straight lines be placed at right 
angles, as OA, OB. 




Ck)mplete the parallelogram and draw the diagonal OC. On OC 
as diameter describe the semicircle OBC^ produce OA^ OB^ and 
through C draw DCFE (meeting OA in 2>, tiie circle again in F, 
and OB m E) wo that DC ^ FB, ''And thU U amimed a$ a 
posttUate unproved.** 

Now DC = FB, and therefore DF^ CE. 

* On the Anal. pott. i. The passage is quoted in Heibexg*s Apolloniut, 
Vol. n. p. 105. 



Cxrvi INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

And, since the circle on 00 as diameter passes through A^ 

OD.DA^FD.DC 
^CE.EF 
=^OB.BB; 

:. OD:OE = BE:AD (1). 

But, by similar triangles, 

ODiOE^CBiBE 

= OA:BE, (2). 

Also, by similar triangles, 

OD:OE = DA:AO 

= DA:OB (3). 

It follows from (1), (2) and (3) that 

OA:BE = BE:AD = AD:OB; 

hence BE^ AD are the two required mean proportionals. 

The important step in the above is the auumed step of drawing 
DE through so tiiat DO = FE. 

If we compare with this tiie passage in Pappus which says that 
ApoUonius " has also contrived the resolution of it by means of the 
sections of the cone*," we may conclude that the point F in the 
above figure was determined by drawing a rectangular hyperbola 
with OA, OB as a83rmptotes and passing through 0. And this is 
the actual procedure of the Arabian scholiast in expounding this 
solution. Hence it is sufficiently clear that ApoUonius' solution 
was obtained by means of the intersection of the circle on 00 as 
diameter with the rectangular hyperbola referred to, Le. by the 
intersection of the curves 

05* + y" - &B - ay = 1 

The mechanical solution attributed to Apollonius is given by 
Eutociust. In this solution if, the middle point of 0(7, is taken, 
and with M as centre a circle has to be described cutting Oil, OB 
produced in points D, E such that the line DE passes through ; 
and this, the writer says, cafi be done by moving a ruUr about as 
a fixed point until the dietancea qf D^ E (the points in which it 
crosses OA, OB) from M a/re equal. 

* Pappus m. p. 56. OSroc yiip 6fidKoyoQpTtt ^rfpcdr fZrat r6 Tp6pKfi/uL ri/w 
jrarotf'fffiH^ adroO /A6ror dpyoFiicC^ wiwolrprrai av/t/^iJ^vt 'AwoKKuvttf rf UtpytUtff 6t 
KoJt 1^9 drdXvtf'iy adroO rcro/iyrai 8id rflv roO Ktiwov rofui^, 

t Archimedes, Vol. ni. pp. 76—78. 



THE METHODS OF AP0LL0NIU8. CXXVll 

It is clear that this solution is essentially the same as the other, 
because, if DC be made equal to FE as in the former case, the line 
from if perpendicular to DE must bisect it, and therefore MD = ME. 
This coincidence is noticed in Eutocius' description of the solution of 
the problem by Philo Byzantinus. This latter solution is the same 
as that attributed by loannes Philoponus to ApoUonius except 
that Philo obtains the required position for DE by moving the ruler 
about C until DC, FE become equal. Eutocius adds that this 
solution is almost the same as Heron's (given just before and 
identical with the meehanteal solution of ApoUonius), but that 
Philo's method is more convenient in practice (irpos "xp^ktw viOvrm^ 
rcpov), because it is, by dividing the ruler into equal and con- 
tinuous parts, possible to watch the equality of the lines 2>C, FE 
with much greater ease than to make trial with a pair of compasses 
(icopicii^ &aircif>a{civ) whether MD^ ME are equal*. 

It may be mentioned here that, when ApoUonius uses the 
problem of the two mean proportionals in the Conic$^ it is for the 
purpose of connecting the coordinates of a point on a central conic 
with the coordinates of the corresponding centre of curvature, Le. of 
the corresponding point on the evolute. The propositions on the 
subject are V. 51, 52 [Prop. 99]. 

S 6. Method of ooiuttraotintf normals pasaintf through 
a given point. 

Without entering into details, for which reference should be 
made to v. 58-63 [Props. 102, 103], it may be stated generaUy that 
ApoUonius' method of finding the feet of the various normals passing 
through a given point is by the construction of a certain rectangular 
hyperbola which determines, by its intersections with the conic, the 
required points. 

The analytical equivalent of ApoUonius' procedure is as foUows. 
Suppose to be the fixed point through which the 
normals are to pass, and PGO to be one of those 
normals, meeting the major or transverse axis of 
a central conic, or the axis of a parabola, in G, 
Let PN be the ordinate of P, and OM the 
perpendicular from on the axis. 

Then, if we take as axes of coordinates the 
axes of the central conic, and, for the parabola, 

• Archimedes, Vol. ni. p. 76. 




CXXVIU INTRODUCTION TO AP0LL0NIU8. 

the axis and the tangent at the yertex, and if (x, y), (aS|, y,) be 
the coordinates oi P^ respectiyelj, we have 

y ^ ^O 
-y, «, - « - NO * 

Therefore, (1) for the parabola^ 

y 2 

» 2 

<»• «y-(«.-§)y-y..f = (i); 

(2) for the eUip9€ or hyperbola^ 

ay(i+^-«iy±^-yi«=<>- 

The interseotiona of these rectangular hyperboka with the 
respective conies give the feet of the various normals p^Mnng 
through 0. 

Now Pappus criticises this procedure, so far as applied to the para- 
bola^ as being unorthodox. He is speaking (p. 270) of the distinction 
between the three classes of '' plane " (^rtircSa), " solid " (<rr€pca), and 
the still more complicated '' linear" problems {ypafifiuca vpojSXi/fiaTa), 
and says, "Such procedure seems a serious error on the part of 
geometers when the solution of a plane problem is discovered by 
means of conies or higher curves, and generally when it is solved 
by means of a foreign kind {i( dvovcctov yc^ovs), as, for example, the 
problem in the fifth Book of the Conies of ApoUonius in the case of 
the parabola, and the solid vcvort? with reference to a circle assumed 
in the book about the spiral by Archimedes; for it is possible 
without the use of anything solid to discover the theorem pro- 
pounded by the latter...." The first allusion must clearly be to the 
use of the intersections of a rectangular hyperbola with the parabola 
when the same points could be obtained by means of the intersec- 
tions of the latter with a certain cirde. Presumably Pappus 
regarded the parabola itself as being completely drawn and given, 
so that its character as a " solid locus " was not considered to affect 
the order of the problem. On this assumption the criticism has no 
doubt some force, because it is a clear advantage to be able to effect 
the construction by means of the line and circle only. 



THE METHODS OF APOLLONIUS. CXXIX 

The circle in this case can of course be obtained by combining 
the equation of the rectangular hyperbola (1) above with that of 
the parabola y* ^p^jp^ 

Multiply (1) by — , and we have 

Pa 



i^-('.-t)^f-»' 



Pc 
and, substituting p^ for y*, 

whence, by adding the equation of the parabola, we have 

But there is nothing in the operations leading to this result 
which could not have been expressed in the geometrical language 
which the Greeks used. Moreover we have seen that in Apollomus' 
solution of the problem of the two mean proportionals the same 
reduction of the intersections between two conies to the intersec- 
tions of a conic and a circle is found. We must therefore assume 
that Apollonius could have reduced the problem of the normals to 
a parabola in the same way, but that he purposely refrained from 
doing so. Two explanations of this are possible; either (1) he 
may have been unwilling to sacrifice to a pedantic orthodoxy the 
convenience of using one uniform method for all three conies alike, 
or (2) he may have regarded the presence of one "solid locus*' 
(the given parabola) in his figure as determinative of the class of 
problem, and may have considered that to solve it with the help of 
a circle only would not» in the circumstances, have the eifect of 
making it a " plane " problenL 



H. C. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE CONSTRUCTION OF A CONIC BY MEANS OP TANGENTS. 

In Book III. 41-43 [Props. 65, 66, 67] ApoUoniuB gives three 
theorems which may be enunciated as foUows : 

41. If three atraight linee^ each of which iauehee a parabda^ 
meet one another^ they tvill be cut in the $ame propartum. 

42. If in a eentnU eanie parallel tangenU he drawn at the 
exiremitiee qf a fixed diameter^ and if both tangente be met by any 
vcuriable tangent, the rectangle under the intercepte an the parallel 
tangents is constant, being eq^ial to the square on haffthe parallel dia- 
meter, i,e, the diameter conjugate to that joining the points of contact, 

43. Any tangent to a hyperbola cuts off lengths from the asymp- 
totes vshose product is constant. 

There is an obvious family likeness between these three consecu- 
tive propositions, and their arrangement in this manner can hardly 
have been the result of mere accident. It is true that iii. 42 [Prop. 
66] is used almost directly afterwards for determining the foci of a 
central conic, and it might be supposed that it had its place in the 
book for this reason only; but, if this were the case, we should have 
expected that the propositions about the foci would follow directly 
after it instead of being separated from it by iii. 43, 44 [Props. 67, 
68]. We have also a strong positive reason for supposing that the 
arrangement was due to set purpose rather than to chance, namely the 
fact that all three propositions can be used for describing a conic by 
means of tangents. Thus, if two tangents to a parabola are given, 
the first of the three propositions gives a general method of drawing 



CONSTRUCTION OF A CONIC BY MEANS OF TANGENTS. CXXXl 

any number of other tangents ; while the second and third give the 
simplest cases of the construction of an ellipse and a hyperbola by 
the same means, those cases, namely, in which the fixed tangents 
employed are chosen in a special manner. 

As therefore the three propositions taken together contain the 
essentials for the construction of all three conies by this method, it 
becomes important to inquire whether Apollonius possessed the 
means of drawing any number of tangents satisfying the given 
conditions in each case. That Apollonius was in a position to solve 
this problem is proved by the contents of two of his smaller 
treatises. One of these, Xoyov AiroTOfitj^ p (two Books On cutting 
off a proportion)^ we possess in a translation by Halley from the 
Arabic under the title De aectione rationia; the other, now lost, 
was x«dp^ &voTOfjL^^ p^ (tvo Books On cutting off a apace, which means 
cutting off from two fixed lines lengths, measured from fixed points 
on the lines respectively, such that they contain a rectangle of 
constant area). Now the very problem just mentioned of drawing 
any number of tangents to a parabola reduces precisely to that 
which is discussed with great fulness in the former of the two 
treatises, while the construction of any number of tangents to 
the ellipse and hyperbola in accordance with the conditions of 
III. 42, 43 [Props. 66, 67] reduces to two important cases of the 
general problem discussed in the second treatise. 

I. In the case of the parabola, if two tangents qP, qR and the 
points of contact P, R are given, we have to draw through any 
point a straight line which will intersect the given tangents 
(in r, p respectively) in such a way that 

Pr : rq^qp : pR, 

or Pr : Pq = qp :qR; 

that is, we must have 

Pr :qp-Pq : qR (a constant ratio). 

In fact, we have to draw a line such that the intercept on one 
tangent measured from the point of contact is to the intercept on 
the other tangent measured from the intersection of the tangents in 
a given ratio. How to do this is shown in the greatest detail in the 
first Book Xoyov dvorofii}^. 

If, again, instead of the points of contact, two other tangents 
are given meeting the fixed tangent qP m r^, r, and the fixed 
tangent qR in p^, p^, we have to draw a straight line rp cutting off 

ii 



CXXXll INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIU8. 

along the tangents qP^ qR parts measured from r^ p, respectively 
which are in a given proportion, i.e. such that 

r^r : p^p = r^r^ : p,p, (a fixed ratio) ; 

and this problem is solved in the second Book Xoyov diroro/t^. 

The general problem discussed in that treatise is, to draw from 
a point a straight line which shall cut off from two given straight 
lines portions, measured from two fixed points A^ B, which are in a 
given proportion, e.g., in the accompanying figure, OlfM is to be 
drawn so that AM : BN is a given ratio. In the second Book of 




the treatise this general case is reduced to a more special one in 
which the fixed point B occupies a position B' on the first line AM^ 
so that one of the intercepts is measured from the intersection of 
the two lines. The reduction is made by joining OB and drawing 
B'lf' parallel to Blf from the point B' in which OB, MA intersect 

Then clearly B'N* : BN is a given ratio, and therefore the ratio 
B'N' : AM is given. 

We have now to draw a straight line ON'M cutting MAB\ B'N' 
in points if, N' such that 

-y^r - ^ given ratio, A suppose. 
AM 

This problem is solved in the first Book, and the solution is 
substantially as follows. 

Draw OC parallel to N'B' meeting MA produced in C, Now 
suppose a point D found on AM such that 

"-AD- 



CONSTRUCTION OF A CONIC BT MEANS OF TANGENTS. CXXXUl 

B'N' 
Then, supposing that the ratio . _ is made equal to X, we have 

AM B'N' B'M 



whence 



AD" OC "CM' 
MD CB' 



AD" CM' 

and therefore CM . MD = AD . CB' (a given rectangle). 

Thus a given line CD has to be divided at if so that CM. MD 
has a given value ; and this is the Euclidean problem of applying to 
a given straight line a rectangle eqttal to a given area but /ailing 
shorty or exceeding^ by a square. 

In the absence of algebraical signs, it was of course necessary for 
ApoUonius to investigate a large number of separate cases, and also 
to find the limiting conditions of possibility and the number of the 
possible solutions between each set of limits. In the case repre- 
sented in the above figure the solution is always possible for any 
value of the given ratio, because the given value AD . CB\ to which 
CM. MD is to be equal, is always less than CA . AD, and therefore 

(CD\* 
-^ j , the maximum value of the rectangle whose 

sides are together equal to CD. As the application of the rectangle 
would give two positions of if, it remains to be proved that only 
one of them falls on AD and so gives a solution such as the figure 
requires; and this is so because CM.MD must be less than 
CA.AD. 

The application to the parabola has more significance in the 
cases where the given ratio must be subject to certain limits in 
order that the solution of the problem may be possible. This will 
be so, e.g. in the annexed figure, where the letters have the same 
meaning as before, and the particular case is taken in which one 



CXZXIV INTRODUCnOK TO AFOLLONIUS. 

intercept BN* is measured from B\ the intersection of the two fixed 
lines. ApoUonios begins by stating the limiting case, saying that 
we obtain a solution in a special manner in the case where M is the 
middle point of C2>, so that the given rectangle CM.MD or 
CB'.AD has its maximum value. 

In order to find the corresponding limiting value of A, ApoUonius 
seeks the corresponding position of D. 

BC CM BM 
Wehave MD^ AD" MA' 

whence, since MD = CM^ 

B'C CM B'M 
B'M" MA " B'A ' 

and therefore B'M* = B'C . B'A. 

Thus M is determined, and therefore D also. 

AccordiDg, therefore, as X is less or greater than the particular 

OC 
value of .^ thus determined, ApoUonius finds no solution or two 
AV 

solutions. 

At the end we find also the following further determination of 

the limiting value of X. We have 

AD^BA^BC-iBD-^BC) 

^BA^BC" 2BM 

= BA-^BC'-2 JBATBC. 

Thus, if we refer the various points to a system of coordinates with 
BAf BN* as axes, and if we denote the coordinates of by (x^ y) 
and the length B'A by A, we have 

x=^= y— 

If we suppose ApoUonius to have used these results for the 
parabola, he cannot have failed to observe that the limiting case 
described is that in which is on the parabola, while N'OM is the 
tangent at ; for, as above, 

BMBC 
BA" BM 

" WM' ^^ P*™^^®^^ 



CONSTRUCTION OF A CONIC BT MEANS OF TANGENTS. CXZXV 

SO that B^Ay N'M are divided at M^ respectively in the same 
proportion. 

Further, if we put for X the proportion between the lengths of 
the two fixed tangents, we obtain, if A, ^ be those lengths, 

- = — ^— =. 

which is the equation of the parabola referred to the fixed tangents 
as coordinate axes, and which can easily be reduced to the sym- 
metrical form 

1. 



©'^(i)' 



II. In the case of the eUipse and hyperbola the problem is to 
draw through a given point a straight line cutting two straight 
lines in such a way that the intercepts upon them measured from 
fixed points contain a rectangle of constant area, and for the ellipse 
the straight lines are parallel, while for the hyperbola they meet in 
a point and the intercepts on each are measured from the poiut of 
their intersection. 

These are particular cases of the general problem which, accord- 
ing to Pappus, was discussed in the treatise entitled xi^pCov diroro/ii; ; 
and, as we are told that the propositions in this work corresponded 
severally to those in the Xoyov dvoro/ii;, we know that the particular 
cases now in question were included. We can ako form an idea 
how the general problem was solved. The reduction to the particular 
case where one of the points from which the intercepts are measured 
is the intersection of the two fixed lines is effected in the same 
manner as in the case of proportional section described above. 
Then, using the same figure (p. cxxxii), we should take the point D 
(in the position represented by (2>) in the figure) such that 

OC . AD = the given rectangla 
We have then to draw the line ON'M so that 

FN'.AM^OC.AD, 
BN' AD 



or 



OC " AM' 
But, since BN\ OC are parallel, 

BN' BM 



Therefore 



15c "VM' 

AM AD DM 
CM" BM" BC 



CXXXvi INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

and the rectangle BM . MD = AD . BC^ which is given. Hence, as 
before, the problem is reduced to an application of a rectangle in 
the well-known manner. 

The complete treatment of the particular cases of the problem, 
with their Siopurfwi, could present no difficulty to Apollonius. 

III. It is not a very great step from what we find in Apollonius 
to the general theorem that, if a Biraight line ctUa off from two fixed 
Biraight lines intercepts, measured from given points on the lines 
respectively, which contain a rectangle of given area, the envelope of 
the first straight line is a conic section touching the tux> fixed straight 
lines. 




Thus, suppose ABCD to be a parallelogram described about a 
conic and j^, ^ to be the points of contact of AB, CD. If a fifth 
tangent MN cuts AB, CD in M, iT and AD, CB in P,Q respectively, 
we have, by the proposition of Apollonius, 

EA.FD^EM.FN. 

rjr, g EA EM AM AP 

Therefore FN^ FD^^ ND^ PD^ 

Hence, since EA =■ CF, 

CFFN CN 
AP" PD^ AD' 

and therefore AP.CN=CF. AD, 

or the rectangle AP, CN has an area independent of the position of 
the particular fifth tangent MN. 



CONSTRUCTION OF A CONIC BY MEANS OF TANGENTS. CXXXVll 

Conversely, if the lines AD, DC are given as well as the points 
A, C and the area of the rectangle AF . ON, we can determine the 
point F, and therefore also the point E where AB touches the conic. 
We have then the diameter £F and the direction of the chords 
bisected by it^ as well as the tangent AD; thus we can find the 
ordinate to EF drawn through the point of contact of AD, and 
hence we can obtain the equation of the conic referred to the 
diameter EF and its conjugate as axes of coordinates. Cf. Lemma 
XXV. of the first Book of Newton's Frincipia aud the succeeding 
investigations. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE THREE-LINE AND FOUB-LINE LOCU& 

The 80-called roroc ivl rptU koX ritrtrapai ypcL/ifias is, as we have 
seen, specially mentioned in the first preface of ApoUonius as a 
subject which up to his time had not received full treatment. He says 
that he found that Euclid had not worked out the synthesis of the 
locus, but only some part of it, and that not successfully, adding 
that in fact the complete theory of it could not be established 
without the " new and remarkable theorems " discovered by himself 
and contained in the third book of his Conies. The words used 
indicate clearly that ApoUonius did himself possess a complete 
solution of the problem of the four-line locus, and the remarks of 
Pappus on the subject (quoted above, p. xxxi, xxxii), though not 
friendly to ApoUonius, confirm the same inference. We must 
further assume that the key to ApoUonius' solution is to be found 
in the third Book, and it is therefore necessary to examine the 
propositions in that Book for indications of the way in which he 
went to work. 

The three-line locus need not detain us long, because it is really a 
particular case of the /our4ine locus. But we have, in fact^ in 
III. 53-56 [Props. 74-76] what amounts to a complete demonstration 
of the theoretical converse of the three-Une locus, viz. the proposition 
that, \f from <vny point of a conic there be draum three straight lines 
in fixed directions to meet respectively two fixed tangents to the conic 
and their chord of contact, the ratio of the rectangle contained by the 
first two lines so draum to the square on the third line is constant. 
The proof of this for the case where the two tangents are parallel is 
obtained from iii. 53 [Prop. 74], and the remaining three propo- 
sitions, III. 54-56 [Props. 75, 76], give the proof where the tangents 
are not paraUel. 



THE THREE-LINE AND FOUR-LINE LOCUS. CXXXIX 

In like manner, we should expect to find the theorem of the 
fowr-lint locus appearing, if at all, in the form of the converse 
proposition stating that every conic section has, tmth re/erenoe to any 
inscribed quadrilcUeralj the properties of the four-line locus. It will 
be seen from the note following Propa 75, 76 that this theorem is 
easily obtained from that of the three-line locus as presented by 
Apollonius in those propositions ; but there is nowhere in the Book 
any proposition more directly leading to the former. The explana- 
tion may be that the construction of the locus, that is, the aspect of 
the question which would be appropriate to a work on solid loci 
rather than one on conies, was considered to be of preponderant im- 
portance, and that the theoretical converse was regarded as a 
mere appendage to it. But^ from the nature of the case, that 
converse must presumably have appeared as an intermediate step 
in the investigation of the locus, and it could hardly have 
been unknown even to earlier geometers, such as Euclid and 
Aristaeus, who had studied the subject thoroughly. 

In these circumstances we have to seek for indications of the 
probable course followed by Greek geometers in their investiga- 
tion of the four-line locus; and, in doing so, we have to bear 
in mind that the problem must have been capable of partial 
solution before the time of Apollonius, and that it could be 
completely solved by means of the propositions in his third Book. 

We observe, in the first place, that in. 54-56 [Propa 75, 76], 
which lead to the property of the three-line locus, are proved by 
means of the proposition that the ratio of the rectangles under the 
segments of any intersecting chords drawn in fixed directions is 
constant. Also the property of the three-line locus is a particular 
case of the property of a conic with reference to an inscribed quadri- 
lateral having two of its sides parallel, that case, namely, in which 
the two parallel sides are coincident ; and it will be seen that the 
proposition relating to the rectangles under the segments of in- 
tersecting chords can equally well be used for proving generally 
that a conic is a four-line locus with reference to any inscribed 
quadrilateral which has two sides paralleL 

For, if il^ is a fixed chord of a conic and Er a chord in a given 
direction cutting AB in I, we have 

^j-^ = (const). 
If we measure RK along Rr equal to /r, the locus of JT is a chord 



Cxl INTRODUCTION TO APOLIX)NIUS. 

DC meeting the diameter which bisects chords parallel to Rr in 
the same point in which it is met by AB^ and the points 2), C lie on 
lines drawn through A^ B respectively parallel to Rr, 




Then, if as, y, 2;, u be the distances of R from the sides of the 
quadrilateral ABCD^ we shall have 

— = (const.), 
yu 

And, since A BCD may be any inscribed quadrilateral with two 
sides parallel, or a trapezium^ the proposition is proved generally for 
the particular kind of quadrilateral. 

If we have, on the other hand, to find the geometrical locus of a 

point R whose distances x^y,z,u from the sides of such a trapezium 

, are connected by the above relation, we can first manipulate the 

constants so as to allow the distances to be measured in the 

directions indicated in the figure, and we shall have 

^ RI.RK Rl.Ir 
AI.IB ' AI.IB' 

where X is a given constant. We must then try to find a conic 
whose points R satisfy the given relation, but we must take care to 
determine it in such a manner as to show synthetically at the same 
time that the points of the conic so found do really satisfy the given 
condition ; for, of course, we are not yet supposed to know that the 
locus is a conia 

It seems clear, as shown by Zeuthen, that the defective state of 
knowledge which prevented the predecessors of Apollonius from 
completing the determination of the four-line locus had reference 
rather to this first step of finding the locus in the particular case of 
a trapezium than to the transition from the case of a trapezium to 
that of a quadrilateral of any form. The transition was in fact, in 



THE THREE-LINE AND FOUR-LINE LOCUS. CxU 

itself, possible by means which were within the competence of 
Euclid, as will presently be seen ; but the difficulty in the way of 
the earlier step was apparently due to the fact that the conception 
of the two branches of a hyperbola as a single curve had not 
occurred to any one before Apollonius. His predecessors ac- 
cordingly, in the case where the four-line locus is a complete 
hyperbola in the modern sense, probably considered only one branch 
of it ; and the question which branch it would be would depend on 
some further condition determining it as one of the two branches, 
e.g. the constant might have been determined by means of a given 
point through which the conic or single-branch hyperbola, which it 
was required to prove to be the four-line locus, should pass. 

To prove that such a single branch of a hyperbola, not passing 
through all four comers of the quadrilatei-al, could be the four-line 
locus, and also to determine the locus corresponding to the value of 
X leading to such a hyperbola, it was necessary to know of the 
connexion of one branch with the other, and the corresponding 
extensions of all the propositions used in the proof of the property 
of the inscribed quadrilateral, as well as of the various steps in the 
converse procedure for determining the locus. These extensions to 
the case of the complete hyperbola may, as already mentioned 
(p. Ixxxiv 8eqq,), be regarded as due to Apollonius. His predeces- 
sors could perfectly well have proved the proposition of the in- 
scribed trapezium for any single-branch conic ; and it will be seen 
that the converse, the construction of the locus, would in the 
particular case present no difficulty to them. The difficulty would 
come in where the conic was a hyperbola with two branches. 

Assuming, then, that the property of the four-line locus was 
established with respect to an inscribed trapezium by means of the 
proposition that the rectangles under the segments of intersecting 
chords are to one another in the ratio of the squares on the parallel 
tangents, what was wanted to complete the theory was (1) the 
extension to the case where the tangents are tangents to op- 
posite branches of a hyperbola, (2) the expression of the constant 
ratio between the rectangles referred to in those cases where no 
tangent can be drawn parallel to either of the chords, or where a 
tangent can be drawn parallel to one of them only. Now we find 
(1) that Apollonius proves the proposition for the case where the 
tangents touch opposite branches in iii. 19 [Prop. 59, Case i.]. 
Also (2) the proposition in. 23 [Prop. 59, Case iv.] proves that, 



I 



Cxiii INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

where there is no tangent to the hyperbola parallel to either of the 
chords, the constant ratio of the rectangles is equal to the ratio of 
the squares of the parallel tangents to the ear^tigate hyperbola ; and 
III. 21 [Prop. 59, Case ii.] deals with the case where a tangent can 
be drawn parallel to one of the chords, while no tangent can be drawn 
parallel to the other, and proves that, if tQ^ the tangent, meets the 
diameter bisecting the chord to which it is not parallel in ^ and if 
tq is half the chord through t parallel to the same chord, the 
constant ratio is then tQ* : tq*, 

Zeuthen suggests (p. 140) that the method adopted for deter- 
mining the complete conic described about a given trapezium ABCD, 
which is the locus with respect to the four sides of the trapezium 
corresponding to a given value of the constant ratio X, may have 
been to employ an auxiliary figure for the purpose of constructing a 
conic aimilar to that required to be found, or rather of finding the 
form of certain rectilineal figures connected with such a similar 
conic. This procedure is exemplified in Apollonius, IL 50-53 
[Props. 50-52], where a certain figure is determined by means of a 
previous construction of another figure of the same form ; and the 
suggestion that the same procedure was employed in this case has 
the advantage that it can be successfully applied to each of the 
separate cases in which Apollonius gives the difierent expressions 
for the constant ratio between the rectangles under the segments 
of intersecting chords in fixed directions. 

We have the following data for determining the form of the 

conic similar to the required conic circumscribing ABCD : the value 

RI It 
(X) of the ratio ajjj^ between the products of segments of lines in 

two different directions, and the direction of the diameter Pp 
bisecting chords in one of the given directions. 

I. Suppose that the 4X>nic has tangents in both given directions 
(which is always the case if the conic is a conic in the old sense of 
the term, i.e. if the double-branch hyperbola is excluded). 

Let the points of the auxiliary figure be denoted by accented 
letters corresponding to those in the figure on p. cxl. 

We know the ratio 

and, if we choose any straight line for (yp\ we know (1) the position 



THE THEEE-LINE AND FOUB-LINE LOCUS. 



cxliii 



of a diameter, (2) its extremity P\ (3) the direction of the chords 
bisected by the diameter, (4) a point Q' with the tangent at that 
point 

Then the intersection of the tangent at Q^ with the diameter 
and the foot of the ordinate to it from Q' determine, with P\ three 
points out of four which are harmonically related, so that the 
remaining one, the other extremity {p') of the diameter, is found. 
Hence the conic in the auxiliary figure is determined. 

II. Suppose that the conic has no tangent in either direction. 
In this case we know the ratio between the tangents to the 

hyperbola conjugate to the required auxiliary hyperbola, and we can 
therefore determine the conjugate hyperbola in the manner just 
described ; then, by means of the conjugate, the required auxiliary 
hyperbola is determined. 

III. Suppose that the conic has a tangent in the direction of 
ADf but not in the direction of AB, 




In this case, if the tangent Pt parallel to AD and the diameter 
bisecting AB meet in <, Apollonius has expressed the constant X as 
the ratio between the squares of the tangent tP and of tq, the half 
of the chord through t parallel to AB, We have then 

tq U 

If we now choose t!P' arbitrarily, we have, towards determining the 
auxiliary similar conic, 

(1) a diameter with the direction of chords bisected by it^ 

(2) one extremity P' of that diameter, 

(3) two points q\ s' on the curve. 



Cxliv INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIUS. 

If yp ^t are the ordinates of ^, 9' with respect to the diameter, 
a;p x^ the distances of the feet of the ordinates from F\ and 9^^ x^ 
their distances from the other (unknown) extremity of the diameter, 
we have 



y.' ^ y.' ^ 



X 

whence -^, is determined. 



X 



The point p' can thus be found by means of the ratio between 
its distances from two known points on the straight line on which 
it must lie. 

rV. Suppose that the conic has a tangent in the direction of 
AB^ but not in the direction of AD, 

Let the tangent at P, parallel to AB^ meet the diameter bisecting 
BC^ AD iat, and let tq parallel to AD meet the conic in 7 ; we then 
have 



tf^* 






If we choose either <Y or t'F arbitrarily, we have 

(1) the diameter t'T, 

(2) the points P\ q* on the curve, the ordinates from which to 
the diameter meet it in f', T' respectively, 

(3) the tangent at P'. 
Since dF is the tangent at F, 

c't . cr = i . a", 

where C is the centre, and a' the length of the diameter. 



THE THBEE-LIKE AND FOUR-LINE LOCUS. Cxlv 

Therefore, by Bymmetry, Ttl is the tangent at ^. [Prop. 42.] 
Hence we can find the centre C by joining P, the middle point 

of Pify to 0\ the point of intersection of the tangents, since TO* 

must be a diameter and therefore meets iT' in C\ 

Thus the auxiliary conic can be readily determined. The 

relation between the diameter cl and the diameter 6' conjugate to it 

is given by 

i(C 6^ 6' 

Thus it is seen that, in all four cases, the propositions of Apollo- 
nius supply means for determining an auxiliary figure similar to 
that which is sought. The transition to the latter can then be 
made in various ways; e.g. the auxiliary figure gives at once the 
direction of the diameter bisecting AB^ so that the centre is given; 
and we can efiect the transition by means of the ratio between CA 
and CA\ 

There are, however, indications that the auxiliary figures would 
not in practice be used beyond the point at which the ratio of the 
diameter (a) bisecting the parallel sides of the trapezium to its 
conjugate (6) is determined, inasmuch as we find in ApoUonius 
propositions which lead directly to the determination of the absolute 

values of a and 6 when the ratio ^ \=^ ^, j is given. The problem to 

be solved is, in fact, to describe a conic through two given points A 
and B such that one diameter of it lies along a given straight line, while 
the direction of the chords bisected by the diameter is given, as well as 

the ratio {-A between the length of the diameter and its conjugate. 

Suppose that, in the accompanying figure, a straight line is 
drawn through B parallel to the known direction of the diameter, 




H. C. 



Oxlvi INTBODUCnON TO AFOLLOKIUS. 

and meeting DA produced in 0. Also let OB meet the curve 
(which we will Bappoee to be an ellipse) again in £• 
Then we most have 

OB.OB a* 
OA.OD^V 

whence OB can be found, and therefore the position of E. The line 
bisecting BB and paraUel to iiZ> or BC will determine the centre. 

We have now, for the case of the ellipse, a proposition given 
by Apollonius which determines the value of a' directly. By 
ui. 27 [Prop. 61 (1)] we know that 

OB"-^ 0B'+ ^(Oil* + OD") = a\ 

whence a* is at once found. 

Similar propositions are given for the hyperbola (see in. 24-26, 
88, 29 [Props. 60 and 61 (2)]). The construction in the case of the 
hyperbola is also facilitated by means of the asymptote properties. 
In this case, if the letters have the same significations as in the 
figure for the ellipse, we find the centre by means of the chord BB 
or by using the auxiliary similar figure. The asymptotes are then 

determined by the ratio j-. If these cut the chord ii2> in JT, Z, 

then 

AK.AL^\b\ 

or AK.KD^^. 

If the required curve is a parabola the determination of the 
auxiliary similar figure after the manner of the first of the four 
cases detailed above would show that P', the end of the diameter, is 
at the middle point of the intercept between the intersection of the 
diameter with the tangent at Q^ and with the ordinate from Q respec- 
tively. The curve can then be determined by the simple use of the 
ordinary equation of the parabola. 

So far the determination of the four-line locus has only been 
considered in the particular case where two opposite sides of the 
inscribed quadrilateral are parallel It remains to consider the 
possible means by which the determination of the locus with 
referpnce to a quadrilateral of any form whatever might have been 
reduced to the problem of finding the locus with reference to a 
trapezium. As Apollonius' third Book contains no propositions 
which can well be used for effecting the transition, it must be 



THE THREE-LINE AND FOUR-LINE LOCUS. cxlvii 

oonclnded that the transition itself was not affected by Apollonius' 
completion of the theory of the locus, but that the key must be 
looked for elsewhere. Zeuthen (Chapter 8) finds the key in the 
Poruma of Euclid*. He notes first that Archimedes' proposi- 
tion (given on p. lix, Ix above) respecting the parabola exhibits the 
curve as a four-line locus with respect to two quadrilaterals, of 
which one is obtained from the other by turning two adjacent 
sides about the points on the parabola in which they meet the two 
other sides. (Thus PQ is turned about Q and takes the position 
QTf while PF is turned about its intersection with the parabola 
at inOnity and takes the position of the diameter through Q.) 
This suggests the inquiry whether the same means which are 
used to effect the transition in this very special case cannot 
also be employed in the more general case now under consi- 
deration. 

As the Porisnu of Euclid are themselves lost, it is necessary to 
resort to the account which Pappus gives of their contents; and 
the only one of the Porisnu which is there preserved in its original 
form is as follows t : 

If from two given points there be drawn etraight linee which 
intersect one another on a straight line given in position^ and if one 
of the straight lines so draum cuts off from a straight line given in 
position a certain length measured from a given point on it, then the 
other straight line also will cut off a portion from another straight 
line bearing a given ratio [to the former intercept]. 

The same proposition is true also when a four-line locus is 
substituted for the first-mentioned given straight line and the two 
fixed points are any two fixed points on the locus. Suppose that we 
take as the two fixed points the points A and C, being two opposite 
comers of the quadrilateral A BCD to which the locus is referred, 
and suppose the lines from which the intercepts are cut off to be 
CE, AE drawn respectively parallel to the sides BA, EG of the 
quadrilateral. 

Let if be a point on the required locus, and let AD, AM meet 

* That the PoHtmM of Eaclid were a very important contribntion to geometry 
is indicated by the deaoriptioD of them in Pappas (p. 648) as a collection most 
ingeniously adapted for the solntion of the more weighty problems (a^pour/ia 

t Pappus, p. 656. 

k2 



Cxiviii IMTRODUCnON TO AFOLLONIUS. 

CB in D\ M' rapeotiTely, while CD, CM meet AB in D", M" 
respeotiyely. 

For the porpoee of determining the geometrical loons, let the 
distanoes of M from AB, CD be measnred parallel to BC, and its 
distances from BC, AD parallel to BA. 



Then the ratio of the distances of M from CD, BC respectively 

D"M" 
will be equal to ^„ , and the ratio of the distances of J/* from AB, 

AB 
DA will be equal to -jyr^, • 

Therefore the fact that the ratio of the rectangles under the 
distances of M from each pair of opposite sides of the quadrilateral 
ABCD is constant may be expressed by the equation 

D"M" , CE _ ... 

D'M* ^ AE~^' ®*^ ^^ 

where ft is a new constant independent of the position of M. 

If now X be determined by means of the position of a point F of 
the locus, we have 

D"M" _ D"F" F"M" .^. 

where F, F" are the intersections of AF, CB and of CF, AB 
respectively. 

And, since the last ratio in (2), which is derived from the other 
two, remains constant while M moves along the required locus, it 
follows that that locus is also a four-line locus with reference to the 
four sides of the quadrilateral ABCF. 

Thus, in order to extend the proposition about an inscribed 



THE THREE-LINE AND FOUR-LINE LOCUS. cxlix 

trapezium to a quadrilateral of any form, or, eonversely, to reduce 
the determination of a four-line locus with reference to any quadri- 
lateral to a similar locus with reference to a trapezium, it was only 
necessary to consider the case in which one of the lines AD or AF 
coincides with AE. It follows that the four-line locus with reference 
to any quadrilateral is, like the four-line locus with reference to a 
trapezium, a conic section. 

The actual determination of the locus in the general form can 
be effected by expressing it in the more particular form. 

Suppose that the distances of M from AB^ CD (reckoned parallel 
to BC) are denoted by x^ 2, and the distances of M from BCy AD 
(reckoned parallel to BA) are y, u respectively. Then the locus is 
determined by an equation of the form 

aszsX.yu (1), 

where X is a constant^ and x^ y are the coordinates of the point M 
with reference to BC^ BA as axes. 

If P^ Q are the points in which the ordinate (y) of M meets AD^ 
AE respectively, 

^PQ'-MQ (2). 

Since (— MQ) is the distance of M from AE measured paraUel to 
BA^ let it be denoted by U|. 
Then, from the figure, 

Therefore^ from (1), 

(D'E \ 
« — X -j-= y ) I we derive 

from the figure 

D'^IT' 

and we have then to take a point 6 on AB such that 

i/E ire 

AE~ CE' 
(The point G is thus seen to be a point on the locus.) 



cl INTBODUCnOK TO APOLLONIUS. 

Hence ^'^^ JE^- ^ce' V ' CB^ 

GM" 
" CB -^ 

= «P 
where 2^ is the distance of the point M from the line CG measured 
parallel to EC. 

The equation representing the locus is accordingly transformed 
into the equation 

and the locus is expressed as a four-line locus with reference to the 
Unvpewumi ABCG. 

The method here given contains nothing which would be beyond 
the means at the disposal of the Greek geometers except the mere 
notation and the single use of the negative sign in (— MQ), which 
however is not an essential difference, but only means that, whereas 
by the use of the negative sign we can combine several cases into 
one, the Greeks would be compelled to treat each separately. 

Lastly, it should be observed that the four-line locus with 
reference to a trapezium corresponds to the equation 

which may be written in the form 

a? (euc + )3y + d) = - y (yy + «). 

Thus the exact determination of the four-line locus with reference 
to a trapezium is the ^problem corresponding to that of tracing a 
conic from the general equation of the second degree wanting only 
the constant term. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE CONSTRUCTION OF A CONIC THROUGH nVS POINTS. 

SiNCK ApoUoniua was in possession of a complete solution of the 
problem of constructing the four-line locus referred to the sides of a 
quadrilateral of any form, it is clear that he had in fact solved the 
problem of constructing a conic through five points. For, given the 
quadrilateral to which the four-line locus is referred, and given a 
fifth point, the ratio (X) between the rectangles contained by the 
distances of any point on the locus from each pair of opposite sides 
of the quadrilateral measured in any fixed directions is also given. 
Hence the construction of the conic through the five points is 
reduced to the construction of the four-line locus where the constant 
ratio X is given. 

The problem of the construction of a conic through five points 
is, however, not found in the work of ApoUonius any more than the 
actual determination of the four-line locus. The omission of the 
latter \b easily explained by the fact that, according to the author's 
own words, he only professed to give the theorems which were 
necessary for the solution, no doubt regarding the actual construc- 
tion as outside the scope of his treatise. But^ as in Euclid we find 
the problem of descrilnng a circle about a triangle, it would have 
been natural to give in a treatise on conies the construction of a 
conic through five points. The explanation of the omission may be 
that it was not found possible to present the general problem 
in a form sufficiently concise to be included in a treatise embracing 
the whole subject of conies. This may be easily understood when 
it is remembered that^ in the first place, a Greek geometer 
would regard the problem as being in reality three problems 
and involving a separate construction for each of the three 
conies, the parabola, the ellipse, and the hyperbola. He would 



clii iNTBODUCTlON TO AP0LL0NIU8. 

then discover that the construction was not always possible 
for a parabola, since four points are sufficient to determine a 
parabola; and the construction of a parabola through four points 
would be a completely different problem not solved along with the 
construction of the four-line locus. Further, if the curve were an 
ellipse or a hjrperbola, it would be necessary to find a Siopurfu>s 
expressing the conditions which must be satisfied by the particular 
points in order that the conic might be the one or the other. If it 
were an ellipse, it might have been considered necessary to provide 
against its d^eneration into a circle. Again, at all events until the 
time of Apollonius, it would have been regarded as necessary to find 
a Btapur/juii expressing the conditions for securing that the five points 
should not be distributed over both branches of the hyperbola. 
Thus it would follow that the complete treatment of the problem by 
the methods then in use must have involved a discussion of con- 
siderable length which would have been disproportionate in such a 
work as that of Apollonius. 

It is interesting to note how far what we actually find in 
Apollonius can be employed for the direct construction of a conic 
through five points independently of the theory of the four-line 
locus. The methods of Book IV. on the number of points in which 
two conies may intersect are instructive in this connexion. These 
methods depend (1) on the harmonic polar property and (2) on the 
relation between the rectangles under the segments of intersecting 
chords drawn in fixed directions. The former property gives a 
method, when five points are given, of determining a sixth ; and by 
repeating the process over and over again we may obtain as many 
separate points on the curve as we please. The latter proposition 
has the additional advantage that it allows us to choose more freely 
the particular points to be determined ; and by this method we can 
find conjugate diameters and thence the axes. This is the method 
employed by Pappus in determining an ellipse passing through five 
points respecting which it is known beforehand that an ellipse can 
be drawn through them*. It is to be noted that Pappus* solution 
is not given as an independent problem in conic sections, but it is 
an intermediate step in another problem, that of finding the dimen- 
sions of a cylinder of which only a broken fragment is given such 
that no portion of the circumference of either of its bases is left 
whole. Further, the solution is made to depend on what is to be 

* Pappus (ed. Holtoch), p. 1076 aaqq. 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF A CONIC THROUGH FIVE POINTS, cliii 

found in Apollonius, and no claim is advanced that it contains 
anything more than any capable geometer could readily deduce for 
himself from the materials available in the Canie$, 

Pappus' construction is substantially as follows. If the given 
points are A, JB, C, Z), E, and are such that no two of the lines 
connecting the different pairs are parallel, we can reduce the problem 
to the construction of a conic through A^ B^ 2), E^ F^ where EF is 
parallel to AB, 




For, if EF be drawn through E parallel to AB^ and if CD meet 
AB in and EF in O', we have, by the proposition relating to 
intersecting chords, 

CO.OD: AO.OB = C(y. ffD : E(y. OF, 

whence (fF is known, and therefore F is determined. 

We have therefore to construct an ellipse through A^B^D^ E^ F^ 
where EF is parallel to AB. 

And, if F, fT be the middle points of AB^^ EF respectively, the 
line joining Y and fT is a diameter. 

Suppose DR to be the chord through Z) parallel to the diameter, 
and let it meet AB^ EF in (?, H respectively. Then R is deter- 
mined by means of the relation 

RG.GDiBO.GA^ RH. UD : FH. HE (1). 



cliv INTRODUCTION TO APOLLONIU& 

In order to determine R^ let DB, RA be joined meeting EF in JT, Z 
respectively. 
Then 

RO.GD : BG.6A = (RH:HL).(DH: HK), by similar triangles, 

= RU.HD:KH.HL. 

Therefore, from (1), we have 

FH.HB^KU.HL, 

whence HL is found, and therefore L is determined. And the 
intersection of AL^ DH determines R, 

In order to find the extremities of the diameter {PP'\ we draw 
ED^ RF meeting the diameter va M^ N respectively. And, by the 
same procedure as before, we obtain 

FU.HEiRH.HD^FW. WE.FW.WP, 

by the property of the ellipse. 

Also FH.HE.RH.UD^FW. WEiNW. WM, 
by similar trianglea 

Hence FW.WP^NW.WM] 

and similarly we can find the value of PT. FP. 

Pappus' method of determining jP, F by means of the given 
values of P'V. VP and FW. WP amounts to an elimination of one 
of the unknown points and the determination of the other by an 
equation of the second degree. 

Take two points Q, Q' on the diameter such that 

FY. VP^ Wr. VQ (a), 

Fw. wp= rw. wq os), 

and r, fT, Q, Q' are thus known, while P, F remain to be found. 
It follows from (a) that 

FY xVW^QV.yP, 
whence FWxVW^PQxPY. 

From this we obtain, by means of (/3), 

Pq\PY^qWxWP, 
so that PQ\(iY^qW.Pq\ 

or PQ.PQ'^QY.qW. 

Thus P can be found, and similarly F. 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF A CONIC THROUGH FIVE POINTS, clv 

It is noteworthy that Pappus' method of determining the ex- 
tremities of the diameter PP* (which is the principal object of his 
constmction) can be applied to the direct construction of the points 
of intersection of a conic determined by five points with any straight 
line whatever, and there is no reason to doubt that this construction 
could have been effected by ApoUonius. But there is a simpler 
expedient which we know from other sources that ApoUonius was 
acquainted with, and which can be employed for the same purpose 
when once it is known that the four-line locus is a conic. 

The auxiliary construction referred to formed the subject of a 
whole separate treatise of ApoUonius On determinate section (ircpl 
iuopuTfUyris TOfi^). The problem is as follows : 

Given four points J, ^, (7, 2) on a straight line, to determine 
another point P on the same straight line so that the ratio 

AP.CPiBP.DP 
has a given value. 

The determination of the points of intersection of the given 
straight line and a four-line locus can be immediately transformed 
into this problem, A,B,CfD being in fact the points of intersection 
of the given straight line with the four lines to which the locus 
has reference. 

Hence it is important to examine all the evidence which we 
possess about the separate treatise referred to. This is contained 
in the seventh Book of Pappus, who gives a short account of the 
contents of the work* as well as a number of lemmas to the 
different propositions in it. It is clear that the question was very 
exhaustively discussed, and in fact at much greater length than 
would have been likely had the investigation not been intended as 
a means of solving other important problems. The conclusion is 
therefore irresistible that, like the Books Xoyov Awm-ofi^ and x^^^ 
AtroTOfirj^ above mentioned, that On determinate section also was 
meant to be used for solving problems in conic sections. 

To determine P by means of the equation 

AP.CP:=\.BP.DP, 

where A^ B^ C, D, X are given, is now an easy matter because the 
problem can at once be put into the form of a quadratic equation, 
and the Greeks also would have no difficulty in reducing it to the 
usual application of (vreas. But, if it was intended for application 

* Pappus, pp. 642^644. 



clvi INTBODUOnON TO AFOLLONIUa 

in further investigationii the complete diicoanon of it would 
naturally include, not only the finding of a lolution, but also the 
determination of the limits of possibility and the number of possible 
solutions for difierent positions of the given pairs of points A, C and 
B^ Z), for the cases where the points in either pair coincide, where 
one is infinitely distant^ and so forth : so that we should expect the 
subject to occupy considerable space. And this agrees with what 
we find in Pappus, who farther makes it clear that, though we do 
not meet with any express mention of $erie$ of point-pairs deter- 
mined by the equation for different values of X, yet the treatise 
contained what amounts to a complete theory qf InvoUUian. Thus 
Pappus says that the separate cases were dealt with in which the 
given ratio was that of either (1) the square of one abscissa 
measured from the required point or (2) the rectangle contained by 
two such abscissa to any one of the following : (1) the square of one 
abscisss, (2) the rectangle contained by one abscissa and another 
separate line of given length independent of the position of the 
required pointy (3) the rectangle contained by two abecisse. We 
also learn that maxima and minima were investigated. From the 
lemmas too we may draw other conclusions, e.g. 

(1) that^ in the case where X = 1, and therefore P has to be 
determined by the equation 

AF.CP^BF.DP, 
Apollonius used the relation* 

BP :DP=AB.BC : AD. DC; 

(2) that Apollonius probably obtained a double point B of the 

involution determined by the point-pairs A^ C and B, D by means of 

the relation t 

AB.BC:AD.DCmBB':DE\ 

Assuming then that the results of the work On determinaie 

aectian were used for finding the points of intersection of a straight 

line with a conic section represented as a four-line locus, or a conic 

determined by five points on it, the special cases and the various 

iiopuTfioC would lead to the same number of properties of the conies 

under consideration. There is therefore nothing violent in the 

supposition that Apollonius had already set up many landmarks in 

the field explored eighteen centuries later by Desargues. 

* This appears in the first lemma (p. 704) and is proved by Pappus for 
several different cases. 

t Cf. Pappus* prop. 40 (p. 732). 



APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION. 



NOTES ON THE TERMINOLOGY OF GREEK GEOMETRY. 

Thk propositions from the Cania of Apollonias which are given 
at length in Chapter II. above will have served to convey some idea 
of the phraseology of the Oreek geometers ; and the object of the 
following notes is to supplement what may be learnt from those 
propositions by setting out in detail the principal technical terms 
and expressions, with special reference to those which are found in 
Apollonius. It will be convenient to group them under different 
headings. 

1. Points and lines. 

A paint is cn;/Acibv, the point A ro A (njfUlw or rb A simply ; a 
fuller expression commonly used by the earlier geometers was t6 
(cny/ACiov) ^^' ov A, "the point on which (is put the letter) A*." Any 
paint is tv)^¥ cn;/ActbK, the paint («o) arieing r6 ycvoficKOK cn;/ACibK, the 
paint (io) taken ri Xi;^^ cny/Mibr, a paint not within the eeetion 
(njfuiov fitf hrr^ r^ ^<^M% ^^V point toithin the iurfntee vrffulov re rmv 
ivrif r^ jiri^vcuif ; in one point only Ka9 tv fu$vov (n^/utov, in two 
points Kara Suo, and so on. 

The following are names for particular points: apex or vertex 
icopv^, centre icivrpoy^ point of divieum &a4>«rif, point qf bieeetion 
tiXorofuoy extremity ircpa^ . 

A line is ypofifii;, a straight line cMcZa ypofifu; or cMcid alone, a 
Jlnite straight line Mw wtrtfioafiirri ; a curved line is tcafonSkrf 

* A timilar expression was 1i {t6$ua) i^t f AB the itraight line {an which are 
the Utten) AB. The same phrases, with the tame Tariation of ease after iwl, 
are fband frequently in Aristotle, particularly in the logical tre atis es and the 
Phy$ie$, 



civiii APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION. 

ypa/i/ii;, but ypofifiyj alone is often used of a carve, ag. a circle or a 
conic ; thus rd wipa^ r^ cvtfctaf ro wpiq vq ypf^H^i ^ ^^ exiremUy qf 
the straight line which i$ an the curve. A eegment (of a line as well 
as a curve) b r/itifia. 

Of lines in relation to other lines we find the terms parallel 
vapiXXrjIKoq^ a ^perpendicular to KoBerf^ M (with aco.); a straight 
line produced ib if hr* cvtfcuif avrg. 

For a line passing through particular points we have the follow- 
ing expressions used with Sea and the genitive, 17 jcc, l^cnu, AcuGrcrac, 
vopcvcroi ; likewise irtirrw Sea, or Kara (with aoc.). 

Of a line meeting another line wivrnv M (with ace.), (rvftmrrcir, 
<rv/Aj9aAA.ctv, avrofun are used; until it meets is Ibi9 ov arv/uriirg or 
axptt iv avfiirifrgf point of meeting av/iwrwo'i's ; the line frofm the point 
0/ concourse to A, 17 dird r^ avfiimia€ias jirl to A; the straight line 
joining H, 9, 17 hrl ra H, 9 lirttcvyvvfi^ cMcu&; BA passes through 
the points o/contact, iwl ra« d^s ^<mv 17 BA. 

IVke NiM Z0 is bisected in M, 8cx<^ rcr/&i7rai 17 Zd #car& rft M; 
bisecting one another Sixa rc/ivovo-ai dXXi^Xaf , the line joining their 
middle points 17 ras &xoTOfiias a^«0v ^ifcvyvvovcra, m ctU into equal 
and unequal parts cU fthf ura, ck 8i Syura rrrfupui. 

Straight lines cut off or intercepted are dirorcfu^/Acvai or diroXofu 
fiavoiuyaij the part cut offuAHio/tU (the curve) 17 iirros dvoXofi^avoficin;, 
u^ cut off an equal length Itrifv diroXi/^crai, fA« lengths intercepted on 
it by the {conic) section towards the asymptotes a\ AwoXa/iPavofiwai av* 
afr^f wp^ rats ocrv/Airrciroif. 

A point on a line is often elegantly denoted by an adjective 
agreeing with it : thus air* d#cpa« alr^ from its extremity , aw Sscpov 
rov a(ovoi/rom the eaetremity of the axis, 17 hr* Sjcpay r^y aToXrf^€uray 
ayofUtni the line draum to the extremity of the intercept^ ai vp^ fiun/v 
rrfy rofiffv icXti/jLtyai cMccai the straight lines draum so as to meet at the 
middle point of the section. 

2. Angles. 

An 091^20 is ywyla, an actUe angle 6(€ul yfAvUt^ obtuse c^/SXcut, 
right dpOij ; at right angles to wpb^ 6p0a% (with dative) or 6p$^ vpos 
(with ace.); the line A A (draum) from A at right angles to £A, avh rev 
A T]^ EA 6pOti if ^h; tocutfU right angles irp^ 6p0h!i r^iyciv, wiU not 
in general be at right angles but only when,,, ovk aU\ irpos opBos Icrrot, 
a AX' oraK... 



NOTES ON THE TERMINOLOGY OF GREEK GEOMETRY. cUx 
Ai any angles h rv^ouo-aif ya>ruu^ at a given angle h io6%(ffiQ 

Vertically opposite (anglee) Kara Kopv^fv aXXi^Xcus jcc^cyot; the 
angle vertically opposite to the angle Z0E, 17 #car& icopv^^ r^ Imh ZOE 
yuKiaf ; the same expression is also used of triangles (e.g. in ra 
ycvo/icva icara Kopv^^ r/nycdva), and of the two halves of a doable 
cone, which are called vertically opposite surfaces aX Kara Kopv^V^ 

The exterior angle of the triangle is 1} iiew rov Tpcywrov ytaviau 

For the angle APE we find the full expression 1} wtpuxofUvrf ywvia 
vw6 rQy APE or ''the angle contained by the lines AP, PE," but 
more usually 1} viro nSv APE or 17 viro APE. The angles APZ, AZP 
are {together) equal to a right angle aX inro APZ, AZP /of 6p$fl Zimi 
clcriv. 

The acfjacent angle^ or the nt/Tp/tfiyMtt^ of an angle, is 17 i^e(^9 ycma. 

To subtend (an angle) is uirorctvccv either with a simple accusa- 
tive, or with viro and ace. {easUmd undvr) as in a! yciyvuu, i^ ts eX 
ofjuiXoyoi wXxvpal virorciKotNTiK the angles which the homologous sides 
subtend, 

3. Planes and plane flCores. 

A plane is hrCv€So¥, a figure (rx^/uL or cI8o«, a figure in the sense 
of a diagram icaraypa^ or a^fta, 

(A circle) which is not in the same plane unih the point i% ovk 
coTiK hf rf avrf JircircS^ ncp cny/ACii^ 

The /tn« 0/ intersection of two planes is their icoin; to/at. 

A rectilineal figure is ax>ipo. Mxyfiamuov (Euclid), and among the 
figures of this kind are triangle rpl-fayw^ quadrilateral rcrpairXcvpor, 
a five-sided figure ircvrairXcvpoK etc., irXtvpa being a side, 

A ctrc^ is jcvicXof, its dreun^ference vipi^^cia, a Mmictrc^ 
if/iucvKXiov, a ««$mitfnt of a circle Tfirj/ia kvicXov, a M^rn^n^ greater, or 
^eM, t^n a semicircle r/itifML /mZCok, or IXaotrov, i/fuicvicX/ov ; a Mj^meyU 
q/'a circle containing an angle equal to the angle APB is k6kXov rii^iia 
Sc^Oficvov yaviay larqv tq vtro APB. 

Of quadrilaterals, a parallelogram is iro^MiXXiTXoypafi/Aoy, a square 
rcrpayoiKov, a rectangle opOoytivior or frequently x«pior with or without 
opOoyiiviov. Diagonal is Sia/tcrpos. 

To describe a figure upon a given line (as base) is waypa^w airo. 
Thus <A« figure 0IH Aa« 6een described upon the radius 0H is avayc- 
ypanToi aTO T79 ^ic rov nivrpov r^% 0U ctSos to 01H, tlie square on M 



Clx APPENDIX TO INTEODUCnON. 

is TO dvi r^f Z0 (rtr^ywvov), the Jigurea on KA» AZ is ra dwo KAZ 
cSSi;. But hri with the genitive is used of deaeribing a semieireh^ 
or a aeffmerU qf a cireUf on a given straight line, e.g. hri r^f AA 
ycypa^o) iffUKVKXuVf Tfiij/jLa kvkXov, Similarly quadriUUeraU standing 
on the diameters aa bases are fitfirfKora hri rw SuifUrpwy rrrpairXMvpa, 
A rectangle applied to a given straight line is irapaiccc/MvoF vapa 
(with ace.), and its breadth is wXaroq, The rectangle contained by 
AZ, ZE is ro vro twk AZ, ZE or ro inro (toik) AZE ; will contain (with 
another straight line) a rectangle equal to the square on is Icnv 

With reference to squares the most important point to notice is 
the use of the word Swofus and the various parts of the verb tuivafiau 
iwafU9 expresses a square (literally a power) ; thus in Diophantus it 
is used throughout as the technical term for the square of the 
unknown in an algebraical equation, i.e. for af. In geometrical 
language it is used most commonly in the dative singular, ivydfui, in 
such expressions as the following : Xoyos Sr lx*i ro Ivroc rfJL'^fui wpo9 
TO Xoivov SwafMi, *' the ratio which " (as one might say) " the inner 
segment has to the remaining aegment potentially " meaning the ratio 
of the square of the inner segment to that of the other. (Similarly 
Archimedes speaks of the radius of a circle as being SiWfici laa to the 
sum of two areas, meaning that the square of the radius is equal etc.) 
In like manner, when SiWrai is used of a straight line, it means 
literally that the line is (if squared) capable of producing an area 
equal to another, laov fivFo^icvai rip viro is in Apollonius {straight 
lines) the squares on which are equal to the rectangle contained by ; 
Ovartu TO Tipicxo/Acvov viro the square on it is equal to the rectangle 
contained by; BiN SiWrcu to ZB, the square on MN is equal to the 
rectangle ZS, ; Swi/o'crai to vapaicci/i.cvov opOoyiiyioy wpi^ n^ wpofnro' 
fiurdturw the square on it wUl be equal to the rectangle applied to the 
straight line so taken in addition (to the figure) ; and so on. 

To construct a triangle out qf three straight lines is in Euclid ix 
rpwv cv0ctc0V Tplytwoy avanio'curfiaif and similarly Apollonius speaks 
of its being possible avamia'aadai rpiywvoy he r^ #cal Suo rw EA, to 
construct a triangle from the straight line and two straight lines 
(equal to) EA. The triangle formed by three straight lines is to 
yivofitvov vv avTW¥ rplyfoycr, 

Equiangular is Icroyioyto^f similar ofAoios, similar and similarly 
situated o/tMOi koL 6/ao^s #ccifi<vos ; because qf the similarity of the 
triangles 0EN, KEO is Sid t^v 6fUMon^ toiv 0EN, KEO rpvfamar. 



NOTES ON THE TERMINOLOOT OF GREEK QEOMETRT. clxi 

4. Oones and sections of cones. 

A cone b K^vo^t a rigfU cone op$o9 icwvof , an Miqtie or scalene cone 
aKaXifvo9 iccSvos, the surfiice of a cone is kiovuc^ hru^aytui, the Hraighi 
line generating the surface by its motion about the circumference of 
a circle is 1/ ypd^cva-a cvtfcto, the fixed point through which the 
straight line always passes is to fUfitm^Ko^ inffi€tov, the surface of the 
double cone is that which consists of two stvi/aces lying verHcally 
opposite to one a/nother yj <n;yiccirat Ik ivo lirtt^v€iw¥ Kara Kopwfiftjv 
oAAijXais Ktifiiyiavt the circular hose is ^0-19, the apex Kopv^, the 
axis a(iav. 

A circular section subcon^ary to the base is vvcvavrui to/m;. 

In addition to the names parabola^ ellipse, and hyperbola (which 
last means only one branch of a hyperbola), Apollonius uses the 
expression rofial dvTiK€lfi€vai or al avraccificvai denoting the opposite 
branches of a hyperbola; also al #car Ivavriov royuai has the same 
meaning, and we even find the expression Biofurpoi nSv Svo avCvy^r 
for a diameter of two pairs of opposite branches, so that conjugate 
here means opposite branches. (Cf . too Iv /acv t{ ^^ <rv{vytigi in the 
one pair of opposites,) Generally, however, the expression rofiaX 
(rv{uyci9 is used of conjugate hyperbolas, which are also called a! Kara 
mt^vyiav aarrucMi/xtvai or {rv^vycTs aKruccificvai corrugate opposites. Of 
the four branches of two conjugate hyperbolas any two adjoining 
branches are at ^^c^9 ro/iaL 

In the middle of a proposition, where we should generally use the 
word curve to denote the conic, Apollonius generally uses rofui 
section, sometimes ypa/A/Aif. 

5. Diameters and chords of conies. 

Diameter is 1; Siafitrpo^, conjugate diameters avtvytU Bidfurpoi, of 
which the transverse is 17 wXayla, the other 17 opOta (erect) or itvripa 
(secondary). 

The original diameter (Le. that first arising out of the cutting of 
a cone in a certain manner) is 17 Ik t^s ycvlo-ccDS Sui/icrpof or 17 irpoi^ 
vapxovaa 8ia/icrpo9| and (in the plural) ai dpxucal Sio/Mrpoc. The 
bisecting diameter is 1; Bixorofidwra &a/icrpo9. A radius of a central 
conic is simply Ik rov Korrpov (with or without the definite article). 

Chords are simply al ayoficvat iv rj ropjfi. 

6. Ordinates. 

The word used is the adverb rcrayficyois ordiruUe-wise, and the 
advantage of this is that it can be used with any part of the verb 
H. C. I 



clxii APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION. 

rignifyiDg to dfraw. This verb is either mnroycir or orttyoy, the 
former being used when the ordinate is drawn dovon to the diameter 
from a point on the curve, and the latter when it is drawn iifMoarcb 
from a point on a diameter. Thus rcrttyfiirMf tamf^fim hA r^ 
itafurpw means iuppote an ardinaie drawn to the diameter^ whidi 
diameter is then sometimes called 4 '^* ^^ Syomu or Kar^KTOi, An 
ordinate is rcrayfimit KorayofU^ or ican;y/A^, and sometimes rcmy- 
fimtfc alone or Koniyfihn/i alone, the other word being understood; 
similarly jcar^icTai and dvijicriu are used alone for is on ordinate or 
ha$ been drawn ordinate-wiee. rcray/uimK is also used of the tangent 
at the extremity of a diameter. 

Parallel to an ordinate is wapa rcray/Acyws KorrjyiUvtiv or vopo- 
rfray/Aor«»s in one word. 

7. Abscissa. 

The abseieea of an ordinate is 17 iwoKatfiPavofUmj vw a^r^ dwi 
r^ BuLfUrpov wp^ TQ KOffv^ the {portion) cut off by it from the 
diameter towards the vertex. Similarly we find the expressions a2 
dirorc/Ai^/Acvai vro rfc KonffiUvrfi^ or aZ d«t>Xafi^H$fMFai vw a^rrwv, 
vploi rois wipaufTk rij^ vXayUk% ir\€vpSs rov cSovf the (fKirtione) cui off by 
the ordinate^ or by them, towards the extremities of the transverse 
side of the figure (as to which last expression see paragraph 9 
following). 

8. Parameter. 

The full phrase is the parameter of the ordinates^ which is 17 wop* 
^v Swavrot at Karayofuvaj. rcrayficycas, i.e. the straight line to which 
are applied the rectangles which in each conic are equal to the 
squares on the ordinates, or (perhaps) to which the said squares are 
related (by comparison). 

9. The " fltfore " of a central conic. 

The figure (to cISo«) is the technical term for a rectangle 
supposed to be described on the transverse diameter as base and 
with altitude equal to the parameter or latus rectum. Its area is 
therefore equal to the square on the conjugate diameter, and, with 
reference to the rectangle, the transverse diameter is called the 
transverse side (trXayCa irXcvpa) and the parameter is the erect side 
{6p6ia irXcvpo) of the ^ure (cISo?). We find the following different 
expressions, ro irpo9 rfj BA c78o9 the figure on (the diameter) BA ; ro 
vapa r^v AB cI8of the figure applied to (the diameter) AB ; r6 viro AE, 
H cISoc the figure contained by {the diameter) AE and {the parameter) 



NOTES ON THE TERMINOLOOT OF GREEK OEOMETRT. clxiii 

H. Similarly to yivofiwov ctSos irpos r^ Bti. rrj^ d^s iiyoylvji iut^TfHf 
is the Jigure /armed on the diameter drawn through the point, of contact 
and rd irpo« t^ rhs cL^s iirt^cvyKUovo^ ctSo« is ^ fig^ire on (the 
diamaier which ie) the chord joining the pointe of contact (of two 
parallel tangents). 

TO rlrapTov rov cZ8ov9 one fourth of thefigwre is, with reference to 
a diameter PF^ one-fourth of the square of the conjugate diameter 
Djy, i.e. CD'. 

10. Tangents etc. 

To touch is most commonly i<l>dirr€O'0aij whether used of straight 
lines touching curves or of curves touching each other, a tangent 
being of course ifJHnrrofitvri ; tfie tangent at A, 17 #car^ to A i^wro/Uvri. 
(The simple verb airrco-^ai is not generally used in this sense but as 
a rule means to meet, or is used of points lying on a locus. Ci. 
Pappus, p. 664, 28, wff^Tai to <njfi€iov 64xtu B€Sofi€V7i9 cv^cias the point 
unU lie on a straight line given in position ; p. 664, 2, ikv amifnu Irir 
tr&ov roirov 0c<rci ScSo/aci^ov if it lies on a plane locus given in position). 
The word ^t^vciv is also commonly used of touching^ e.g. icaff tv 
^iri^avov<ra t^c to/jltj^ is touching the section in one point, 1j% hvxe 
riov ro/Aiov lirt^avovora toucIUng any one of the sections at random. 

Point of contact is 0^17, chord of contact 17 ras d^s lirifcvyvvovoreu 

The point of intersection of tu)o tangents is 17 avfiirrwri^ t<uv i^- 
awrofUy<oy, 

The following elliptical expressions are found in Apollonius : oar 
avTov if AB i^irriaOw let AB be the tangent (draum) from A (outside 
the curve) ; lav air' avrov 17 /acv ^^im^rac, 17 Sc ri/iirg if (there be 
draum) from it (tuH) straigJU lines of which) one toucJies, and the other 
cuts (the cwrve), 

11. Asymptotes. 

Though the technical term used by Apollonius for the asymp- 
totes is dcrv/Airrwros, it is to be observed that the Greek word has a 
wider meaning and was used of any lines which do not meet, in 
whatever direction they are produced. Thus Proclus*, quoting from 
Gteminus, distinguishes between (a) iiavfiimaTOi which are in one 
plane and (b) those which are not. He adds that of icrvfumnToi 
which are in one plane " some are always at the same distance from 
one another (Le. parallel), while others continually dimimsh the 
distance, as a hyperbola approaches the straight line and the 

* CommeiU, in EucL i. p. 177. 



ckiv APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION. 

conchoid the straight line." The same use of aavfunwros in its 
general sense is found even in Apollonius, who says (ii. 14) wokt^v 
Twv davfiiminay rg ro/i^ iyytor dcriv al AB, AT, the line$ AB, AT (the 
asymptotes proper) are nearer than any of the linee which do not 
meet the aeetion. 

The original enunciation of u. 14 [Prop. 36] is interesting : a2 
iurvfiirTo>roi #cai 17 ro/Ai; elf iwtipov ^jSoAAofMvoi hffviv re Tpwrayovaw 
lavroic fCQU irovrds rev iaOivrof Suumffiaro^ tU HXarroy a^ucvovvrcu 
Scoo-n/fui, the asymptotes and the section^ \f produced to infinity ^ 
approach nearer to one another and come tvithin a distance less than 
any given distance. 

One of the angles formed by the asymptotes is if wtpUxovau nfy 
vwtpfiokijv the angle containing (or including) the hyperbola, and 
similarly we find the expression hrl fuia^ rSv davfiirrwTwy rmy 
V€pi€xpv<rmv rrjv rofiifv on one of the asymptotes containing the 
section. 

The space between the asymptotes and the cwrve is 2 d^opiiifjL€vo% 

12. Data and hypotheses. 

CHven is SoOtk or 8cSo/i.^o« ; given in position Mo-ci ScSo/ui/n^ given 
in magnittide rf firyiOti B€^fUvfj (of straight lines). For is or wiU 
be, given in position we frequently find decree iarrivy krrai without Sc8o- 
fuvo% or even $ia€i alone, as in Oiati apa 17 AE. A more remarkable 
ellipse is that commonly found in such expressions as vapa Oia'€i nfv 
AB, parallel to AB (given) in position, and ir/m Oicti r^ AB, used 
of an angle made tnth AB (jgiven) in position. 

Of hypotheses viro#ccir(u and the other parts of the same verb are 
used, either alone, as in vVoiccur^oi rd fi2v SXXa rd oM, let all the 
other suppositions be the same, rwv avnSv viroK€iyJvw¥ with the same 
suppositions, or with substantives or adjectives following, e.g. kvkKo^ 
uirofcciTot 1} AKEA ypafifjuj the line AREA is by hypothesis a circle, 
vvoKtirai Imi is by hypothesis equal, vWiccivrai avyLiriirrowrai they meet 
by hypothesis. In accordance with the well-known Greek idiom oircp 
oyx v^oKciTiu means which is contrary to the hypothesis. 

13. Theorems and problems. 

In a theorem what is required to be proved is sometimes denoted 
by rb irporctfcv, and the requirement in a problem is rb hrvrayOiv, 
llius c2 ii,\v o6v 17 AB d^v icrri, ytyovos iv cii; to hriraxO^ if then AB 
is an axis, that which was required would Ikave been done. To draw 



NOTES ON THE TERMINOLOGY OF GREEK GEOMETRY. clxv 

in the manner required is ayayciv m irpoiccinu. When the solution 
of a problem has been arrived at, e.g. when a required tangent has 
been drawn, the tangent is said iroictv ro vpopXtf/igi, 

In the Ik^cctis or setting out of a theorem the re-statement of 
what it is required to prove is generally introduced by Apollonius 
as well as Euclid by the words Xcyos ori ; and in one case Apollonius 
abbreviates the re-statement by saying simply X^yco, ori, iarai ra r^ 
Tporoorcoif / eay that the property stated in the enunciation will be 
true ; it is to be proved is Scuct^ok, it remains to be proved koivoy apa 
SforrcoK, let it be required to draw Scok foro) ayayciK. 

The synthesis of a problem regularly begins with the words crw- 
rc^iffrcrai &tj (ro vpopXrffui) ovrcD«. 

U. Oonstraotions. 

These are nearly always expressed by the use of the perfect 
imperative passive (with which may be classified such perfect 
imperatives as ycyovcrco from y(ytfr$ai^ avwrrarta from owurrakac, 
and the imperative #cci<r0ci> from icccfuu). The instances in Apollonius 
where active forms of transitive verbs appear in constructions are 
rare ; but we find the following, lav irov^oia/uy if toe make (one line 
in a certain ratio to another), biuMOi yap rf vpotipn/ifUvtf dyayvtv n/v 
AB l^irroit.ivqv Xcycti, ori, for in the same manner as brfore^ after 
drawing the tangent AB, / say that..., cirt{€v(avrcf n^v AB ipovfi€y 
having joined AB u)e shall prove ; while in ayaydn-cs yap ^irt^avovorav 
njv 0E iiffdirTMrai avrrj we have a somewhat violent anacoluthon,ybr, 
having draum the tangent 0E, this Umclies, 

Of the words used in constructions the following are the most 
common : to draw aycik, &ayciv and other compounds, to join ciri{cvy- 
vvvfu, to produce i#c)3aAAciv, irpoo-cfc)3aXA.civ, to take or supply iroplliav^ 
to cut off diroXa/AjSavciv, dirorc/AvciK, d^aipctv, to construct awUrraoBat^ 
/caroo-fccvo^civ, to describe ypa^ci> and its compounds, to apply irapa- 
l3aXX.€iv, to erect dvioravat, to divide Scaipciv, to bisect &xoro/ACiv. 

Typical expressions are the following : rj vro tQv H0E ycuvi!^ itnj 
o-wcoraro) 1} wrb rwv BAP let the angle BAP be constructed equal to the 
angle H0E ; 6 iccvrpcp rtf K Scacm/fiari 8c rip KP kvkXo^ ypa^/icvo? tlie 
circle described unth K as centre and at a distance KP ; dvcorarw dvo 
rrj^ AB ^iriircSov 6p$6v irpos ro vrroicct/tcvov ^irircSok let a plane be 
erected on AB at right angles to the supposed plane ; KtiaOut avrj larj 
let (an angle) be made equal to it, iKK^LcOia let (a line, circle etc.) be set 
out, ^f^pi^ia dir* avTov Tfirjfia let a segment be cut off from it, rwv 
avr<tfv «carcunccvao'0^Fr<i>v with the same construction. 



clxvi APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION. 

No detailed enumeration of the various perfect imperatives is 
necessary ; but ycyovcroi for suppose it done deserves mention for its 
elegance. 

Let it be conceived is vo^iaOia : thus yoturOta icwvof, ov Kopv^tf to Z 
inifA€iO¥ let a cone he conceived whose apex is the point Z. 

A curious word is xXaia, meaning literally to brecik qff and 
generally used of two straight lines meeting and forming an angle, 
e.g. of two straight lines drawn from the foci of a central conic to 
one and the same point on the curve, Lid twk £, A cny/ActW iccjcXa- 
(rtfoxroy irpos r^v ypa/i/bi^ at EZ, ZA, (literally) yhrni the points E, A let 
£Z, ZA be broken short off against the curve. Similarly, in a propo- 
sition of Apollonius quoted by Eutocius from the *AyaXvo/icvos roros, 
the straight lines drawn from the given points to meet on the circum- 
/erenee of Hie circle are al diro rcav 8o^^o>v mf/ittfay hri r^v iripi^^taF 
rov kvkXov fcXctf/Acvai cv^ciai. 

15. Operations (Addition, Subtraction etc.). 

The usual word for being added is vpoirMifLgu : thus Scxa rir/iTiTai 
17 Z0 Kara ro M irpwrKtifiivrp^ ix"'^'^^ ''V^ ^^1 or ZB is bisected in M 
(md has AZ added Of a magnitude having another added to it the 
participle of irpo<rXafjifiay€iv is used in the same way as Xiirc^v for 
having something subtracted. Thus ro KP Xiirov 1} wpoa-Xa/Sov ri BO 
la-ov ioTi np MIX means KP minus or plus BO is equal to MIX. /actcC 
(with gen.) is also used for plu>Sy e.g. ro vvo AEB /ura rov diro ZE is 
equivalent to AE . EB + ZE*. 

A curious expression is avya/i^Ttpo^ 17 A A, AB, or awaiA/^rtpo^ 
ilj rZA meaning Uie sum of \^ AB, or ofVZ^ ZA. 

Of adding or subtracting a common magnitude koiv6% is used : 
thus icoivov wpoa-KtiaOfa or iff^priaOia \& let the common (magnitude) be 
added, or taken away, the adjective Xoiiro9 being applied to the 
remainder in the latter case. 

To exceed is vvtpPaXKtiv or \nr€pix!^iy, the excess is often 1; vir^o^, 
rjv vTTcpcxct ic.r.X., 11 A exceeds AO by OH is ro HA rov AO vircpc;(ci rf 
on , to differ from is 8ta^4'<iv with gen., to differ by is expressed by 
the dative, ag. (a certain triangle) differs from rA0 by t/ie triangle 
on A& as base similar to FA A, Sta^cpct rov FAQ rtp aVo r^s A0 
Tpiytny 6fAOLif rep FAA ; (the area) by which tlie square on FP differs 
from the square on AS, f Sta^cpci ro airo FP r(n) diro AS. 

For multiplications and divisions the geometrical equivalents 
are the methods of proportions and the application of areas ; but of 
numerical multiples or fractions of magnitudes the following are 



NOTES ON THE TERMINOLOGY OF GREEK GEOMETRY, clxvii 

typical instances : the half of AB, 17 vjitJUrwi t^c AB ; the fourth part 
of the figure, ro rhuprov rov cSovs ; four times the rectangle A£ . £A, 

TO TCTfKUClf VVO A£A. 

16. Proportions. 

RcUio IB X/Syoif wiU be cut in the same ratio cfe rov avroy Xoyov 
TfirfOjiaovrcLi, the three proportionals al rpcis dvaXoyov ; being a mean 
proportional between B0, 0A, fiiaov Xiyov i^pwra^ or fiimf avdXoyoVy 
rwv B0A. The sides about the right angles {are) proportional irtpi 
6p0a9 yutvtas ol irXcvpai dvaXoyov, 

The ratio of A to Bia 6 Aoyos, w l^ct ro A wpo^ rh B, or 6 rov A 
vfw ro B Xoyof ; suppose the ratio of V^ to AB mads the same as the 
ratio of FH to HB, rf rrjs PH ir(iioi HB Xoy^ 6 alrhii w€iroi'^a$to 6 r^s 
FA vpos AB ; A has toB a greater (or less) ratio than F has to A, ro 
A wp^ ro B fitiCova (or ^Xcuro-OKa) Aoyor lx<i i^ircp ro F irpos ri A, or 
rov, Sr Itx^i ro F ifpos rd A; the ratio of the square of the inner segment 
to the square of the remaining segment^ Xiyo^ iv ^u ro hnh^ r/x^/Aa 
irpos ro Xoiiroi' Swa/Acc. 

The following is the ordinary form of a proportion : as the square 
on AS M to the rectangle under B2, 2F «o m £0 to £11, lus ro dtrh AS 
irpoc rd viro BSF, ovro>s 17 E0 irpos EH. In a proportion the antece- 
dents are ra if/ov/Acva, i.e. the leading terms, the consequents rk 
Irdficva ; as one of the antecedents is to one of the consequents so are 
all the antecedents (taken together) to all the consequents {taken together) 
us tv rdr rjyovfUvwv irpos tv rwv hrofiivuv, cvrw^ amvra rh. ifycv/itva 
vpo^ awayra r& ltr6fi€ya, 

A very neat and characteristic sentence is that which forms the 
enunciation of Euclid v. 19 : iav ^ cJs oXov irpos oXok, ovnus di^aip^ly 
vpos a^ipc^^, icai ro Xoiirov vpos ro Xoiiroi' lurcu cSs oXok irpos oXov. 
If M a whole is to a whole so is {a part) taken away to {a part) taken 
away^ the remainder also will be to the remainder as the whole to the 
whole. Similarly in Apollonius we have e.g. ^ircl ovk us ihov kvri li 
dvo AE irpos i\ov ro AZ, ovni>s d^oifnOly ro vw6 AAB vpos dfJHUpfOky 
TO AH, icai XoiTov iari irpos Xoiirov, (Js oXov irpos oXov, since then^ as the 
whole the square on AE is to the whole the {parallelogram) AZ, so is 
{the part) taken away the rectangle under AA, AB to {the part) taken 
aujay the {parallelogram) AH, remainder is also to remainder as whole 
to whole. 

To be eofnpounded of is wyKturOai, the ratio compounded of 6 
ovyKtCfiwoi (or awrjfifiivo9f from oin^<£irrciv) Xoyos (c#c re rov, Sy iy*^ 
ic.r.X.), the ratio compounded {of the ratios) of the sides i oi7#cc^cvos 



ckviii APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION. 

XtSyof iK rwv irXcvpcSv. ovyjccurtfcu is moreover used not only of being 
a compounded ratio, but also of being equal to a ratio compounded 
of two others, even when none of the terms in the two latter ratios 
are the same as either term of the first ratio. 

Another way of describing the ratio compounded of two others 
is to use /Acra (with gen.) which here implies multiplication and not 
addition. Thus 6 r^c AS vpos Sr Xoyoq fjLtra rov 1179 AS vpos SB is 
the ratio compounded of the ratio of KX to%V and thai of AS to SB. 
Similarly kowo% ii^fnjaOto 6 r^s PA irpos TO means let the common 
ratio of TU to T% be divided out (and not, as usual, subtracted), 
KOivov d^ipc^cvroc rcf&rov rov Xoyou dividing out by this common ratio. 
Taking the rectangle contained by OE, EZ m a middle term is rov 
vro 0EZ fiiaov kofifiavo/iivoVf taking AH as a common altitude r^ 
AH Koivov v^ov9 Xafifiavofiivrj^. 

So that the corresponding terms are conHnuoue cSorc ra« ifioXAyov^ 
owcxcis ctvat; so that the aegfnents adjoining the vertex are corre- 
sponding terms &rT€ b/wkoya c&^i r& irp^ tq Kopw^ TfuffULra, 

There remain the technical terms for transforming such a pro- 
portion aaa :b = c : d. These correspond with the definitions at the 
beginning of EucL Book v. Thus ^voXXa^ alternately (usually called 
permvtcmdo or altemando) means transforming the proportion into 
a : c = b : d, 

dvairoXiv reversely (usually inverteruio), b : a^d : c 
avvOtoi^ Xoyov is composition of a ratio, by which the ratio a : b 
becomes a + 6 : 6. The corresponding Greek term to cotnpo- 
nendo is awOdvri which means no doubt, literally, "to one 
who has compounded,^ or " if we compound," the ratios. Thus 
crw^cKTi is used of the inference that a + 6:6 = e+c?:</. 
Suupeo-is Xoyov means division of a ratio in the sense of separaiion 
or subtraction in the same way as avv$€oi9 signifies addition. 
Similarly SicXovri (the translation of which as dividendo or 
dirimendo is misleading) means really separating in the sense 
of stibtracting : thus a-b : b^c — d : d. 
dvaoTpo^^ XJyov conversion of a ratio and dvaarpi^avri conver- 
tendo correspond respectively to the ratio a :a — b and to the 
inference that a : a — b^c : c-d. 
Si Zcrov, generally translated ex aeguali (sc. distantia)^ is applied 
to the inference e.g. from the proportions 

a : b : c I d etc. = A : B : C : D etc. 
that a : d = A : 2>. 

All the expressions above explained, ^mXXa^, dvairaXtv, awOivri, 



NOTES ON THE TERMINOLOGY OF GREEK GEOMETRY, clxix 

&cXovrc, dvcurrpc^ravrc, Bi Zcrov are constantly used in Apollonins as 
in Euclid. In one place we find the variant 8ca Si ro amiraXir. 
Are in reciprocal proportion is avriircvov^curtv. 

17. Inferences. 

The usual equivalent for there/ore is apa, e.g. h rg iwi^v^iq, apa 
iarC it is therefore on the swrfacCy cMcta ipa Icrriv 17 AB therefore AB 
ie a straight line ; ovv is generally used in a somewhat weaker sense, 
and in conjunction with some other word, in order to mark the 
starting point of an argument rather than to express a formal 
inference, so that we can usually translate it by then^ e.g. hrti civ 
nneCf then^ on /jlIv ovv,.,^¥tp6y ii m, then, dear that..., S17 is some- 
what similarly used in taking up an argument. So that is okrrc, 
thcU is Tovriarriy. A corollary is often introduced by jccu ^vcpov, 
art, or by owafl-oScSciirrai it ie proved at the same time. 

It is (U once clecvr ^vtp^ aMOw, from this it is dea/r Ik S^ 
rwTcn ^vnpivy for this reason Sea rovro, for the same reason Sth r& 
avra, wher^ore Stoircp, in the same uxiy as above or b^ors Kark rk 
avra roU hrdvia or ifiirpofrOeyf similarly it will be shown b/ioltt^ jcal 
Scix^TO'cTiu, the same results as before vnll follow rk aMi rots vpor€pov 
avfiP'^eraif the same proofs toill apply al ahm airoSci^cif dpfwaovcL 

Conversely iyrurrpw^^y by the converse of the theorem ScA rrfv 
avTurTpo^r/v rov 0€vtpiifAaTO9, by what was proved and its converse Sia 
ra €tpvffiJya Koi ra avrurrpoifM, avTwv. 

By what was before proved in the ease of the hyperbola Scot to 
irpoScScty/icFov M r^f tnrcpjSoX^s; for the same (facts) have been 
proved in the case of the parallelograms which are their doubles koI 
yap M, Tijiv SiirXao'Ui>v avniy vapaWtikoypdfjLfuav rh avra ScScucroi. 

By the similarity of the triangles St^ r^ o/xou^nfra nSv rptyiJvctfv, 
by parallels Sea ra9 ira/x)iXXi;Xov9, by the (property qf the) section, 
parabola, hyperbola Btk r^ to/ai/v, wapafioXiiv, vvtppoKiiv. 

The properties which have already been proved true of the sections 
when the original diameters are taken (as axes of reference) wra 
irpoScScacrai vtpl rac ropk^ avfiPaivovra av/iirapaPaXXofUviav rwv 
dp^^iKiSv Sioficrpcav. 

Much more iroXXf /jloXXov. Cf. iroXv Trportpov rifiyti r^v rofiifv 
much sooner does it cut the section. 

18. Ooncluaions. 

WlUch it UHis required to do, to prove orcp cSci voi^o-oi, Scifai ; 
uiAic/i is absurd oirtp aroirw; and this is impossible, so that Uie 

H. C. m 



clxx APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION. 

original aupposxiion is so also rovro Sk dM^arw iScrrc Kuirb i( apX?^* 
And again the abswrdity will he similarly inferred jcal voXiv 6fu»M»c 
wvaxOrtarrai ro' aroirok. 

19. Distinctions of oases. 

These properties a/rs general^ but for the hyperbola only etc. ravra 
fjily fcoiviSs, liri Sk r^ iw€ppok^ /juivrf^ icr.A., in the third Jtgure iwi 
r^9 TfUrri^ icaraypa^^ or rov rpircv a^fULTo^^ in all the possible cases 
Kara muras ras Jv^c^ofi^yac Suurrokd^, 

20. Direction, concavity, oonyezity. 

In both direcHons 1^* licarcpa, totoards the same parts as the 
section hri ra^na rj rofij ; totijards the direction o/the point £, lire rk 
fUf^, i^* a iarri rh E; on the same side of the centre €U AB, lirl rh 
a^a fUpri rev iccKrpov, h ots iarriy rf AB. There is also the expression 
Kaik t2i liro/Acva lUpri r^ To/A^f, meaning literally in the succeeding 
parts of the section^ and used of a line cutting a branch of a hyperbola 
and passing inside. 

The concave parts t«k icoiXa, the convexities r& mipra, not having its 
concavity (eonveasity) towards the same parts /l^ hri ra abra fUptf rk 
KoTXa (rk Kvpra) Ixovo-a, towards the same parts as the concavity of the 
curve hn ra abra rote icocXoif ryj% ypafifi'^% if it touches wUh its concave 
side i^ i^wrrfToi roi% koCXok abr^^, will touch on its concave side 
l^&i^tnu Kara ra icoiXa. 

Having its convexity turned the opposite way avwrpa/jL/Uya r& 
Kvprk i)(ovau, 

21. Infinite, Infinity. 

Unlimited or infinite art i/k>s, to increase unthout limit or indef- 
nitely ck airctpov ab(A^9(r$aL 

av€tpo9 la also used in a numerical sense ; thus in the same u>ay 
we shall fvnd an infinite number of diameters np Sk avr^ rpim^ ical 
aTtipov^ ct;pifcroftcv itofUrpov^. 



THE C0NIC8 OF APOLLONIUS. 



THE CONE. 



If a straight line indefinite in length, and passing always 
through a fixed point, be made to move round the circumference 
of a circle which is not in the same plane with the point, so as 
to pass successively through every point of that circumference, 
the moving straight line will trace out the sur&ce of a doable 
cone, or two similar cones lying in opposite directions and 
meeting in the fixed point, which is the apex of each cone. 

The circle about which the straight line moves is called 
the bate of the cone lying between the said circle and the 
fixed point, and the axis is defiined as the straight line drawn 
from the fixed point or the apex to the centre of the circle 
forming the base. 

The cone so described is a scalene or oblique cone except 
in the particular case where the axis is perpendicular to the 
base. In this latter case the cone is a right cone. 

If a cone be cut by a plane passing through the apex, the 
resulting section is a triangle, two sides being straight lines 
lying on the surface of the cone and the third side being 
the straight line which is the intersection of the cutting plane 
and the plane of the base. 

Let there be a cone whose apex is A and whose base is the 
circle BC, and let be the centre of the circle, so that ilO is 
the axis of the cone. Suppose now that the cone is cut by any 
plane parallel to the plane of the base BC, as DE, and let 

H. c. 1 



THE CONIOS OF APOLLONIUS. 



the axis AO meet the plane DE in o. Let p be any point on 
the intersection of the plane DE and the surfiEUse of the cone. 
Join Ap and produce it to meet the circumference of the circle 
BC in P. Join OP, op. 





Then, since the plane passing through the straight lines 
A 0, AP cuts the two parallel planes BC, DE in the straight 
lines OP, ap respectively, OP, op are parallel. 

.-. op : OP^Ao : AO. 

And, BPC being a circle, OP remains constant for all positions 
otp on the curve DpE, and the ratio Ao : ilO is also constant. 

Therefore op is constant for all points on the section of the 
surfEice by the plane DE. In other words, that section is 
a circle. 

Hence aU sections of the cone which are parallel to the 
circular base are circles. [L 4.]* 

Next, let the cone be cut by a plane passing through the 
axis and perpendicular to the plane of the base BC, and let the 
section be the triangle ABC. Conceive another plane HK 
drawn at right angles to the plane of the triangle ABC 
and cutting off from it the triangle AHK such that AHK is 
similar to the triangle ABC but lies in the contrary sense, 
ie. such that the angle AKH is equal to the angle ABC. 
Then the section of the cone by the plane HK is called a 
■nboontrary section {iwevavria TOfiij), 

* The referenoet in thia form, here and throughout the book, are to the 
original propodtioni of Apollonius. 



THE CONE. 



Let P be any point on the intersection of the plane HK 
with the sor&ce, and F any point on the circumference of the 
circle BC. Draw PM, FL each perpendicular to the plane of 
the triangle ABO, meeting the straight lines HK, BC respec- 
tively in M, L, Then PM, FL are parallel. 

Draw through M the straight line DE parallel to BO, and 
it follows that the plane through 
DME, PM is parallel to the base 
BO of the cone. 

Thus the section DPE is a 
circle, and DM. ME^ PM\ 

But, since DE is parallel to BO, 
the angle ADE is equal to the 
angle ABC which is by hypothesis 
equal to the angle AKH. 

Therefore in the triangles jETDif, 
EKM the angles HDM, EKM are 
equal, as also are the vertical 
angles at M, 

Therefore the triangles HDM, EKM are similar. 

Hence HMiMD^EMiMK. 

.-. HM.MK^DM.ME^PM\ 

And P is any point on the intersection of the plane HK 
with the sur£EU». Therefore the section made by the plane 
HK is a circle. 

Thus there are two series of circular sectione of an oUique 
cone, one series being parallel to the base, and the other consisting 
of the sections subcontrary to the first series. [L 5.] 

Suppose a cone to be cut by any plane through the ajos 
making the triangular section ABC, so that BO is a diameter 
of the circular base. Let H be any point on the circumference 
of the base, let HK be perpendicular to the diameter BO, and let 
a parallel to HK be drawn from any point Q on the surfisice 
of the cone but not lying in the plane of the axial triangle. 
Further, let ilQ be joined and produced, if necessary; to meet 

1—2 




4 



THE CONIQS OP AP0LL0NIU8. 



the circumference of the base in F, and let FLF' be the chord 
perpendicular to BC. Join AL, AF\ Then the straight line 
through Q parallel to HK is also parallel to FLF' ; it follows 
therefore that the parallel through Q will meet both AL and 
AF\ And AL is in the plane of the axial triangle ABC. 
Therefore the parallel through Q will meet both the plane 
of the axial triangle and the other side of the sur&ce of the 
cone, since AF' lies on the cone. 





Let the points of intersection be F, Q' respectively. 
Then QV'.VQ^FL: LF, and FL « LF'. 

'. QV^ VQf, 
or QQf is bisected by the plane of the axial triangle. [I. 6.] 

Again, let the cone be cut by another plane not passing 
through the apex but intersecting the plane of the base in 
a straight line DME perpendicular to BG, the base of any axial 
triangle, and let the resulting section of the surfoce of the cone 
be DPS, the point P lying on either of the sides AB, AC of 
the axial triangle. The plane of the section ¥dll then cut the 
plane of the axial triangle in the straight line Pif joining P to 
the middle point of DE. 

Now let Q be any point on the curve of section, and through 
Q draw a straight line parallel to DE. 

Then this parallel will, if produced to meet the other side 
of the surface in Q^, meet, and be bisected by, the axial 



THE CONE. 



triangle. But it lies also in the plane of the section DPE\ it 
will therefore meet, and be bisected by, PM. 





Therefore PM bisects any chord of the section which is 
parallel to DE. 

Now a straight line bisecting each of a series of parallel 
chords of a section of a cone is called a diameter. 

Hence, if a cone he cut hy a plane which intersects the 
circtUar base in a straight line perpendicular to the base of any 
aaeUd triangle, the intersection of the cutting plane and the plane 
of the axial triangle will be a diameter of the resulting section 
of the cone, [I. 7.] 

If the cone be a right cone it is clear that the diameter so 
found will, for all sections, be at right angles to the chords 
which it bisects. 

If the cone be oblique^ the angle between the diameter so 
found and the parallel chords which it bisects will in general 
not be a right angle, but will be a right angle in the particular 
case only where the phrne of the axial triangle ABG is at right 
angles to the plane of the base. 

Again, if PM be the diameter of a section made by a plane 
cutting the circular base in the straight line DME perpen- 
dicular to BC, and if PM be in such a direction that it does not 
meet AC though produced to infinity, Le. if PM be either 
parallel to AC, or makes mth PB an angle less than the angle 
BAG and therefore meets CA produced beyond the apex of the 
cone, the section made by the said plane extends to infinity* 



6 THE OOXIOS or APOIXONIUS. 

For, if we take any point V on PM produced and draw thtough 
it HK parallel to BC. and QQ' parallel to DE, the plane 
through HK, QQ' is parallel to that through DE, BG, Le. to the 
hase. Therefore thenectioniTQfQ' is a circle. AndD.E.Q.Q' 
are all on the surface of the cone and are also on the cutting 
plane. Therefore the section DPS extends to the circle ffQK, 
and in like manner to the circular secticm through any point 
on PM produced, and therefore to any distance &om P. [L 8.] 




(It is also clear that DJlf * - 5Jf . MC. uid QV >= BV . VK ; 
and RV. VK becomes greater bb V ia taken more distant 
from P. For, in the case where PM is parallel to AC, VK 
remains oonstant while £'F^ increases ; and in the case where the 
diameter PM meets GA produced beyond the apex of the cone, 
both HV, VK increase together as V moves away from P. 
Thus QV increases indefinitely as the section extends to 
inBnity.] 

If on the other hand PM meets AG, the section does not 
extend to infinity. In that case the section will be a circle 
if its plane is parallel to the base or subcoatraiy. But, if the 
section is neither parallel to the base nor subcontraiy, it mil 
not be a circle. [L 9.] 

For let the plane of the sectuni meet the plane of the base 
in DME, a straight line perpendicular to BC, a diameter of the 



THE CONE. 7 

circular base. Take the axial triangle through BC meeting the 
plane of section in the straight line PP'. Then P, P\ M are 
all points in the plane of the axial triangle and in the plane 
of section. Therefore PP'M is a straight line. 

If possible, let the section PP' be a circle. Take any point 
Q on it and draw QQ' parallel to DME. Then if QQ' meets 
the axial triangle in T, Q7» VQ'. Therefore PP' is the 
diameter of the supposed circle. 




Let HQKQ' be the circular section through QQ' parallel to 
the base. 

Then, from the circles, QF* - HV. VK, 

QV^^PV.VP'. 

.'.HV.rK^PV.rP\ 

so that HViVP^P'V: VK. 

.". the triangles VPH, VKP' are similar, and 

/lPHV^/^KP'V, 

.\ Z,KP'V^/.ABC, and the section PP' is subcontrary: 
which contradicts the hypothesis. 

.*. PQP' is not a circle. 

It remains to investigate the character of the sections 
mentioned on the preceding page, viz. (a) those which extend 
to infinity, (6) those which are finite but are not circles. 

Suppose, as usual, that the plane of section cuts the circular 
base in a straight line DME and that ABC is the axial triangle 



8 THE O0NIC3 OF APOLLONIUS. 

whose base BC is that diameter of the base of the cone which 
bisects DME at right angles at the point M. Then, if the 
plane of the section and the plane of the axial triangle intersect 
in the straight lino PM, PM is a diameter of the section 
bisecting all chords of the section, as QQf^ which are drawn 
parallel to DE. 

If QQ is so bisected in F, QV is said to be an ordinate, or 
a straight line drawn ordinate-wise {rerarffiivfo^ KOTTfyfAanf), 
to the diameter PM; and the length PV cut off from the 
diameter by any ordinate QV will be called the abtciua of QV. 

Proposition 1. 

[I. 11.] 

First let the diameter PM of the section be parallel to one of 
the sides of the axial triangle as AC, and let QV he any ordinate 
to the diameter PM. Then,ifa straight line PL (supposed to be 
drawn perpendicular to PM in the plane of the section) be taJcen 
of such a length that PL: PA ^BC^iBA.AC.itisto be proved 
that 

QV^^PL.PV 

Let HK be drawn through V parallel to BC. Then, since 
QF is also parallel to DE, it follows that the plane through 
H, Q, K ia parallel to the base of the cone and therefore 




THE CONE. 9 

produces a circular section whose diameter is HK, Also QF is 
at right angles to HK. 

/. HV.VK^QV*. 

Now, by similar triangles and by parallels, 

HViPV^BGiAG 
and VK'.PA^BCiBA. 

:. HV.VKiPV.PA^BO'iBA.Aa 
Hence QF" :PV .PA--PL:PA 

^PL.PViPV.PA. 
/. QV'^PL.PV. 

It follows that the square on any ordinate to the fixed 
diameter PM is equal to a rectangle applied {irapaPJXKetp) 
to the fixed straight line PL drawn at right angles to PM with 
altitude equal to the corresponding abscissa PV. Hence the 
section is called a Parabola. 

The fixed straight line PL is called the latas rectum 
(opOla) or the parameter of the ordinate! (Trap* rjv Bv- 
vavrai al tcarayofAevcu rerarffUvwsi)* 

This parameter, corresponding to the diameter PM, will for 
the future be denoted by the symbol p. 

Thus QV^^p^PV, 

or QV^a^PV. 

Propoiition 2. 

[I. 12.] 

Next let PM not he parallel to AC but let it meet CA 
produced beyond the apex of the cone in P*, Draw PL a^t right 
angles to PM in the plane of the section and of such a length 
tlMt PL : PP' =^ BF.FC : AF\ where AF is a straight line 
through A parallel to PM a/nd meeting BC in F. Then, if VR 
be drawn parallel to PL and P'L be joined and produced to 
meet VR in R, it is to be proved thai 

QV^^PV.VR. 

As before, let HK be drawn through V parallel to BG, so 
that QV^^HV.VK, 



) THE CONiaS OF AFOLLONIUS. 

Then, by similar triangles, 

HV:PV''BF.AF, 
VK:PV«FG:AP. 




.: HV.VK : PV.P'V=> BF.FC : AF*. 
Hence QV :PV.F'V~PL iPF 

-VR-.P'V 
^PV.VRiPV.P'V. 
/. QV'^PV.VR. 
It follows that the square on the ordinate is equal to a 
rectangle whose height is equal to the abscissa and whose base 
lies along the fixed straight line PL but overUps (itrtpfiaXXei) 
it by a length equal to the difference between VR and PL*. 
Hence the section is called a HrPEEBOLA. 

* Apolloaini dworibM the raotuigle PR u ofjpUAl to the tatvi rcetsM but 
exetitding by a figvrt iliular and liwutarly lituated to iKat eonlalntd by PP' and 
PL, i.e. eioeeding the reetAogle VL by the raotugle LR. That, if Qy=v, 
Pr=x, PL=p, and PP'=-d, 

which ii simply the Culadwa eqnatioii of the hypetbolk retemd to oblique wui 
oonriatiiiii of k diameter ud the tangent el 



THE CONE. 11 

PL is called the latos rectum or the parameter of the 
ordinate! as before, and PR is called the transrene (1} 
irXayla). The fuller expression transrene diameter (1} irXa^ia 
Suifierpos:) is also used ; and, even more commonly, ApoUonius 
speaks of the diameter and the corresponding parameter together, 
calling the latter the latas rectum (i.e. the erect side, 1} 6p0la 
ir\€vpd), and the former the transvene lide (1} irkarfia trXevpd), 
of the figure (eUo^) on, or applied to, the diameter {irpo^ t§ 
BiafUrpip), ie. of the rectangle contained by PL, PP' as drawa 

The parameter PL will in future be denoted by p, 

[Cor. It follows from the proportion 

QV^:PV.P'V^PL:PP' 
that, for any fixed diameter PP', 

QV^ : PV. PT is a constant ratio, 
or QF* varies as PF. P'F.] 

Propoiition 3. 

[I. 13.] 

If PM meets AC in P' and BC in M, draw AF parallel to 
PM meeting BG produced in F, and draw PL at right angles to 
PM in the plane of the section and of such a length that 
PL : PP' ^BF.FC: AF\ Join P'L and draw VR parallel 
to PL meeting P'L in R. It will be proved that 

QV'^PV.VR. 




12 THE OONICS OF AFOLLONIUS. 

Draw HK through V parallel to BC. Then, as before, 

Now, by similar triangles, 

HViPV^BFiAF, 
VKiF'r^FOiAF. 
/. Hr.VK:PV.P'V^BF.FC:AF\ 
Hence QV* iPV.P'V^PL :PP' 

^VR.P'V 
^PV.VRiPV.P'V. 
... QV*^PV.VR. 

Thus the square on the ordinate is equal to a rectangle 
whose height is equal to the abscissa and whose base lies along 
the fixed straight line PL but &lls short of it (iKKeiirei) by a 
length equal to the difference between VR and PX*. The 
section is therefore called an Ellipse. 

As before, PL is called the latas rectam, or the para- 
meter of the ordinates to the diameter PP", and PP" itself is 
called the traiunrene (mth or without the addition of 
diameter or side of the figure, as explained in the last 
proposition). 

PL will henceforth be denoted by p. 

[Cob. It follows from the proportion 

QV^iPV.Pr^PLiPF 
that, for any fixed diameter PP*, 

Qir : PV. F F is a constant ratio, 
or Q}r varies as PV.FV.'] 

* ApollonioB deseribes the rectangle PR as applied to the laHitu rectum diU 
faUing ihort by a figure HnUUir and nmilarly eituated to that eotUained bg PP' 
and PLf Le. fialling short of the rectangle VL by the rectangle LR. 

If Qy=y* PV=x, PL=p, and PP'^^d, 

Thos Apollonios* ennnciation simply expresses the Cartesian equation referred 
to a diameter and the tangent at its extremity as (oblique) axes. 



THE CONS. 13 

Propoiltlon 4. 

[I. 14.] 

If a ptoTU cuta both parts of a double cone and doea not pass 
through the apex, the seetions of the two parte of the cone will 
both be hyperbolas which will have the savie diameter and equal 
latera recta corresponding tkerOo. And eueh sections are called 

OFPOSFTB BRANCHES. 




Let BC be the circle about which the Btmigbt line generatiug 
the cone revolves, and let B'C be any parallel eectioD cutting 
the opposite half of the cone. Let a plane cat both halves 
of the cone, intersecting the base BG in the straight line DB 
and the plane B'C in I/E'. Then I/S' must be parallel to 
DE. 

Let BC be that diameter of the base which bisects D£ at 
right angles, and let a plane pass through BC and the apex A 
catting the circle B'C in B'C, which will therefore be a diameter 
of that circle and will cat I/B' at right angles, unce B'C is 
parallel to BC, and I/E' to DE. 



14 THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 

Let FAF' be drawn through A parallel to MM', the straight 
line joining the middle points of DE, UE' and meeting CA, 
BfA respectively in P, P'. 

Draw perpendiculars PL, P'U to MM' in the plane of the 
section and of such length that 

PL :PP'^BF.FC:AF\ 

P'L'iP'P^B'F'.FCriAF'*. 

Since now JfP, the diameter of the section DPE, when 
produced, meets BA produced beyond the apex, the section 
DPE is a hyperbola. 

Also, since lyE' is bisected at right angles by the base of 
the axial triangle ARC, and M'P in the plane of the axial 
triangle meets CA produced beyond the apex A, the section 
DP'E' is also a hyperbola. 

And the two hyperbolas have the same diameter MPP'M', 

It remains to prove that PL = P'L', 

We have, by similar triangles, 

BF'.AF^RF' :AF', 

FC : AF = F'C : AF'. 

.'.BF.FC: AF* = B'F' . F'C : AF'*. 

Hence PL x PF ^ P'L' : FP. 

.'. PL ^ PI'. 



THE DIAMETER AND ITS CONJUGATE. 



Propoiition 5. 

[I. 15.] 

If through C, the middle point of the diameter PP' of an 
ellipse, a double ordinate DOU he drawn to PP, DCIf will 
bisect all chords parallel to PP', and will therefore he a diameter 
the ordinates to which are parallel to PP'. 

In other words, if the diameter bisect all chords paralld to a 
second diameter, the second diameter wHl bisect aU chords 
parallel to the first. 

Also the parameter of the ordinates to DOU will he a third 
proportional to DU, PP*, 

(1) Let QV be any ordinate to PP, and through Q draw 
QQ' parallel to PP* meeting DD' in i; and the ellipse in Q[ ; and 
let Q V be the ordinate drawn from Q[ to PP'. 




16 THE aomas of AK)LLONn;& 

Then, if PL is the parameter of the ordinates, and if P'L is 
joined and VR, CE, VR drawn parallel to PZ to meet P'L, we 
have [Prop. 3] QV* = PV. VR, 

qfV" = PV.VR', 

and QV = QT', because QV is parallel to QT' and QQ* to PF. 

:.PV.VR''PV'.V'R. 

Hence PV : PF' = VR : FB = PT' : FV. 

..PV.PV'-'PV^P'V'.P'V-FV', 

or PF: FF'-PT'tFF'. 

.-.PF-PT. 

Also CP-'CR. 

By subtraction, CV='CV', 

and .'. Qv = vQf, so that QQf is bisected by DIX. 

(2) Draw i)£' at right angles to DIX and of such a length 
that Diy : PR = PP' : DK. Join iTiT and draw vr parallel to 
Dif to meet RK in r. 

Also draw TR, LUH and ES parallel to PP'. 
Then, since PC = OP', PS = SL and OE^EH; 
.-. the parallelogram (Pj^ => (5^0- 

Also {PR) = ( FS) + (SiJ) = (SIT) + {RH). 
By subtraction, (PiO - (PR) = (-8^ ; 

.'. CD'-QF» = i22'.rJ?. 
But C]> - QV* ^ Clf - W ^ Rv .vD. 

..Rv.vD~RT.TE (A). 

Now BR : PR = PR: DK, by hypothesis. 

..DR:DK='DR''.PR' 

^CR'.CR 
=^PC.CE:CR 
= RT.TE: RT; 
and DR : DK >= Rv : vr 

= Rv.vD : vD.vr; 
.'. Rv.vD : Dv.vr = RT.TE : RT\ 
But Rv.vD = RT.TE, from (A) above; 

.•.Dv.w = RT* = CV~Qt^. 



THE DIAMETER AND ITS CONJUGATE. 



17 



Thus DK is the parameter of the ordinates to DU^ sach 
Qo. 

Therefore the parameter of the ordinates to DU is a third 
proportional to DJ^, PP. 

Cor. We have CD" « PC. CE 

^\PF.\PL\ 

.'.Dir^PP'.PL, 

or PF'.DU^DUiPL. 

and PL is a third proportional to PP*^ DU. 

Thos the relations of PF, DU and the corresponding 
parameters are reciprocal 

Def. Diameters such as PF^ DU, each of which bisects 
all chords parallel to the other, are called coi^agate diameten. 



Propoiiticn 6. 

[L 16.] 

If from the middle point of the diameter of a hyperbola with 
two hranchea a line he drawn parallel to the ordinates to that 
diameter, the line so drawn will be a diameter conjugate to the 
former one. 

If any straight line be drawn parallel to PF, the given 
diameter, and meeting the two branches of the hyperbola in Q, Q' 
respectively, and if from C, the middle point of PF, a straight 
line be drawn parallel to the ordinates to PF meeting Qff in 
V, we have to prove that QQ is bisected in v. 




Let QF, QT be ordinates to PP', and let PX, FL' be the 
parameters of the ordinates in each branch so that [Prop. 4] 
H,c. 2 



18 THE OOiriCS OF APOLLOMIU& 

PL^P'L'. Draw VR, F'iJ' parallel to PL, FL, and let PL', 
P'L be joined and produced to meet VR, VR respectively in 
Bf.R. 

Then we have QV* = PV. VR, 

qV^^PV'.V'R. 
:. PV. VR = PV . VR, and VR iVR^PV: PV. 
Also PV '.VR^PP .PL'=^PP'.PL = FV.VR. 

:. PV : PT- VR : VR 

= PV : PT', from above ; 
/. PV xPV^'PV-.PV, 
and PV-^PV.PV^PV->rPV .PV, 

or FF'rPF-rF'rPT'; 

.-. PF-P'r. 
But CP^CP; 

.'. by addition, CV = CF', 
or OksC*. 

Hence C7v is a diameter conjugate to PP. 

[More shortly, we have, from the proof of Prop. 2, 

QV:PV.PV=-PLiPP, 
Q^yn :P'V'.PV = PL': PP, 

and QV'~Q^V, PL::-PL'; 

.'. PV.PV^PV.PV, or PV:PV='PV:PV, 
whence, as above, PV*sP V.] 

Def. The middle point of the diameter of an ellipse or 
hyperbola is called the centre; and the straight line drawn 
parallel to the ordinates of the diameter, of a length equal to 
the mean proportional between the diameter and the parameter, 
and bisected at the centre, is called the leoondary diameter 
{hevripa Btdfierpoi). 

Propositioii 7. 

[L 20.] 

In a parabola the square on an ordinate to the diameter 
varies as ^ abaciata. 

This is at once evident from Prop. 1. 



THE DIAMETER AMD ITS COMJOQATE. 



19 



PropoBltlon S. 

[181.] 
7n a hyperbola, an Mipte, or a circle, if QVbe any ordinate 
to the diamOer PP, 

Qr'aepr.PT. 

[This property is at once evident from the proportion 

qV*:Py.PV=PL.PF' 

obttuned in the courBe of Props. 2 and 3 ; but Apollonius gives 

a separate proof, starting from the property QV^^PV.VR 

which forms the basis of the definition of the conic, as follows.] 

Let QV,QfV'\>% two ordinates to the diameter PP". 




QV*~PV.VR, 
qV''=PV'.Y'S:; 
. QV':PV.FV=PV.VR:PV.P'V 

= VR:PV=PL:PF. 



20 THE aomas of apollokiu& 

Similarly QT* : PT.FT = PL : PP\ 

/. QV* : Q'V ^ Pr.RV : Pr.PT; 
and QV* : PV. FV is a constant ratio, 
or QF'ocPF.PT. 



Propoiltion O. 

[L 29.] 

If a straight line through the centre of a hyperbola with 
two branches meet one branch, it will, if produced, meet the 
other also. 




Let PP* be the given diameter and C the centre. Let CQ 
meet one branch in Q. Draw the ordinate QFto PR, and set 
off CV along PR on the other side of the centre equal 
to CV. Let VK be the ordinate to PR through V\ We 
shall prove that QCK ia a straight Una 

Since CV^ CV, and CP « CF, it follows that PV^ FV ; 
.-. PV.FV^FV'.PV. 

But qV* : KV^ = PV. FV : FV . PV. [Prop. 8] 

/. QV^KV; and QV, KV are pamllel, while (7F= CV. 

Therefore QOK is a straight Una 

Hence Q(7, if produced, will cut the opposite branch. 



THE DIAMETER AND ITS CX)NJUOATE. 



21 



Propoiltion lO. 

p. 30.] 

In a hyperbola or an eUipse any chord through the centre 
is bieected at the centre. 

Let PP* be the diameter and C the centre ; and let Qff be 
any chord through the centre. Draw the ordinates QV, Q^V 
to the diameter PP'. 





Then 

PV.FViP'V'.PV'^Qr^iQfV 

= CF» : CF", by similar triangles. 

.-. CV'±PV.P'V:CV*=^CV''±FV'.PV':CV'' 

(where the upper sign applies to the ellipse and the lower 
to the hyperbola). 

.-. CP* : Cr* ^ CP^ : CV^. 

But CP^^CP^; 

.-. CV = CV", and CV « CV\ 

And QV, Q^F are parallel ; 

.-. CQ^CQf. 




TANGENTS. 

Proposition II. 

[I. 17, 32.] 

If a straight line be drawn through the extremity of the 
diameter of any conic parallel to the ordinatee to that diameter, 
the straight line will touch the conic, a^id no other straight 
line can fail between it and the conic. 

It is first proved that the straight line drawn in the 
manner described will tall without the conic. 

For, if not, let it tall within it, as PK, where 
PM is the given diameter. Then KP, being 
drawn from a point K on the conic parallel to 
the ordinates to PM, will meet PM and will be 
bisected by it But KP produced Mia without 
the conic ; therefore it will not be bisected at P. 

Therefore the straight line PK must fall without the conic 
and will therefore touch it 

It remains to be proved that no straight line can tall 
between the straight line drawn as described and the conia 

(1) Let the conic be a parabola, and let PF be parallel 
to the ordinates to the diameter PV. If possible, let PK Ml 
between PF and the parabola, and draw KV parallel to the 
ordinates, meeting the curve in Q. 

Then KV : PV >QV' : PV* 

>PL.PV:PV* 
>PL:Pr. 
Let V be taken on P F such that 

KV*:PV'^PL:Pr, 
and let VQ^M be drawn parallel to QF, meeting the curve in 
Q' and PK in M. 



TANOBNTS. 

Then KV: PV^PL iPV 

^PL.PV'.PV* 
^Q'V-.PV. 



23 




and KV : PV* = MV* : PV, by parallels. 

Therefore MV* - QTV*, and MV = QT'. 

Thus PK cuts the curve in Q', and therefore does not fall 
outside it : which is contrary to the hypothesia 

Therefore no straight line can fieJl between PF and the 
curve. 



(2) 
circle. 



Let the curve be a hyperbola or an ellipse or a 




Let PF be parallel to the ordinates to PP', and, if possible, 
let PK fiftll between PjPand the curve. Draw KV parallel to 
the ordinates, meeting the curve in Q, and draw VR per- 



S4 THE COSiaS 0¥ APOLLONIUS. 

pendicular to PV. Join PL and let it ([ooducect if necessaijr) 
meet FA in it. 

Then QV* = Pr. VR, so that SV*>Pr. VR. 

Take a point £1 on VR produced sach that KV ■> PV. VS. 
Jmn' PS and let it meet P'R in R. Draw RV parallel to PL 
meeting PV in V, and through V draw VQfM parallel to 
QV, meeting the curve in Q' and PK in M. 




Now irr»-PF.vs, 

.-. FSiirV-iTFiPF, 
90 that VB:PV'^KV':PV: 

Hence, by parallels, 

rR-.PV'^MV'-.PV, 

or Jf F' ia a mean proportional between PV, VR, 
i.e. JtfF'-PF'.F'B' 

a Q'F", by the property of the conic; 
.-. JtfF'=e'F'. 
Thus PK cuts the curve in Q*, and therefore does not fall 
outside it : which ia contrary to the hypothesis. 

Hence no straight line can fall between PF and the curve. 



TANGENTS. 25 



Propofltion IS. 

[I. 33, 35.] 

If a point T he taken on the diameter of a parabola outeide 
the curve and such that TP^PV, where V is the foot of the 
ordinate front Q to the diameter PV, the line TQ will touch 
the parabola. 

We have to prove that the straight line TQ or TQ pixxluced 
does not fidl within the curve on either side of Q. 

For, if possible, let K, a point on TQ or TQ produced, 
fall within the curve*, and through K draw QKV parallel 
to an ordinate and meeting the diameter in V and the curve 
in Q'. 

Thene'F'*:QF" 

> KV* : QV\ by hypothesis, 

> TV* : TV\ 
.\PV':PV>TV'*:TV\ 

Hence 




T 

^TP.PV':*TP.PV>TV'':TV\ 
and, since TP^PV, 

^TP. pr= TV\ 

.\^TP.PV'>TV'\ 

But, since by hypothesis TV is not bisected in P, - 

^TP.PV<TV\ 
which is absurd. 

Therefore TQ does not at any point &11 within the curve, 
and is therefore a tangent. 

* Though the proofB of this propotiiioii and the next follow in form the 
method of reduetio ad abiurdum, it is oMily seen that they give in faot the 
direct demonstration that, if JT is any point on the tangent other than Q, the 
point of oontaot, K lies outside the carve because, if KQ^V be paraUel to QK, it 
is proved that KV^QfV, The figures in both propositions have accordingly 
been drawn in accordance with the Csots instead of representing the inoorvect 
assumption which leads to the absurdity in each case. 



26 



THE OOmCS OF APOLLONIUS. 



Conversely, if the tangent at Q meet the diameter produced 
OfUeide the curve in the point T, TP ^ PV. Also no straight line 
can fall between TQ and the curt>e. 

[Apollonius gives a separate proof of this, using the method 
of reducHo ad abaurdumJ] 

Propoiltion 13. 

[I. 34, 36.] 

In a hyperbola, an ellipse, or a circle, if PP' be the 
diameter and QV an ordinate to it from a point Q, and if a 
point T be taken on the diameter but outside the curve such that 
TP : TP'^PV: VP', then the straight line TQ wiU touch the 
curve. 

We have to prove that no point on TQ or TQ prodaced fidls 
within the curve. 






TANGENTS. 27 

If possible, let a point K on TQ or TQ produced fidi within 
the curve*; draw Q'KV parallel to an ordinate meeting the 
curve in Q'. Join P'Q, F'Q, producing them if necessary • 
and draw through P\ P parallels to TQ meeting V'Q, VQ in /, 
and H, N respectively. Also let the parallel through P 
meet P'Q in M. 

Now, by hypothesis, P'V :PV^TP':TP\ 

.\ by parallels, P'H : PN^P'Q : QM 

^P'H.NM. 

Therefore PN^NM. 

Hence PN.NM>PO. OM, 

or NM:MO>OP:PN; 

.\ P'H : P'l > OP : PN, 

or P'H.PN>P'I.OP. 

ItfoUowsthat P'H.PN:TQ*>P'I.OP:TQ*; 

.*. by similar triangles 

P'V.PV: TV'>P'V'.PV' : TV'\ 

or P'V.PV:P'V\PV'>TV*:TV'^\ 

.\QV*:Q'V'^>TV*:TV'* 

> QV^ : KV'\ 

r.Q'V <KV\ which is contrary to the hypothesis. 

Thus TQ does not cut the curve, and therefore it touches it. 

Conversely, if the tangent at a point Q meet the diameter 
PP' outside the section in the point T, and QV is the ordinate 
fromQ, 

TP:TP'^PV:VP\ 

Also no other straight line can fall between 7Xi and the curve. 

[This again is separately proved by Apollonius by a simple 
7'eductio ad absurduin,] 

* See the note on the previous proposition. 



28 



THE aomCS OF APOLLONIU& 



Propogition 14. 

[L 37, 89.] 

In a hyperbola^ an ellipw, or a circle, if QV be an ordinate 
to the diameter PP\ and the tangent at Q meet PP' in T, then 

(1) CV.OT^CP\ 

(2) QV* : CV. Fr-i) : PP' [or CD* : CP"]. 





y.1 

T Pi V c r 



(1) Since QT is the tangent at Q, 

TP'.TP'^PV.P'V, 
.\TP + TP':TP~TP'''PV+P'V:PV~P'V; 

thus, for the hyperbola, 

2CP : 2CT = 2CV : 2CP ; 
and for the ellipse or circle, 

2CT : iCP = 2CP : 2CV ; 
therefore for all three curves 

CV.CT^CP\ 



[Prop. 13] 



TANQENTS. 29 

(2) Since CViOP^CP.CT, 

OV" CP'.CV'=CP''OT'. CP. 
whence PV i OV ^^ PT : CP, 

or PV:PT»CV:CP. 

.'. PV'.PV+PT^CV: CV+ OP, 
or PV : VT ^ CV : P'V. 

and Cr.VT^PV.P'V. 

But QV : PV. P'V=p: PP' (or CD* : CP*). [Prop. 8] 

.\QV*.CV.VT^pi PP' (or CD* : CP*). 

Ck)B. It follows at once that QV : VT is equal to the ratio 
compounded of the ratios p : PP' (or CD* : CP*) and Cr : QF. 

Propoiltloii 16. 

[I. 38, 40.] 

If Qv he the ordinate to the diameter conjugate to PP', and 
QT, the tangent at Q, meet that conjugate diamtAer in t, then 

(1) Cv.Ct'^CD*, 

(2) Qv*:Cv.vt^PP':p[orCP*:CD*], 

(3) tD : tD' = vD' : vD far the hyperbola, 

and tD : tD' = vD : vD' for the ellipse and circle. 

Using the figures drawn for the preceding proposition, we 

have (1) 

QV* : CV. VT - CD* : CP*. [Prop. 14] 

But QV:CV=Cv:CV, 

and QV:VT~Ct:CT; 

.: QV* : CV. FT* Cv.Ct : CV.CT. 

Hence Cv.Ct '.CV.CT^ CD* : CP*. 

And CV.CT'' CP* ; [Prop, 14] 

.-. Cv.Ct^CD*. 
(2) As before. 

QV* : CF. FT" (72)* : CP» (orp : PPy 

But QF : CV' Ov : Q», 



30 THE CONICS OF APOLLOXIUS. 

and QF: VT^vt :Qo\ 

Hence Qi? : Cv.vt^CP* : CD* 

^PP'ip. 
(3) Again, 

Ct.Cv^CD'^CD.CD'; 
.\Ct:CD^CD':Ov, 
and :.Ct + CD .Ct^CD^CD' '\-Cvi CD'^Cv. 
Thus tD : ID' » vD' : vD for the hyperbola, 

and tiy :tD — vD' : vD for the ellipse and ctrcfe. 

Cor. It follows fix>m (2) that Qv : Cv ia equal to the ratio 
compounded of the ratios PP' : p (or CP* : CD*) and vt : Qv. 



PROPOSITIONS LEADING TO THE REFERENCE OF 
A CONIC TO ANY NEW DIAMETER AND THE 
TANGENT AT ITS EXTREMITY. 

Propodtion Id. 

p. 41.] 

In a hyperbola, an ellipse, or a circle, if equiangvlar parol- 
lelograma ( VK), {PM) he described onQV^ CP respectively, and 

their sides are such that QJ^"^ pp-Qjf »•*• cp'CMV ^^ 

( VN) be the parollelogram on CV similar and similarly situated 

to (PM), then 

{VN)±irK)^{PM), 

the lower sign applying to the hyperbola. 

Suppose to be so taken on KQ produced that 

QViQO'^p.PP'. 
so that QV*:QV.QO~QV*tPr.PV'. 
Thus QV.QO''PV.P'r (1). 

Ako QV:QK^{CP: CM). (p:PP')''iCP:CM).(QV:QO). 
or {QV : QO) . (QO : QK) - {CP : CM) .{QV.QO); 

.'. QO : QK^CP : CM (2). 

But QO.QK-^QV.QO.QV.QK 

and CP:CM= CP* .CP.CM-, 




TBS oojrica op afolloniim. 





.-. CP : CP.CU- QV.QO: QT.QK 

= Pr.P'r:QV.QK,ti«mil). 
Therefore, nnce PX, YK are equiaoguW, 

CP':Pr.FV-(PM):(yK) (S). 

Benee OP'fPV.FV: CI' = {PM)^(7K) : (PM), 
where the apper ngn opplieit to the eUtjwe and dreU and the 
lower to the kyptrbola. 

.-. OF- : Ci» - (i>Jf) T (7Jr) : (PJf), 
and hence (Kif) ; (PJf)-(Pif) T (FA') : (Pif), 
so that ( Fy ) - (PM) T ( VK), 

or {rif)±(VK)-(Pir). 

[The above proof is reproduced as given by Apollonius in 
order to show his method of dealing with a aomewliat compli- 
cated problem by purely geometrical means. The proposition 
is more shortly proved by a method more akin to algebra as 
follows. 

We have QV : CV- OP" = CD" : OP", 



and 



CP.CM' 

.Qr.QK.-gpi^:Cv-cr"=cif:Cp; 

Qr.QK.CP.CM(S^-iy 
:.(VK)'.(,V1!)-(PM). 

lYif)±(rK).{Piiy] 



TRANSITION TO A NEW DIAMETER. 



33 



Propoiition 17. 

[I. 42.] 

In a parabola, if QV, RW be ordinates to the diameter 
through P, and QT, the tangent at Q, and RU parallel to it 
meet the diameter in T, U respectively; and if through Q a 
parallel to the diameter be drawn meeting RW produced in F 
and the tangent at P in E, then 

A RUW = the paralldogram {EW). 

Since QT is a tangent, 

rr=2PF; [Prop. 12] 

/. AQTV^{EV) (1). 

Also qV^.RW^^PV:PW\ 

:. A QTV : A RUW^ (EV) : {EW), 

and A QTV = (EV), from (1) ; 

.-. A RUW^(EW). 




Propofition 18. 

[I. 43, 44.] 

In a hyperbola, an ellipse, or a circle, if the tangent at Q 
and the ordinate from Q meet the diameter in T, V, a/nd if RW 
be the ordinate from any point R and RV beparaUel to QT; if 
also RW and the parallel to it through P meet CQ in F, E 
respectivdy, then 

A CFW^ A CPE^ A RUW. 




H. c. 



34 



THE COXICS OF APOLLONIUB. 





We have QV^ : OF. VT^p : PF [or CD« : OP"], 

whence QF: FT = (|> : PP').{CV : QV); [Prop. 14 and Cor.] 
therefore, by parallels, 

RW: WU=(p:PP^.(CP:PE). 

Thus, by Prop. 16, the parallelograms which are the doubles 
of the triangles RUW, CPE, CWF have the property proved in 
that proposition. It follows that the same is true of the 
triangles themselvea 

.-. A CFW^ A CPE^ A RUW. 



[It is interesting to observe the exsuct significance of this 
proposition, which is the foundation of ApoUonius' method of 
transformation of coordinates. The proposition amounts to 
this: If CP, CQ are fixed semidiameters and R a variable 
point, the area of the quadrilateral CFRU is constant for all 
positions of R on the conia Suppose now that CP, CQ are 
taken as axes of coordinates (CP being the axis of a). If we 
draw RX parallel to CQ to meet CP and R7 parallel to CP to 
meet CQ, the proposition asserts that (subject to the proper 
convention as to sign) 

A R7F+ O CXRT+ A iJZ IT -(const.). 

But, since RX, RY, RF, £[7 are in fixed directions, 

ARYFxRY*, 
ARYF^aa^] 
[DCXRYocRX.RY, 
CJCXRY^fixy; 
ARXUocRX\ 
or ARXUr^yy\ 



or 



or 



TRANSITION TO A NEW DIAMETER. 



35 



Henoe, if a?, y are the coordinates of R, 

aa? + fiay -{- yf '^^ A, 
which is the Cartesian equation referred to the centre as origin 
and any two diameters as axes.] 

Propofition 19. 

p. 45.] 

If the tangent at Q and the straight line ihrcfugh R parallel 
to it meet the secondary diameter in t, u reepectively, and Qv, Rw 
be parallel to the diameter PR, meeting the secondary diameter 
in V, to; if also Rw meet CQ inf then 

ACfw^ ARuw ACQL 






[Let PK be drawn parallel to Qt meeting the secondary 
diameter in IT, so that the triangle CPK is similar to the 
triangle vQt.] 

We have [Prop. 14, Cor.] 

QV: CV^ip : PD.{VT : QV) 
:^{p:PF).{Qv:vtl 



36 



THE CONWS OF APOLLONIUS. 



and the triangles Qv(7, Qpt are the halves of equiangular paral- 
lelograms on Ch (or QV) and Qv (or CV) respectively: also 
CPK is the triangle on CP similar to QpL 

Therefore [by Prop. 16], ACQv^ AQvt'-A CPK, 

and clearly A CQv^ A Qvf- ^ OQt; 

.'.ACPK^A CQL 

Again, the triangle Cfw is similar to the triangle CQv, and 
the triangle Rum to the triangle QvL Hierefore, for the ordinate 
RW, 

ACfw^ A Ruw^ A CPK^ A Ruw^ A CQL 



Propofitlon SO. 

[L 46.] 

In a parabola the straight line draum through any point 
paralM to the diameter bisects aU chords paraUd to the tangent 
ai the point. 

Let RR be any chord parallel 
to the tangent at Q and let it 
meet the diameter PVin U. Let 
QM drawn parallel to PF meet 
RR in M, and the straight lines 
drawn ordinate-wise through 22, 
R,PmF, F\ E respectively. 

We have then [Prop. 17] 

ARUW^CJ EW, 

and ARUW'^CJEW. 

Therefore, by subtraction, the figure R W W'R ^CJF'W. Take 
away the common part R W WFM, and we have 

A RMF^ A R'MF\ 

And R'F' is parallel to RF; 

.\RM = MR\ 




TRANSITION TO A NEW DIAMETER. 



37 



Propotition ai. 

[L 47, 48.] 

In a hyperbola^ an eUipae, or a circle, the line joining any 
point to the centre bUecte the chorda parallel to (he tangent at the 
point 




L^A 





If QT be the gi^en taDgent and RR' any parallel chord, let 
RW, R'W, PE be drawn ordinate-wise to PF, and let CQ 
meet them in F, F, E respectively. Further let CQ meet KR' 
in M, 

Then we have [by Prop. 18] 

ACFW^ACPE^ARUW, 
and ACrW'-ACPE^ARUVr. 



38 THE comes OF APOLLOmU& 

Thus (1), as the figure is drawn for the hyperbola, 
A RUW = quadrilateral EPWF, 
and A RUW = quadrilateral EPWF; 

.-. , by subtraction, the figure FWWF^ the figure RWWR 

Taking away the common part RWWFM, we obtain 

AFRM^AFRM. 
And, •/ FR, FR are parallel, 

RM =3 MR', 

(2) as the figure is drawn for the dUpse, 

ACPE-^ACFW^ARUW, 

ACPE'-ACFW^ARUW, 
.*. , by subtraction, 

ACFW^ACFW^ARUW'-ARUW, 

or ARUW-^ACFW^ARUW + ACF'W. 

Therefore the quadrilaterals CFRU, CF'RU are equal, and, 

taking away the common part, the triangle CUM, we have 

AFRM^AF'RM, 

and, as before, RM » MR. 

(3) if RR is a chord in the opposite branch of a hyperbola, 
and Q the point where QC produced meets the said opposite 
branch, CQ will bisect RR provided RR is parallel to the 
tangent at Q[. 

We have therefore to prove that the tangent at Q^ is parallel 
to the tangent at Q, and the proposition follows immediately*. 

* Eatodns BUppUes the proof of the paralleUsm of the two tangents m 
follows. 




We hATe CV . Cr= CP^ [Prop. 14], 

and CV'.cr^^CP^i 

,\cr.0T=zcv'.cr, 

and CK= CV\ v CQ^CQ^ [Prop. 10] ; 

/. CT^CT. 
Hence, from the a s CQT, CQ'T, it foUowa that QT, QT are parallel. 



TRANSITION TO A NEW DIAMETER. 39 

Propoiition QQ. 

[I. 49.] 

Let the tangent to a parabola at P, the extremity of the 
original diameter, meet the ta/ngent at any point Q in 0, and the 
parallel through Q to the diameter in E; and let RR he any 
chord parallel to the tangent at Q meeting FT in U and EQ 
produced in M ; then, ifp' be taken eiuA that 

0Q:QE=p':2QT, 

it is to be proved that 

RiP^p'.QM. 
In the figure of Prop. 20 draw the ordinate QV. 
Then we have, by hypothesis, 

0Q:QjE?=p':2TQ. 

Also Qi&=PF«rP. 

Therefore the triangles EOQ, POT are equal. 

Add to each the figure QOPWF\ 
:. the quadrilateral QTWF^ CJ{EW) = A RUW. [Prop. 17] 

Subtract the quadrilateral MUWF; 

/. CJQU^ARMF. 
and hence RM.MF^2QM.QT (1). 

But RM : MF^OQ : QE^p' : 2QT, 

or RiP:RM.MF^p\QM:2QM.QT. 

Therefore, from (1), RM* = p' . QM. 

Propoiitloii S3. 

[L 50.] 

I/in a hyperbola, an ellipse, or a circle, the tangents atP,Q 
meet in 0, and the tangent at P meet the line joining Q to the 
centre in E ; if also a length QL{^ p') be taken such thai 

0Q:QE^QL:2TQ 



40 THE CONICS OF APOLLONIU8. 

and erected perpendicular to QC; if/urther QfL be joined {tohere 

Osteon QC produced and CQ^CQf), and MK be drawn paraUd 

to QLto meet Q[L in K (where M is the point of concowree of 

CQ and RBf, a chord parallel to the tangent at Q): then it is 

to be proved that 

RIP^QM.MK. 

In the figures of Prop. 21 draw CHN parallel to QfL, meet- 
ing QZ in J? and MK in N, and let RW be an ordinate to PJP', 
meeting CQ in F. 

Then, since CQ « CQ', QH^HL. 

Also 0Q:QE:^QL:2QT 

« QH : QT; 

.'. RMiMF^QHiQT (A). 

Now 

ARUW^^^ACFW'-ACPE^ACFW-ACQT*; 
.'. in the figures as drawn 



(1) for the hyperbola, 
ASUW^QTWF, 
.-. , subtracting MUWF, 
we have 

ARMF^QTUM. 



(2) for the eUipee and drde, 

ARUW»ACQT-ACFW; 

:. A CQTsquadrilateralA UCF\ 

and, subtracting AMUC, we 
have 

ARMF^QTUM. 

.\ RM.MF^QMiQT^MU) (B). 



* It win be obterved thai ApoUomui hoe unamt the eqoeli^r oC the two 
triangke CPE, CQT, though it ie not untQ Vtop. 58 fUL 1] thel thie equality 
is aetoaUj proved. Bat Eutodiis giTes another pnxrf of Pn^ 18 wfaiofat he ei^ji, 
appears in some eqpies, and whieh begins b j proving theee two trisngiee to be 
equal by ezaetly the same method as is nsed in onr text of the later proot If 
then the alternative proof is gennine, we have an explanation of the assomption 
here. If not, we shoold be tempted to si^pose that ApoUonins quoted the 
property as an obvious UmiHmg ease of Prop. 18 [L 48, 44] when B ednddes 
with Q; hot this woold be ecmtrary to the osoal praetiee of Qreek geometers 
who, no doobt for the pnrpoee of seeming greater stringency, p re f e r red to give 
separate proofs of the limiting eases, thoo^ the paralWism of the respeetive 
proofs suggests that thqr were not unaware oC the eonnesion b et wee n the 
general theorem and its limiting eases. Conqpare Pn^ 81 [Y. 8], where 
Apcdlonins proves separately the ease where F eoincidee witti B, though we have 
for the sake of brevity only mentioned it as a 



TRANSITION TO A NEW DIAMETER. 41 

Now QTiMU^^CQ : CM^QHiMN, 

.'. QH -{-MN : QT + MU^QH : QT 
^RMiMF [fromiA)]; 
.'. QM(QH + MN) : QMiQT^-MU) = RiP : KM. MF; 

.'. [by (B)] RIP = QM(QE + MN) 

^QM.MK. 



The same is true for the opposite branch of the hyperbola 
The tangent at Q" is parallel to QT, and P'E' to PE. 

[Prop. 21, Note.] 

.-. (TOf : Qfir^OQ: QE^p' : 2QT^p' : iQT, 

whence the proposition foUowa 

It results from the propositions just proved that in Ck parabola 
all straight lines drawn parallel to the original diameter are 
diameters, and in the hyperbola and eUipse all straight lines 
drawn through the centre are diameters; also that the conies 
can each be referred indifferently to any diameter and the 
tangent at its extremity as axes. 



CONSTRUCTION OF CONICS FROM CERTAIN DATA. 

Propofition 34. (Problem.) 
[I. 52, 53.] 

Given a straight line in a fixed plane and terminating m a 
fiaed pointy and another straight line of a certain length, to find 
a parabola in the plane such that the first straight Une is a 
diameter, the second straight line is the corresponding parameter^ 
and the ordinates are inclined to the diameter at a given cMgle. 

First, let the given angle be a right angle, so that the given 
straight line is to be the aais. 

Let AB be the given straight line terminating at A, p^ the 
given length. 

Produce BA to C so that AC > v > ^^^ let £f be a mean 

proportional between AC and pa* (Thus pa : AC =^8* : AC*^ 

at 

and AC>lpat whence AC*>-^, or 2AC>8, so that it is 

possible to describe an isosceles triangle having two sides equal 
to AC and the third equal to S.) 

Let AOC be an isosceles triangle in a plane perpendicular 
to the given plane and such that AO^AC, OC « 8. 

Complete the parallelogram ACOE, and about AE as 
diameter, in a plane perpendicular to that of the triangle 
AOC, describe a circle, and let a cone be drawn with as 



p» 



8 




PROBLEMS. 



43 



apex and the said circle as base. Then the cone is a right 
cone because OE^AC^OA. 

Produce OE, OA to jff, K, and draw HK parallel to AE, 
and let the cone be cut by a plane through HK parallel to the 
base of the cone. This plane will produce a circular section, 
and will intersect the original plane in a line PP', cutting AB 
at right angles in N. 

Now Pa : AE = AE : AO, since AE^OC^S, AO^AC; 
.\pa:AO = AE*:AO* 

= AE*:AO.OE. 

Hence PAP' is a parabola in which pa is the parameter 
of the ordinates to AB. [Prop. 1] 

Secondly, let the given angle not be right. Let the line 
which is to be the diameter be PM, let p be the length of the 
parameter, and let MP be produced to ^ so that PF^^p. 
Make the angle FPT equal to the given angle and draw FT 
perpendicular to TP. Draw TN parallel to PM, and PN perpen- 
dicular to TN; bisect TN in A and draw LAE through A 
perpendicular to FP meeting PT in 0; and let 

NA.AL^PN\ 

Now with axis AN and parameter AL describe a para- 
bola, as in the first case. 

This will pass through P since PN* = LA . AN. Also PT 
will be a tangent to it since AT ^AN. And PM is parallel 
to AN. Therefore PM is a dia- 
meter of the parabola bisecting 
chords parallel to the tangent 
PT, which are therefore inclined to 
the diameter at the given angle. 

Again the triangles FTP, OEP 
are similar ; 

.\OP:PE^FP:PT, 

=p : 2PT, 

by hypothesis. 

Therefore p is the parameter of the parabola corresponding to 
the diameter PM. [Prop. 22] 




44 TUB comes of apolloniuk 

Propoiltlon 05. (Problem.) 
[I 54, 55, 69.] 

Qivm a riraigkt Ime AA' in a plane, and lUso anotAar 
tiraighi line o/a certain length; to find a hyperiola in the plane 
inch that the firri straight tine ia a diameter of it and the aeoond 
equal to the corre^Hmding parameter, while the ordinatea to Mtf 
diamrier make with it a given angle. 

First, let the given angle be a right angle. 

Let AA', Pa be the given strught lines, and let a circle be 
dtawn through ii, .^' in a plane perpendicular to the given 
plane and ancb that, if C be the middle point of AA ' and HF 
the diameter perpendicnlar to AA', 

BC-.GF-ifAA'-.p^ 

Then, if iX7 : GF=AA' : p» we should use the point F tar 
our oonsbvction, but, if not, suppose 

DC:CO = AA' :p. (CO being leas than CF). 
Draw QO parallel to AA', meeting the circle in 0. Join AO, 




A'O. DO. Draw AE parallel to DO meeting A'O produced 
in E. Let DO meet AA' in B. 



PROBLEMS. 45 

Then jlOEA^ /^A'OD^ /: AOD^ /iOAE; 

.'. OA = OE. 

Let a cone be described with for apex and for base the 
circle whose diameter is AE and whose plane is perpendicular 
to that of the circle AOD. The cone will therefore be right, 
since OA » OE. 

Prodace OE, OA to H, K and draw HK parallel to AE. 
Draw a plane through HK perpendicular to the plane of the 
circle AOD. This plane will be parallel to the base of the cone, 
and the resulting section will be a circle cutting the original 
plane in PP' at right angles to il'il produced. Let 00 meet 
HKiaM. 

Then, because NA meets HO produced beyond 0, the curve 
PAP' is a hyperbola. 

And AA'ipa^DCiCG 

^DBiBO 

^DB.BOiBO* 

^A'B.BA:BO\ 

But A'B iBO^OM: MH\ 

BAiBO^OMiMK^ 

.'. A'B.BA : BO*^OM^ : HM.MK. 

Hence AA':pa-=^ OM^ : HM.MK. 

Therefore pa is the parameter of the hyperbola PAP' cor- 
responding to the diameter A A'. [Prop. 2] 

Secondly, let the given angle not be a right angla Let 
PP', p be the given straight lines, CPT the given angle, and 
C the middle point of PP'. On CP describe a semicircle, and 
let N be such a point on it that, if NH is drawn parallel to PT 
to meet CP produced in H, 

NH^iCH.HP^piPP'*. 

* This oonstraetion Is Msnmed by Apollonios without any explanation ; hat 
we may infer that it was airiYed at l»y a method similar to that adopted for 



:} b, «« .H.^e. 



46 THE C0N108 OF AP0LL0NIU8. 

Join NC meeting PT in T, and take A on CN such that 
CA^^CT. CN. Join PN and produce it to JST so that 

PN^^AN.NK. 

Produce AC to il' so that AC » CA\ join A'K^ and draw 
EOAM through A parallel to PJV meeting CP, PT, A'K m 
E, 0, M respectively. 

With AA' as axis, and AM as the corresponding parameter, 
describe a hyperbola as in the first part of the proposition. 
This will pass through P because PN^ = AN.NK. 



a simiUur OMe in Prop. 53. In Caet the eolation given by Entodoi lepraaota 
Boffioiently cloaely ApoUonioB* probable prooedore. 




I 



If HN prodnoed be supposed to meet the corye again in N\ then 

N'H.HN=iCH.HP; 

.-. NH^ : CH.HP=:NH : N'H. 
Thus we have to draw HNN' at a given inclination to PC and so that 

N'H:NH:=PP':p. 
Take any straight line a/3 and divide it at y so that 

api^^PP' :p. 

Bisect 07 in d. Then draw from O, the centre of the semicircle, OR at ri^t 
angles to PT which is in the given direction, and let OR meet the dreomfBrtnce 
in R. Then RF drawn parallel to PT wiU be the tangent at R, SnppoM RF 
meets CP produced in F. Divide FR at S so that FS : SR==py : y^, and 
prodnce Fit to ;9' so that RS'=^RS, 

Join G5, G;9', meeting the semicircle in N, N\ and join N'N and prodaoe it 
to meet CF in H. Then NH is the straight line which it was required to 
find. 

The proof is obvious. 



PROBLEM& 



47 



Also Pr will be the tangent at P because CT.CN^ CA\ 
Therefore CP will be a diameter of the hyperbola bisecting 




chords parallel to PT and therefore inclined to the diameter at 
the given angle. 

Again we have 

p : iCP = NH^ : CH. HP, by construction, 

and 2CP:2PT^CH:NH 

^CH.HP'.NH.HP; 

.\p:iPT^NH^:Nn.HP 

^NHiHP 

s OP : PE, by similar triangles ; 

therefore p is the parameter corresponding to the diameter PP'. 

[Prop. 23] 

The opposite branch of the hyperbola with vertex A' can be 
described in the same way. 



Propoiltion 36. (Problem.) 

p. 60.] 

Qiven two straight lines bisecting one a/nother at any a/ngle, to 
describe two hyperbolas each with two branches such that the 
straight lines are conjugate diameters of both hyperbolas. 

Let PF, DU be the two straight lines bisecting each other 

at a 



48 THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 

From P draw PL perpendicular to PP' and of such a length 
that PF . PL s BU^ ; then, as in Prop. 25, describe a doable 
hyperbola with diameter PP and parameter PL and such that 
the ordinates in it to PP are parallel to DU. 

Then PP', DU are conjugate diameters of the hyperbola 
so constructed 




Again, draw DM perpendicular to DU of such a length that 
DM. DDf » PF^ ; and, with DU as diameter, and DM as the 
corresponding parameter, describe a double hyperbola such that 
the ordinates in it to DDf are parallel to PP'. 

Then DDt^ PP' are conjugate diameters to this hyperbola, 
and DDf is the transverse, while PF is the secondary dia- 
meter. 

The two hyperbolas so constructed are called ooAjiigate 
hyperbolas, and that last drawn is the hyperbola ccAjiigate to 
the first. 

Propoiltion 97. (Problem.) 
[L 66, 57, 58.] 

Gfven a diamder of an ellipse, the corresponding parameter, 
and the angle of inclination between the diameter and its ordi- 
nates : to find the ellipse. 

First, let the angle of inclination be a right angle^ and let 
the diameter be greater than its parameter. 



PROBLEMS. 



49 



Let AA' be the diameter and AL^ a straight line of length 
Pa perpendicular to it, the parameter. 




In a plane at right angles to the plane containing the 
diameter and parameter describe a segment of a circle on AA' 
as base. 

Take AB on AA' equal to AL, Draw AE, A'E to meet at 
E, the middle point of the segment. Draw DF parallel to A'E 
meeting AE in F, and OFN parallel to A A' meeting the 
circumference in 0. Join EO and produce it to meet A'A 
produced in T. Through any point H on OA produced draw 
HKMN parallel to OE meeting OA', AA', OF 'm K, M, N 
respectively. 

Now 

Z TOA = z OEA + ^ OAE = z AA'O + z: OA'E = Z AA'E 

^^EAA'^ZEOA', 

and HK is parallel to OE, 

whence z OiTiT = Z OKH, 



and 



OH^OK. 



H. C. 



4 



50 



THE CONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 



With as vertex, and as base the circle drawn with diameter 
HK and in a plane perpendicular to that of the triangle OHK, 
let a cone be described. This cone will be a right cone because 
OH^OK. 

Consider the section of this cone by the plane containing 
AA\ AL, This will be an ellipse. 

And Pa : AA' = AD : AA' 

^AFiAE 

-^TO :TE 

^TO^iTO.TE 

^TO*.TA.TA\ 
TOiTA^HNiNO, 
TO : TA' = NK : NO, by similar triangles, 
TA.TA'^HN.NK:IfO\ 
Pa'AA'^HN.NK:NO\ 

or Pa is the parameter of the ordinates to AA\ [Prop. 3] 

Secondly t if the angle of inclination of the ordinates be 
still a right angle, but the given diameter less than the para- 
meter, let them be BR, BM respectively. 

Let C be the middle point of BR, and through it draw AA\ 
perpendicular to BR and bisected at (7, such that 



Now 



and 



so that 



TO' 




M 



AA'*^BR.BM\ 
and draw AL, parallel to BR, such that 

BM:BR^AA':AL\ 

thus AA' > AL, 



PROBLEMS. 



51 



Now with AA' as diameter and AL as the corresponding 
parameter describe an ellipse in which the ordinates to AA' are 
perpendicular to it, as above. 

This will be the ellipse required, for 

(1) it passes through £, E because 

AL.AA'^BE xBM 
= BB^ : AA'^ 
^BC^:AC.CA\ 

(2) BMiBR^AG^iBC 

^AC'iBC.CR, 
so that BM is the parameter corresponding to BR. 

Thirdly, let the given angle not be a right angle but 




equal to the angle CPT, where C is the middle point of the 
given diameter PP' ; and let PL be the parameter correspond- 
ing to PP. 

Take a point N, on the semicircle which has CP for its 

diameter, such that NH drawn parallel to PT satisfies the 

relation 

NH* : CH.HP - PL : PP'* 



* This oonstrootion like that in Prop. 25 is assumed without explanation. 
If NH be supposed to meet the other semicirole on CP as diameter in N', the 



52 THE COmOS OF APOLLONIUa 

Join CN and produce it to meet PT in T. Take A^ on CT^ such 
that CT. CN = C^', and produce ACtoA' so that il(7« CA\ 
Join PJVand produce it to JT so that AN.NK^PIP. Join 
ii'JT. Draw EAM through A perpendicular to CA (and 
therefore parallel to NK) meeting CP produced in E, PT in 0, 
and A'K produced in M. 

Then with axis AA' and parameter AM describe an ellipse 
as in the first part of this proposition. This will be the ellipse 
required. 

For (1) it wiU pass through P / PIP^AN.NK. For 
a similar reason, it will pass through P' */ CP'^CP and 
CA' = CA. 

(2) PT will be the tangent at P '.' CT. CN^ CA\ 

(3) We have p :2CP^ NH' : CH.HP, 
and 2CP:2PT^CH:HN 

^CH.HP:NH.HP\ 

.'. ex aequali p : iPT^NH* : NH. HP 

^NHiHP 

= OP : PE. 

Therefore p is the parameter corresponding to PP'. 

[Prop. 28] 



problem here reduces to drawing NHN' in a given direction (parallel to PT) eo 

that N'H:NH:sPP':p» 

and the oonstmotion can he effected by the method shown in the note to Prop. 85 
mutatii mutandU, 



ASYMPTOTES. 

Propofition 98. 

pi. 1, 15, 17, 21.] 

(1) If PP' he a diameter of a hyperbola and p the corre- 
sponding parameter, and if on (he tangent at P there beset off 
on eadh side equal lengths PL, PL\ such that 

PU ^PL" ^ \p.PF [^Ciy\, 

then CL, CL' produced mill not meet the curve in any finite point 
and are accordingly defined as a«ymptotM. 

(2) The opposite branches have the same asymptotes. 

(3) Conjugate hyperbolae have their asymptotes common. 

(1) If possible, let CL meet the hyperbola in Q. Draw the 




ordinate QV, which will accordingly be parallel to LL\ 
Now p : PF^p.PP' : PP^ 

^PL^iCP^ 
« QV* : CV\ 



54 



THE comas OP apollonius. 



But p.PF^QV^iPV.P'V. 

/. PV.P'V^CV^ 

La CF* - CP^^CV^, which is absurd. 

Therefore CL does not meet the hyperbola in any finite 
pointy and the same is true for CL'. 

In other words, CL, CL' are asymptotes. 

(2) If the tangent at P" (on the opposite branch) be taken, 
and P'Jf, P'Jf' measured on it such that P'if' = P'Jf'* « Ci>», 
it follows in like manner that CM, CM' are asymptotes. 

Now MM\ LL' are parallel, PL - FM, and PCP is a 
straight line. Therefore LCM is a straight line. 

So also is LCM', and therefore the opposite branches have 
the same asymptotea 

(3) Let PP*, DU be conjugate diameters of two conjugate 




hyperbolaa Draw the tangents at P, P, D, U, Then [Prop. 
11 and Prop. 26] the tangents form a parallelogram, and the 
diagonals of it, LM, L'M', pass through the centre. 

Also PL^PL'^FM^FM'^CD. 

Therefore LM, L'M' are the asymptotes of the hyperbola in 
which PP' is a transverse diameter and DU its conjugate. 

Similarly DL^DM'^UL'^ UM^ CP, and LM, L'M' are 
the asymptotes of the hyperbola in which DU is a transverse 
diameter and PP' its conjugate, Le. the conjugate hyperbola. 

Therefore conjugate hyperbolas have their asymptotes 
common. 



ASTMFTOTES. 



55 



Propoiition 90. 

[n. 2.] 

No straight line through G within the angle between the 
asymptotes can itself be an asymptote. 




If possible, let CK be an asymptote. Draw from P the 
straight line PK parallel to CL and meeting CK in K, and 
through K draw RKQR parallel to LL\ the tangent at P. 

Then, since PL = PL', and RR, LV are parallel, RV^ RY, 
where V is the point of intersection of RR and CP. 

And, since PKRL is a parallelogram, PK^LR, PL = KR. 

Therefore QR > PL. Also RQ > PL' ; 

.-. RQ.QR>PL.PL', or Pr (1). 

RV : CV^ = Pr : CP'^p : PR, [Prop. 28] 
p:PP'^ QV^ : PV.P'V [Prop. 8] 

iJF* : CF« = QF« : CF« - CP« 

.-. PX» : CP« = RV - e^* : CP\ 
PV^RV^^QV^^RQ.QR', 
which is impossible, by (1) above. 

Therefore CK cannot be an asjrmptote. 



Again 



and 



thus 



whence 



56 



THB 00NI08 OF APOLLONIUa 



Propoiition 30. 

[IL 3.] 

If a straight line touch a hyperbola at P, it will meet 
the cuymptotee in two points L, L' ; LL' will be bisected at P, 
and Pi*«Jp.PP'[-CD«]. 

[This proposition is the converse of Prop. 28 (1) above.] 

For, if the tangent at P does not meet the asymptotes 
in the points L, L' described, take 
on the tangent lengths PK, PK' 
each equal to CD. 

Then CK^ CK' are asymptotes; 
which is impossible. 

Therefore the points K, K' must 
be identical with the points L, U 
on the asymptotes. 




Propoaition 31. (Problem.) 
[IL 4.] 

Given the asymptotes and a point P on a hyperbola, to find 
the curve. 

Let CL, CL' be the asymptotes, 
and P the point. Produce PC 
to P' so that CP^CP'. Draw 
PK parallel to CL' meeting CL 
in K, and let CL be made equal to 
twice CK. Join LP and produce 
it to L'. 

Take a length p such that 
LL'*^p.PP\ and with diameter PP' and parameter p 
describe a hyperbola such that the ordinates to PP' are 
parallel to LL'. [Prop. 25] 




ASYMPTOTES. 



57 



Propoiition 39. 

[11. 8, 10.] 

If Qq be any chord, it will, if produced both ways, meet 
the asymptotes in two points as R, r, and 

(1) QR, qr wiU be equai, 

(2) RQ.Qr^lp.PP'l^CD*]. 

Take V the middle point of Qq, and join CV meeting 
the cun'e in P. Then CV is a ^ 

diameter and the tangent at P 
is parallel to Qq. [Prop. 11] 

Also the tangent at P meets 
the asymptotes (in L, L'). 
Therefore Qq parallel to it also 
meets the asymptotes. 

Then (1), since Qq is parallel 
to LL\ and LP = PL', it follows that RV^Vr. 

But QV^Vq; 

therefore, subtracting, QR » qr. 

(2) We have 

piPP'^PL^iCP* 

^RV':Cr\ 
and p : PF^QV : CV'^CP'; [Prop. 8] 

.-. PL* : CP'^p : PP'-EF'-QF^ : CP* 

^RQ.QriCP'; 
thus RQ.Qr^PL* 

^\p.PP'^CD\ 
Similarly rq.qR^CD\ 




I 



68 



THE comes OF AP0IX0NIU8. 



Propodtion 33. 

[k 11. 16.] 

If Q>Q! <>'V on opporiU branehet, and QQ^ meet the luymp- 
totes in K, K', and if CP be the temidiameter paraUel toQQ^, then 

(1) KQ.QK' = CP\ 

(2) QK-mQ^K'. 

Draw the tangent at P meeting the asymptotes in L, L', and 




let the chord Qq parallel to LL' meet the asymptotes in R, r. 
Qq is therefore a double ordinate to CP. 

Then we have 

PL* : CP* = (PL : CP) .(PL': CP) 

= (RQ : KQ) . (Qr : QK') 

= RQ.Qr.KQ.QK'. 

But PL* = RQ.Qr; [Prop. 32] 

..KQ.QK'^CP*. 

Similarly K'Qf . QfK = CP*. 

(2) KQ.QK'^CP* = K'(^.Q'K; 

.: KQ . {KQ + KK') = K'Qf{K'Qf + KK'). 

whence it follows that KQ = K'Q'. 



ASYMPTOTES. 



59 



Propofition 34. 

[IL 12.] 

If Q, q he any two points on a hyperbola, and parallel 
straight lines QH, qh be drawn to meet one asymptote at any 
angle, and QK, qk (also parallel to one another) meet the other 
asymptote at any angle, then 

HQ.QK^hq.qk 




Let Qq meet the asymptotes in R, r. 
We have RQ.Qr^Rq.qr; 



But 



and 



r.RQ 
RQ 

:.HQ 



Rq — qr:Qr. 
Rq--HQ:hq, 
Qr^qkiQK; 
hq^qk'.QK, 



or 



HQ.QK^hq.qk. 



[Prop. 32] 



60 



THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 



Propodtioii 36. 
[IL 13.] 

If in the space between the asymptotes and the hyperbola a 
straight line be drawn parallel to one of the asymptotes^ it will 
meet the hyperbola in one point only. 

Let ^ be a point on one asymptote, and let EF be drawn 
parallel to the other. 

Then EF produced shall 
meet the curve in one point 
only. 

For, if possible, let it not 
meet the curve. 

Take Q, any point on the 
curve, and draw QH, QK e.ach 
parallel to one asymptote and 
meeting the other ; let a point 
F be taken on EF such that 

HQ.QK^CE.EF. 

Join CF and produce it to 
meet the curve in q ; and draw 
qh, qk respectively parallel to Qff, QK. 

Then hq.qk^^HQ.QK, [Prop. 84] 

and HQ.QK^ CE.EF, by hypothesis, 

.\hq.qk:=^CE.EF: 
which is impossible, '/ fiq> EF, and qk > CE. 

Therefore EF will meet the hyperbola in one point, as 12. 

Again, EF will not meet the hyperbola in any other point. 

For, if possible, let EF meet it in 22^ as well as jB, and let 
jBif, RM' be drawn parallel to QK. 

Then ER.BM^ER .RM': [Prop. 34] 

which is impossible, *.' ER > ER. 

Therefore EF does not meet the hyperbola in a second 
point R. 




ASYMPTOTES. 61 



PropoiiUon 36. 

[IL 14] 

The asymptotes and the hyperbola, as they pass on to infinity, 
approach continually nearer, and will come within a distance 
less than any aseiffnaJble length. 

Let S be the given length. 

Draw two parallel chords Qq, Q!^ meeting the asymptotes 
in i2, r and R, r\ Join Cq and produce it to meet Q'g' in F. 




Then /?' . j'iZ' = rg . qR, 

and €[B:>qR\ 

:. j'/ < qr, 

and hence, as successive chords are taken more and more distant 
from the centre, qr becomes smaller and smaller. 

Take now on rq a length rH less than 8, and draw HM 
parallel to the asymptote Cr. 

HM will then meet the curve [Prop. 35] in a point M, And, 
if MK be drawn parallel to Qj to meet Cr in K, 

MK^rH, 

whence MK < 8. 



62 



THE comes OF AFOLLONIUa 



PropofliUon 37. 

[IL 19.] 

Any tangent to the conjugate hyperbola wiU meet both 
branches of the original hyperbola and be bisected at the point 
of contact 

(1) Let a tangent be drawn to either branch of the conju- 
gate hyperbola at a point D. 




This tangent will then meet the asymptotes [Prop. 30], and 
will therefore meet both branches of the original hyperbola. 

(2) Let the tangent meet the asymptotes in Z, if and the 
original hyperbola in Q, Q[. 

Then [Prop. 30] DL = DM. 

Also [Prop. 33] LQ = MQ^ ; 

whence, by addition, DQ = DQ. 



ASTUPTOTES. 



PropoaiUon 38. 

pi 2a] 

If a diord Qq in OM hnmek of a hyperbola meet the a$ymp- 
totea in R,r and the conjugate hypetMa in Q', ^, then 

QQ.Qq'^lCD*. 




Let CD be the parallel semi-diameter. Then we have 
[Propa 32, 83] 

RQ.Qr^CD\ 

RQr.qr^CD*; 

.\2CD*^BQ.Qr + BjQr.Qrr 

"(RQ + RQyQr + RQf. 00^ 

== QQf (Qr + rf} 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAMETERS AND AXES. 

Propodtloii 39. 

[II. 20.] 

If Qhe any point on a hyperbola^ and CE he drawn from 
the centre parallel to the tangent at Q to meet the conjugate 
hyperbola in E^ then 

(1) the tangent at E wUl be parallel to CQ^ and 

(2) CQ, CE wiU be conjugate diameters. 

Let PP\ DD' be the conjugate diameters of reference, and 
let QF be the ordinate from Q to PP\ and EW the ordinate 




8 



from E to DD'. Let the tangent at Q meet PP', DD' in 
T, t respectively, let the tangent at E meet DD' in U, and let 
the tangent at D meet EU, CE in. 0, H respectively. 

Let p, p' be the parameters corresponding to PP\ DD' 
in the two hyperbolas, and we have 

(1) rP':p = p':DD\ 

['.' p. PP' = DD^, p'.DD'^ PP •] 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAHETEBS AND AXES. 65 

and PP':p^CV.VT'.QV\ 

p' iDD'^EW^iCW. WU. [Prop. 14] 

/. CV. VTiQV^^ EW : CW . WU. 
But, by similar triangles, 

VT'.QV^EW'.CW. 
Therefore, by division, 

CViQV^EW: WU. 
And in the triangles CFQ, EWU the angles at F, W 
are equal. 

Therefore the triangles are similar, and 

^QCV^^UEW. 
But Z VCE^ L CEW, since EW, GVare parallel. 
Therefore, by subtraction, /i QCE « z CEU. 
Hence EU is parallel to CQ, 
(2) Take a straight line 8 of such length that 

HEiEO^EU: 5, 
so that 8 is equal to half the parameter of the ordinates to the 
diameter EE' of the conjugate hyperbola. [Prop. 28] 

Also Ct.QV^ CD\ (since QF = Cv\ 

or Ct:QV^Ce:CD\ 

Now Ct : QV^tT : TQ-^ llitCT : L.CQT, 
and Ce : OD^^ AtCT : AODH^ AtCT : t^CEU 

[as in Prop. 28]. 

It follows that A CQT ^ ACEU. 

And /.CQT ^z CEU. 

.-. CQ.QT^CE.EU (A). 

But 8:EU»0E:EH 

^OQiQT. 
/. 8.CE:CE.EU^CQ*:CQ.QT. 
Hence, by (A), 8.CE^ CQ\ 

.-. 2S.^JF' = QQ'». 
where 28 is the parameter corresponding to EE\ 

And similarly it may be proved that EE'* is equal to the 
rectangle contained by QQ' and the corresponding parameter. 
Therefore QQ\ EE' are conjugate diameters. [Prop. 26] 
H. c. 5 



66 THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 

Propodtloii 40. 

[IL 37.] 

If Qf Q^ ore any points on opposite branches, and v the 
middle point of the chord QQ, then Cv is the *' secondary** 
diameter corresponding to the transverse diameter drawnparaUel 
toQQ'. 




Join Q'O and prodaoe it to meet the hyperbola in q. Join 
Qq, and draw the diameter PP' parallel to QQ\ 

Then we have 

CQ'^Cq, and Qv^Qv. 

Therefore Qq is parallel to Ov. 

Let the diameter PP' produced meet Qq in F. 

Now QV^Cv^ Vq, because CQ' = Cq. 

Therefore the ordinates to PP' are parallel to Qq, and 
therefore to Cv. 

Hence PP\ Ov are conjugate diametera [Prop. 6] 

Propodtloii 41. 

[IL 29, 30, 38.] 

If tfvo tangents TQ, TQf be drawn to a conic, and V be the 
middle point of the chord of contact QQ', then TV is a diameter. 

For, if not, let VE be a diameter, meeting TQ' in E. Join 
EQ meeting the curve in R, and draw the chord RR' parallel to 
QQ' meeting EV, EQ' respectively in K, H. 

Then, since RH is parallel to QQ', and QV^Q'V, 
RK^KH. 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAICETERS AND AXE& 



67 



Also, since BR' is a chord parallel to QQ' bisected by 
the diameter EV, RK = KR\ 

Therefore KR' ^KH: which is impossible. 





Therefore EV is not a diameter, and it may be proved 
in like manner that no other straight line through F is a 
diameter except TV, 

Conversely, the diameter of the conic drawn through T, the 
point of intersection of the tangents, mU bisect the chord of 
contact QQ\ 

[This is separately proved by Apollonius by means of 
an ensy reductio ad absurdum,'] 



Propodtloii 42. 
[II. W.] 

If tQ, tQ' be tangents to opposite branches of a hyperbola, 
and a chord RR' be drawn through t parallel to QQ', then the 
lines joining R, R' to v,the middle point of QQ\ will be tangents 
at R, R\ 




5—2 



68 



THE aONIOS OF APOLLONIUS. 



Join vL vtiB then the diameter conjugate to the transverse 
diameter drawn parallel to QQ^ ie. to PP\ 

But, since the tangent Qf; meets the secondary diameter 



in ty 



Cv.a^lp.PP'lr^CDI 



[Prop, 16] 



Therefore the relation between t^ and t \a reciprocal, and the 
tangents at i2, R' intersect in t*. 



Propofitloii 43. 

[11. 26, 41, 42.] 

In a cofiic, or a circle, or in conjugate hyperbolas, if two 
chords not passing through the centre intersect, they do not 
bisect each other. 




Let Qq, Rr, two chords not passing through the centre, 
meet in 0. Join CO, and draw the diameters Pp, P'p' re- 
spectively parallel to Qq, Rr. 

Then Qq, Rr shall not bisect one another. For, if possible, 
let each be bisected in 0. 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAMETERS AND AXES. 69 

Then, since Qq is bisected in and Pp is a diameter 
parallel to it, CO, Pp are conjugate diameters. 

Therefore the tangent at P is parallel to CO. 

Similarly it can be proved that the tangent at P' is 
parallel to CO. 

Therefore the tangents at P, P' are parallel: which is 
impossible, since PP' is not a diameter. 

Therefore Qq, Br do not bisect one another. 



Propositioii 44. (Problem.) 

[IL 44, 45.] 

To find a diaineter of a conic, and ike centre of a central 
conic. 

(1) Draw two parallel chords and join their middle points. 
The joining line will then be a diameter. 

(2) Draw any two diameters ; and these will meet in, and 
so determine, the centre. 



Propositioii 46. (Problem.) 

[IL 46, 47.] 

To find the axis of a parabola, and the aaee of a central 
conic. 

(1) In the case of the parabola, let PD be any diameter. 
Draw any chord QQ' perpendicular to PD, and 
let J\r be its middle point. Then AN drawn 
through N parallel to PD will be the axis. 

For, being parallel to PD, ANIba diameter, 
and, inasmuch as it bisects QQ' at right angles, 
it is the axis. 

And there is only one axis because there is 
only one diameter which bisects QQ'. 



d 



70 



THE CONIOS OF APOLLONIUS. 



(2) In the case of a central conic, take any point P on the 
conic, and with centre C and radios CP describe a circle 
cutting the conic in P, P\ Q', Q. 





Let PP', PQ be two common chords not passing through 
the centre, and let jY, if be their middle points respectively. 
Join CN, CM. 

Then CN, CM will both be axes because they are both 
diameters bisecting chords at right anglea They are also 
conjugate because each bisects chords parallel to the other. 



Propodtioii 46. 

pi. 48.] 

No cetitral conic has more than two aaea. 

If possible, let there be another axis CL. Through P' 
draw P'L perpendicular to (7Z, and produce P'L to meet the 





curve again in R. Join CT, CK 



TANGENTS, GONJUOATE DIAMETERS AND AXEa 71 

Then, since CX is an axis, P'L » LR ; therefore also 

CP^CP'^CR. 

Now in the case of the hyperbola it is clear that the circle 
PP' cannot meet the same branch of the hyperbola in any 
other points than P, P'. Therefore the assumption is absurd. 

In the ellipse draw RK, PH perpendicular to the (minor) 
axis which is parallel to PP'. 

Then, since it was proved that CP » CR, 

CP' = GR\ 

or CH* + HP*^CK' + KR\ 

.\CK^^CH*^nP*^KR^ (1). 

Now BE . KB' + CK^ ^ CB\ 

and BH.HB'-^CH^ = CB\ 

.'.CK'^CH'^BH.HB'-'BK.KB'. 

Hence HP' - KR' = BH . HB' - BK . KB\ from (1). 

But, since PJ7, RK are ordinates to BB\ 

PH* : BH. HB' = RK' : BK. KB\ 

and the difference between the antecedents has been proved 
equal to the difference between the consequents. 

.'.PH^^BH.HB', 

and RK^^BK.KB'. 

.'. P, R are points on a circle with diameter BH : which is 
absurd. 

Hence CL is not an axis. 



72 THE CONIOS OP AP0LL0NIU8. 



Propofitloii 47. (Problem.) 
[II. 49.] 

To draw a tangent to a parabola through any point on or 
outside the curve. 

(1) Let the point be P on the curve. Draw PN per- 
pendicular to the axis, and produce NA to 7 so that AT^ AN. 
Join PT. 




Then, since AT^ AN, PT is the tangent at P. [Prop. 12] 

In the particular case where P coincides with A, the 
vertex, the perpendicular to the axis through A is the tangent. 

(2) Let the given point be any external point 0. Draw 
the diameter OBV meeting the curve at j5, and make BV 
equal to OB. Then draw through V the straight line VP 
parallel to the tangent at B [drawn as in (1)] meeting the 
curve in P. Join OP. 

OP is the tangent required, because PV^ being parallel to 
the tangent at j5, is an ordinate to jBF, and OB » BV. 

[Prop. 12] 

[This construction obviously gives the two tangents through 

0.] 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAMETERS AND AXES. 73 

Propodtloii 48. (Problem.) 

[11. 49.] 

To draw a tangfint to a hyperbola through any point on 
or outside the curve. 

There are here four cases. 

Case I. Let the point be Q on the curve. 




Draw QN perpendicular to the axis A A' produced, and 
take on A A' a point T such that A'T : AT ^ A'N : AN. 
Join TQ. 

Then TQ is the tangent at Q. [Prop. 13] 

In the particular case where Q coincides with A or A' the 
perpendicular to the axis at that point is the tangent. 

Case II. Let the point be any point within the angle 
contained by the asymptotes. 

Join CO and produce it both ways to meet the hyperbola in 
P, P'. Take a point V on CP produced such that 

P'F:PF=OP':OP, 

and through V draw VQ parallel to the tangent at P [drawn 
as in Case L] meeting the curve in Q, Join OQ. 

Then, since QF is parallel to the tangent at P, QF is an 
ordinate to the diameter P'P, and moreover 

P'ViPV^OP'iOP. 

Therefore OQ is the tangent at Q. [Prop. 13] 

[This construction obviously gives the two tangents through 
0.] 



74 



THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 



Case III. Let the point be on one of the asjnnptotes. 
Bwect CO at if, and through H draw HP parallel to the other 




asymptote meeting the curve in P. Join OP and produce it to 
meet the other asymptote in L. 

Then, by parallels^ 

OP.PL^OHiHC, 

whence OP = PL. 

Therefore OL touches the hyperbola at P. [Props. 28, 30] 

Case IV. Let the point lie within one of the exterior 
angles made by the asymptote& 




Join CO. Take any chord Qq parallel to CO, and let V be 
its middle point. Draw through V the diameter PP\ Then 
PP' is the diameter conjugate to GO. Now take on OC 
produced a point w such that CO.Cw^lp, PP* [= CD^, and 
draw through w the straight line wR parallel to PP' meeting 
the curve in B. Join OR, Then, since Rw is parallel to CP 
and Cw conjugate to it, while CO.Cw^ CD*, OR is the tangent 
at jB. [Prop. 16] 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAMETEBS AND AXE& 75 



Proposition 49. (Problem.) 

[IL 49.] 

To draw a tangent to an eUtpse through any point on or 
outside the curve. 

There are here two cases^ (1) where the point is on the 
curve, and (2) where it is outside the curve; and the con- 




structions correspond, mutatis mutandis, with Cases I. and IL 
of the hjrperbola just given, depending as before on Prop. 13. 

When the point is external to the ellipse, the construction 
gives, as before, the two tangents through the point 



Proposition 50. (Problem.) 

[II. 50.] 

To draw a tangent to a given conic making with the axis an 
angle equal to a given acute angle, 

L Let the conic be a parabola, and let DEF be the given 
acute angle. Draw DF perpendicular to EF, bisect EF at H, 
and join DH. 

Now let AN be the axis of the parabola, and make the 
angle NAP equal to the angle DHF. Let AP meet the curve 
in P. Draw PN perpendicular to AN. Produce NA to 7 so 
that AN^AT, and join PT. 

Then PT is a tangent, and we have to prove that 

Z,PTN^^,DEF. 



76 



THE OOmaS OF APOLLONIUa 



Since 



or 



zDHF 
HFiFD. 
. 2HF:FD 

jEFiFD- 



AN : NP. 
2AN : NP, 
TN : NP. 
Z DBF. 





II. Let the conic be a central conic. 

Then, for the hyperbola, it is a necessary condition of the 
possibility of the solution that the given angle DEF must be 





greater than the angle between the axis and an asymptote, 
or half that between the asymptotes. If DEF be the given 
angle and DF be at right angles to EF, let iT be so taken 
on DF that ZiHEF^zACZ, or half the angle between 
the asymptote& Let AZ be the tangent at A meeting an 
asymptote in Z. 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAMETERS AND AXES. 77 

We have then CA^ : AP (or CA^ : CB') = EF* : FH*. 

.'.CA^:CB^>EF^:FD\ 

Take a point K on FE produced such that 

CA^:CB^^KF,FE:FD\ 

Thus KF^ : FD^ > CA^ : AP. 

Therefore, if DK be joined, the angle DKF is less than the 
angle ACZ. Hence, if the angle ACP be made equal to the 
angle DKF, CP must meet the hjrperbola in some point P. 

In the case of the ellipse K has to be taken on EF produced 
so that CA*:CB*^KF.FE:FD\ and fix)m this point the 
constructions are similar for both the central conies, the angle 
ACP being made equal to the angle DKF in each case. 

Draw now PN perpendicular to the axis, and draw the 
tangent PT. [Propa 48, 49] 

Then PIPiCIf.NT^ CB^ : CA* [Prop. 14] 

^FD^iKF.FE, fix)m above; 
and, by similar triangles, 

Cir:Pir^KF*:FD\ 

.-. CN^ : CN.NT^ KF* : KF.FE, 

or CNiNT^KFiFE. 

And PNiCN^DF.KF. 

.'.PNiNT^DFiFE. 

Hence z PTN = z DEF. 



Propotltlon 61. 

\U. 52.] 

In an ellipse, if the tangent at any paint P meet the major 
axis in T, the angle CPT is not greater than the angle ABA' 
{where B is one extremity of the minor axis). 

Taking P in the quadrant AB, join PC. 

Then PC is either parallel to BA' or not parallel to it. 



78 



THE 00N1C8 OF APOLLOKIUS. 



First, let PC be parallel to BA'. Then, by parallels, 
CP bisects AB. Therefore the 
tangent at P is parallel to AB, 
and zCPr= ^A'BA. 

Secofidly, suppose that PC 
is not parallel to BA\ and we 
have in that case, drawing PN 
perpendicular to the axis, 

/,PCN^ ^BA'C, or /^BAC. 





whence 



[Prop. 14] 



/. PN* : CN^ ^ BC* : AC\ 
PN* : CN*:I^PN* : CN.NT. 

.'. CNJ^2fT. 

Let FDE be a segment in a circle containing an angle FDE 
equal to the angle ABA', and let 
DO be the diameter of the circle 
bisecting FE at right angles in /. 
Divide FE in Jf so that 

EMiMF^CNiNT, 

and draw through M the chord 
HE at right angles to EF. From 
0, the centre of the circle, draw OL 
perpendicular to HK, and join 
EH, HF. 

The triangles DFI, BAC em 
then similar, and 




Now 



FP:ID*^CA*:CB\ 
OD : OI>LH:LM, since OI^LM. 
.-. OD:DI<LH:HM 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAMETERS AND AXES. 79 

and, doubling the antecedents, 

DQ:DI<nK:HM, 

whence 01 :ID< KM : MH. 

But GI : ID^FP : TD^^CA* : CB* 

^CN.NTiPir. 

.'. CN.NT:Pir<KM:MH 

<KM.MH:MH^ 

<EM.MF:MH*. 

Let CN.NT'.PN^^EM.MF:MR\ 

where R is some point on HK or HK produced. 

It follows that MR > MH, and R lies on KH produced. 
Join ER, RF. 

Now CN. NTiEM.MF^PIT: RM\ 

and CN^ : EM^ = CN . NT : EM.MF 

(since CN : NT^EM : MF). 

.'. CNiEM^PNiRM. 

Therefore the triangles CPN, ERM are similar. 

In like manner the triangles PTN, EFM are similar. 

Therefore the triangles CPT, ERF are similar, 

and ZCPT:^ ^ERF; 

whence it follows that 

Z CPT is less than Z EHF, or Z ABA'. 

Therefore, whether CP is parallel to BA' or not, the Z CPT 
is not greater than the Z ABA'. 

Proposition 63. (Problem.) 
[n. 51, 63.] 

To draw a tangent to any given conic making a given angle 
with the diameter through the point of contact 

I. In the case of the parabola the given angle must be 
an acute angle, and, since any diameter is parallel to the axis, 
the problem reduces itself to Prop. 50 (1) above. 



80 



THE OOmOS OF APOLLONIXJS. 



II. In the case of a central conic, the angle CPT must be 
acute for the hyperbola^ and for the ellipse it must not 
be less than a right angle, nor greater than the angle ABA\ as 
proved in Prop. 51. 

Suppose to be the given angle, and take first the particu- 
lar case for the ellipse in which the angle is equal to the 
angle ABA', In this case we have simply, as in Prop. 51, to 
draw CP parallel to BA' (or AB) and to draw through P a 
parallel to the chord AB (or A'B). 

Next suppose (9 to be any acute angle for the hyperbola, 
and for the ellipse any obtuse angle less than ABA'\ and 
suppose the problem solved, the angle CPT being equal to 0. 






4- 



-i 




i 
y^ — ** 


1^ 


9 

^ 


I o 




M ^ 
R 

J 





4- 



Y 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAMETERS AND AXES. 81 

Imagine a segment of a circle taken containing an angle 
(JSDF) equal to the angle 0, Then, if a point D on the 
circumference of the segment could be found such that, if DM be 
the perpendicular on the base EF, the ratio EM.MF : DJP is 
equal to the ratio CA* : CB\ i.e. to the ratio CN. NT : PJ^, we 
should have 

/iCPT^ Z^= zEDF, 

and CN.NT : PIP ^ EM.MF : DiP, 

and it would follow that triangles PCN, PTN are respectively 
similar to DEM, DFM\ Thus the angle DEM would be 
equal to the angle PCN. 

The construction would then be as follows : 

Draw CP so that the angle PCN is equal to the angle 
DEM, and draw the tangent at P meeting the axis AA' in T. 
Also let PN be perpendicular to the axis AA'. 

Then CN.NT : PN^^CA^ : CB*^ EM.MF : DM\ 

and the triangles PCN, DEM are similar, whence it follows 
that the triangles PTN, DFM are similar, and therefore also 
the triangles CPT, EDF*, 

.'. /:CPT= ^EDF^^e. 

It only remains to be proved for the hyperbola that, if 
the angle PCN be made equal to the angle DEM, CP must 
necessarily meet the curve, i.e. that the angle DEM is less 
than half the angle between the asymptotes. If AZ is per- 
pendicular to the axis and meets an asymptote in Z, we have 

EM.MF : DM^^CA* : CB^ = CA^ : AZ*, 

:. EM* : DM* > CA* : AZ*, 
and the angle DEM is less than the angle ZCA. 

We have now shown that the construction reduces itself 
to finding the point D on the segment of the circle, such that 

EM.MF: DM*^CA* : CB*. 

* These oonclnflions are taken for granted by ApoUonios, bnt they are easily 
proved. 

H. C. () 



82 THE OOmCS OF APOLLONIUS. 

This is effected as follows : 

Take lengths a/9, fi*i in one straight line such that 

fiy being measured towards a for the hyperbola and away 
from a for the eUipae ; and let 07 be bisected in & 

Draw 01 from 0, the centre of the circle, perpendicular to 
EF; and on 01 or 01 produced take a point H such that 

OH:HI^Sy:y0, 

(the points 0, H, I occupying positions relative to one another 
corresponding to the relative positions of B, y, fi). 

Draw HD parallel to EF to meet the segment in D. Let 
DK be the chord through D at right angles to EF and meeting 
it in Jf. 

Draw OR bisecting DK at right angles. 

Then RD : DM^ OH : Hl^Sy.yfi. 

Therefore, doubling the two antecedents, 

KD:DM^ay:yfi\ 

so that KM : DM^afi : Py. 

Thus 

KM.MD : DM*^EM.MF:DM*^a0 : fiy^CA* : Off. 
Therefore the required point D is found 

In the particular case of the hyperbola where CA* = Off, i.e. 
for the rectangular h3rperbola, we have EM. MF^DM*, or DM 
is the tangent to the circle at D, 



Note. ApoUonius proves incidentally that, in the second 
figure applying to the case of the ellipse, H falls between / and 
the middle point (L) of the segment as follows : 

/iFLI^^zCPT, which is less than ^zABA': 

.-. Z FLI is less than Z ABC, 



TANGENTS, CONJUGATE DIAMETERS AND AXEa 83 

whence CA^ : Cff > FP : /Z« 

>L'I:IL. 
It follows that a0:l3y>L'I: IL, 

so that 0E7 : 7/9 > L'L : IL, 

and, halving the antecedents, 

Sy:y0>OL:LI, 
so that B0:l3y>OI:IL. 

Hence, if £r be such a point that 

IE is less than IL. 



6—2 



EXTENSIONS OF PROPOSITIONS 17—19. 

Proposition 63. 

PIL 1, 4, 13.] 

(1) P, Q being any two paints an a conic, if the ta/ngent aJt 
P a/nd the diameter through Q meet in E, and the tangent aJt Q 
and the diameter through P in T, and if the tangents intersect ai 
0,then AOPT^AOQE. 

(2) IfP be any paint on a hyperbola and Q any paint on 
the conjugate hyperbola, and if T,E have the same significance 
as before, then ACPE^ACQT. 

(1) Let QV be the ordinate from Q to the diameter 
through P. 




Then for the parabola we have 

TP^PV, [Prop. 12] 

so that TV^2PV, 

and CJEV^AQTV. 



EXTENSIONS OF PBOPOSITIONS 17 — 19. 

Sabtracting the common area OP VQ, 

AOQE^AOPT. 
For the central conic we have 

(7F,0r=CP», 



85 




or CV iCT^Cr^iCP^; 

.\ ACQV : ACQT ^ ACQV : ACPE ; 
.\ ACQT^ACPE. 

Hence the sums or differences of the area OTCE and each 

triangle are equal, or 

AOPT^AOQE. 

(2) In the conjugate hyperbolae draw CD parallel to the 




86 



THE OONICS OF APOLLONIUH. 



tangent at P to meet the conjugate hyperbola in D, and draw 
QF also parallel to PE meeting CP in V. Then OP, CD are 
conjugate diameters of both hyperbolas, and QV is drawn 
ordinate-wise to CP. 

Therefore [Prop. 15] 

CV.CT^CP', 

or CPiCT^CViCP 

^CQiCE; 

.'. CP.CE^OQ.CT. 
And the angles PCS, QCT are supplementary ; 

/. ACQT^ACPE. 

Propoiitlon 64. 
[ILL 2, 6.] 

If we keep ths notation of the last proposition, and if R be 





EXTENSIONS OF PROPOSITIONS 17 — 19. 87 

any other point on the conic, let RU be drawn parallel to QT to 
meet the diameter through P in U, and let a parallel through R 
to the tangent at P meet QT and the diam^eters through Q, P %n 
H, F, W respectively. Then 

A HQF = quadrilateral HTUR 

Let RU meet the diameter through Q ia M. Then, as in 
Props. 22, 23, we have 

A RMF^ quadrilateral QTUM ; 

.'., adding (or subtracting) the area HM, 

i^HQF^ quadrilateral HTUR. 



Proposition 55. 

[III. 3, 7, 9, 10.] 

// we keep the same notation as in the last proposition and 
take two points R\ R on the curve with points H\ F\ etc, corre- 
sponding to H, F, etc. and if, further, RU, R'W intersect in I 
and RU', RW in J, then the quadrilaterals F'IRF, lUU'R' 
are equal, as also the quadrilaterals FJR'F', JU'UR. 

[N.B. It will be seen that in some 
cases (according to the positions of R, R ') 
the quadrilaterals take a form like that 
in the margin, in which case F'IRF must 
be taken as meaning the difference 
between the triangles F'MI, RMF.] 

L We have in figs. 1, 2, 3 

AHFQ = quadrilateral HTUR, [Prop. 54] 

AH'F'Q = quadrilateral H'TU'R', 
.'. F'H'HF^ H'TU'R' - HTUR 
= IUU'R' + {IH)', 
whence, adding or subtracting IH, 

FIRF=IUU'R' (1), 




THE OONICa OP AfOLLONIUS. 



and, adding (IJ) to both, 

FJR'F' -JU'UR.. 




n. In figs. 4, 5, 6 we have [Props. 18, 53] 

AR'U'W'~ACF'W'-ACQT, 
a that A CQr= quadrilateral CU'R'F', 



EZTBN8I0KS OF PBOFOSITIONS 17 — 19. 

ding the quadrilateral GF'H'T, we have 

£^H'F'Q = quadrilateral S'TU'R'. 



89 




ng.6. 

Similai-ly AEFQ^^HTUR; 
and we deduce, as before, 

FIRF^IUU'R' (1). 

Thus e.g. in fig. 4, 

AH'FQ' - AHFQ = H'TV'R' - HTUR ; 

.'. F'H'HF= {R'H) - (RW), 

and, subtracting each from (IH), 

F'IRF='IUU'R'. 
In fig. 6, 

F'H'HF^H'TU'R' - AHTW+ ARUW, 




Fig. 6. 



90 THK OOmOS OF APOLLONIUa 

and, adding (IH) to each side, 

riRF = H'TU'R' + H'TUI 

^lUU'R (1). 

Then, subtracting (AT) from each side in fig. 4, and sub- 
tracting each side from (7J) in figs. 5, 6, we obtain 

FJR'F^JU'UR (2), 

(the quadrilaterals in fig. 6 being the differences between the 
triangles FJM\ F'R'M' and between the triangles JU'W.RUW 
respectively). 

lU. The same properties are proved in exactly the same 
manner in the case where P, Q are on opposite branches, and 
the quadrilaterals take the same form as in fig. 6 above. 

Cor. In the particular case of this proposition where R' 
coincides with P the results reduce to 

EIRF^l^PUI, 

PJRU^PJFE. 



Propoiition 56. 

pii. a] 

If PP\ QQ' he two diameters and the tangents at P, P', 
Q, Q' he drawn, the fai'mer two meeting QQ' in E, E' and the 
latter two meeting PP' in T, T\ amd if the parallel through P' 
to the tangent at Q meets the tangent at P in K while the parallel 
through Q' to the tangent at P meets the tangent at Q in K\ then 
the quadrilaterals (EP'\ {TQ') are equal, as also the quadri- 
laterals (JE'K), (TKy 

Since the triangles CQT, CPE are equal [Prop. 53] and 
have a common vertical angle, 

CQ.CT^CP.CE', 
.\CQ:CE^CP:CT, 



EXTENSIONS OF PROPOSITIONS 17 — 10. 91 

whence QQ' : EQ - PP' : TP, 

and the same proportion is true for the squares ; 

And the consequents are equal ; 




/. AQg'J5r'= APP'if, 

and, subtracting the equal triangles OQT, CPE, we obtain 

(EP')^(TQ') (1). 

Adding the equal triangles CP'E\ CQ'T respectively, we 
have 

(E'K)^(rK') (2). 

Proposition 57. 

[in. 5, 11, 12, 14.] 

(Application to the case where the ordinates through R, R\ 
the points used in the last two propositions, are drawn to a 
secondary diameter.) 

(1) Let Ov be the secondary diameter to which the oixii- 
nates are to be drawn. Let the tangent at Q meet it in t, and 
let the ordinate Rw meet Q^ in A and CQ in /. Also let Ru, 
parallel to Qt, meet Cv in lu 

Then [Prop. 19] 

ARutv- ACfw^ ACQt (A) 



92 



THE OOmOS OF APOUX>NIU& 



and, subtractiiig the quadrilateral OwhQ, 

£iRuw - AhQf^ AMto ; 
/. A&Q/*a quadrilateral kkiR, 




(2) Let Rii/ be another ordinate, and h', vf &c. points 
corresponding to &, tc;, &o. Also let Bu, Rn/ meet in t and Rw^ 
Ru' in 7. 

Then, from above, 

t^KQf^Ktu'R, 

and AhQ/^htuR. 

Therefore, subtracting, 

fh'hf^iuu'R^ihi) 
and, adding {hi), 

fiRf^iuu'R (1). 

If we add {if) to each, we have 

fjRf^ju'uR (2). 

[This is obviously the case where P is on the conjugate 
hyperbola, and we deduce from (A) above, by adding the area, 
CwRM to each of the triangles Ruw, CJw, 

ACuM'- AR/M^ ACQt, 

a property of which Apollonius gives a separate proo£] 



EXTENSIONS OF PROPOSITIONS 17 — 19. 93 



Propodtion 58. 

[III. 15.] 

In the case where P, Q are on the originai hyperbola and B 
on the conjugate hyperbola, the same properties as those formu- 
lated in Propositions 55, 67 stiU hold, viz. 

ARMF^ ACMU^ ACQT, 

and FIRF^IUJTR. 




Let UU' be the diameter of the conjugate hyperbola 
parallel to RU, and let QT be drawn; and fix>m U draw DO 
parallel to Pi? to meet CQ in 0. Then Uiy' is the diameter 
conjugate to CQ. 

Let p' be the parameter in the conjugate hyperbola corre- 
sponding to the transverse diameter Uiy, and let p be the 
parameter corresponding to the transverse diameter (^ in the 
original hyperbola, so that 

|.(7g=CZy. and ^.CU^Cif. 

Now we have [Prop. 23] 

OQxQE^p:lQT:^%iQT\ 



94 THE OONtCS OP AI>0UX>Nn7S. 

= Ciy* : CQ. QT. 
Hence LfC .GO^CQ.QT, 

or AjyCO= ACQT. (1). 

Again, CM.MU^CQ.QT 



= (<?Q:|).(/»:2QD 



= {p':iyiy').{OQ:QE) 

= {p':iyiy').{RM.MF) (2). 

Therefore the triangles CMU, BMF, UCQ, being respec- 
tively half of equiangular parallelograms on CM (or Bn), 
RM (or Cv), CJy, the last two of which are similar while the 
sides of the first two are connected by the relation (2), have the 
property of Prop. 16. 

.-. ARMF- ACMU= AJyCO^ACQT. (8). 

If J3' be another point on the conjugate hyperbola, we have, 
by subtraction, 

RJFF - RMM'J = MUV'M', or RJFF - RUU'J. 

And, adding (/J), 

F'lRF^IUU'K (4) 



RECTANGLES UNDER SEGMENTS OF 
INTERSECTING CHORDS. 



Propoaition 50. 

[in. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.] 

Oaie X. If OP, OQ be two tangents to any conic and Br, 
Rr' two chords parcMel to them respectively and intersecting in 
J, an internal or external point, then 

OP'.Oq^'' RJ. Jr : RJ, Jr'. 

(a) Let the construction and figures be the same as in 
Prop. 66. 

We have then 

RJ.Jr^RW*~JW*, 

and RW*:JW~ARUW:£^JU'W; 

.-. RW~JW.RW~JU'UR'. ARUW. 
But RW* : OP* = ARUW: AOPT; 

.-, RJ.Jr.OP^^JU'UR.AOPT (1). 

Again RJ.Jr^^ R'M" - JiT 

and RM" : JiT = ARFM' : AJFiT, 

or R'M^ ~ J If* : RiT - FJRF' : A RFM'. 

But Rif : 0^ - ARFM' : A OQB; 

.: RJ.Jf': Oif^FJRF: AOQB (2X 



96 THE CONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 

Comparing (1) and (2), we have 

JU'UR^FJRF, by Prop. 66, 
and AOPT^ AOQE\ by Prop. 63. 

Thus BJ.Jr : OP* = RJ.Jf^ : 0(f, 

or OP" :0(^^ BJ.Jr iRJ.Jf^. 

(6) If we had taken the chords i2V/, Rr^ parallel respec- 
tively to OP, OQ and intersecting in /, an internal or external 
point, we should have established in the same manner that 

OP^ : OQ^ = RI. It; : RI. Ir,. 

Hence the proposition is completely demonstrated. 

[Cor. If /, or J, which may be any internal or external 
point be assumed (as a particular case) to be the centre, we 
have the proposition that the rectangles under the segments of 
intersecting chords in fixed directions are as the squares of the 
parallel semi-diameters.] 

Case IX. If P be a point on the conjugate hyperbola and 
the tangent at Q meet CP int; if further q^ be drawn through 
t parallel to the tangent at P, and Rr, Rr^ be two chorda parallel 
respectively to the ta/ngente at Q, P, and intersecting at i, then 

ti^'.Uf^Ri.iriRi.ir'. 
Using the figure of Prop. 67, we have 

Ri.ir^Mi^'-MR, 
and Mi?:MR^ AMfi : AMfR 

Hence Ut.tr : MR^fiRf: AMfR. 

Therefore, if QC, q^ (both produced) meet in Z, 

Ri.iritqt^fiRf: AQtL (1). 

Similarly, Ri.it^ : Rv/^^iuu'R: ARuW: 

.-. Ri.if^it^^imfRiAtqK (2), 

where qK is parallel to Qt and meets Ct produced in K. 



SBCTANGLES UNDKR SKQMEMTS OF INTEBSECTTHG CHORDS. 97 



But, comparing (1) aad (2), we have 

f'iRf^iuu'R, 
and h.tqK =: ACLt+ ACQt = AQtL. 

or t<?itq' = Ri.ir:Ri.it^. 



[Prop. 67] 
[Prop. 19] 



Oaie nz. If PP" b« a diameter and Rr, Rr^ he chorda 
parcUlel respectivdy to the tangent at P a/nd the diameter PP" 
amd intersecting in I, iheii 

RI.Ir.R'I.If^^p'.PF. 





[Prop. 8] 



If RW, RW are ordinates to PR, 

p.PR^RW^.CW'CR 
^RW'*:CW--CP' 
=>RW*" RW* : CW - CW* 
^RI.Ir.RI.Ir'. 

Case ZV. If OP, OQ be tangents to a hyperbola and Rr, 
Rt' be two chords of the conjugate hyperbola parallel respectively 
to OQ, OP, and meeting in I, then 

OQ^:OP*'^RI.Ir:RI.Ir^. 

Using the figure of Prop. 58, we have 
OQ*i AOQE^RM*: ARMF 

= MP : AMir 
^Rl.Ir: ARMF- AMIF' 
^RI.Ir-.F'IRF, 
H. c. 7 



98 



THE comes OF AFOLLONIUa 



and, in the same way, 

OF* : A OPT ^Rl.Ir^: ARWW - AIUW' 

= RI.It^:IUU'R; 
whence, by Props. 53 and 58, as before, 

OQ^.RI.Ir^OP'.RI.lT^, 
or OQ* : OF*^RI.Ir : Rl.Ir^. 



Propoiitton 60. 

[m. 24, 25. 26.] 

If Rr, Rr' he chorda of conjugate hyperbola* meeting in 
and paralld respectively to conjugate diameters PR, DU, then 

RO. Or + ^. ii'0. 0/ = 2aP* 



[ 



RO.Or . R O.Off 
^ CP* - Clf 



-]• 




Let Rr, Rr' meet the asymptotes in K,k; K', V, and CD, 
CP in w, W respectively. Draw LPL', the tangent at P, 
meeting the asjrmptotes in L, L', so that PL=sPL'. 

Then LP.PL'='CIf, 

and LP. PL' .CP*'-CI/: CP'. 

Now LP.CP^ K'O : OK, 

PL'.CP = OV.Ok; 

.'. Clf.CP'^K'O.OW.KO.Ok. 



RECTANGLES UNDER SEGMENTS OF INTERSECTING CHORDS. 99 

[From this point ApoIIonius distingoishes five cases: (1) 
where is in the angle LCL', (2) where is on one of the 
asymptotes, (3) where is in the angle LCk or its opposite, (4) 
where is within one of the branches of the original hyperbola, 
(5) where lies within one of the branches of the conjugate 
hyperbola. The proof is similar in all these cases, and it will 
be so£Bcient to take case (1), that represented in the accom- 
panying figure.] 

We have therefore 

= K'O.OV + K'R.RK .KO.Ok + CI* 

= K'W'*-OW + IlfW'*-K'W'*:Ov^-Kv^+CF' 

:^RW-OW:Rvf-Kv^-Rv^+Ov^ + CI* 

^RO.Or^iRK.Kr + CF'-BO.Or 

= RO . Ot^ : iCP' - RO . Or (since Kr=^Rk), 

whence ie0.0r + ^.ie'0.0r'»2CP», 

RO.Or , RO.Or^ _a 
or ^p, + ^2)» "•*• 

\The following proof serves for all the cases : we have 
RJT-CI^.CW^CDI'.CI* 
and Ovf.Rvf-CP'^Oiy-.CP'; 

.-. RW'*-Cv^-CI/:CP'-iRv^-CW'^''Ciy:CF*, 
Bothat ±RO.(y-CD':CF'±RO.Or^CIJ^'.CI*, 
whence ± JTO . 0/ : 2CP' ± iJO . Or = Oi)» : OP* 

jrO . 0/ . JJO . Or », 
or 0D» *~OF"'^'J 



7—2 



100 



THE comes OF APOLLONIUS 



Proposition 61. 

[III. 27, 28, 29.] 

If in an ellipse or in conjugate hyperbolas two chorda Rr, 
R'r' be drawn meeting in and parallel respectively to two 
conjugate diameters PP', DIY, then 

(1) for tlie ellipse 



or 



ROF + Of* , RCf + Of^ . 

+ TTKS «■*, 



CF* 



ojy 



and for the hyperbolas 

Alto, (2) if R'r' in the hyperbolas meet the asymptotes in 
K', V, then 

K'O' + Oir + iOI/ : RO' + Or'=Ciy: OP'. 




(1) We have for both carves 
CP'.Ciy^PW.WP'.RW* 
= R'v/*.Dv/.v/D' 

= (7i* + PW. WP' ± R'v/* : 01^ + RW* ± Dw' .v/D', 



INTERSECnNQ CH0BD8. 101 

(taking the upper sign for the hyperbolas and the lower 
for the ellipse); 

.-. CP':CD'=CP'± CW* ■\-PW.WP' :Ciy + Cu^± Du/.w'jy, 

whence, for the hyperbolas, 

CI* : Ciy => CW + CW : Cw' + Cu/* 

= ^(RO" + 0»0 : i iRO* + OO. 

or RO^ + Ot' : B'O' + Or^ = CI» : Giy (A), 

while, for the ellipse, 

CF*:Cjy=' 2CF* -(CW+CW*) : Cw" + Cvf 
= 4CP» - {fi(f + (h*) : {RCf + OO. 

whence — ^p, — + — ^^ =4 (B). 

(2) We have to prove that, in the hyperbolas, 

R'CF + (V* - K'C^ + 0*^ + 2CL^. 
Now R'(y - K'(y = R'K'* + 2R'K' . K'O, 
and (V-0ifc^ = r'A^ + 2r'ifc'.ifc'0 

= R'K'* + 2R'K'.k'0. 
Therefore, by addition, 

R'Cf + (V» - K'O' - Oifc^ = 2R'K' (R'K' + K'O + OW) 

= 2R'K' . R'y 

.: R'O' + 0r^^ K'O* + 0*~ + 2CL^. 
whence K'O* + OA^ + 2CD' : RO* + Ot* =• OB' : OF*, 
by means of (A) above. 



HARMONIC PROPERTIES OF POLES AND POLARS. 

Proposition 62. 

[in. 30, 31, 32. 83, 34.] 

TQ, Tq being tangents to a hyperbola^ if V he the middle 
point of Qq, and if TM he drawn parallel to an asymptote 
meeting the curve in R and Qq in M, while VN parallel to 
an asymptote meets the curve in R' and the parallel through T 
to the chord of contact in N, then 

TR^RM, 
VR'^R'N*. 




L Let CV meet the curve in P, and draw the tangent PL, 
which is therefore parallel to Qq. Also draw the ordinates 
RW, RW to CP. 

Then, since the triangles CPL, TWR are similar, 
RW*:TW*^Pr:CP'^Ciy:CP^ 

^RW'iPW.Wr; 
.'. TW^PW.WF. 

* It will be observed from this proposition and the next that Apollonins 
begins with two partionlar cases of the general property in Prop. 64, namelj 
(a) the case where the transversal is parallel to an asymptote, (6) the case where 
the chord of contact is parallel to an aqrmptote, i.e. where one of the tangents 
is an aqrmptote, or a tangent at infinity. 



HABIIONIC PBOPERTIES OF POLES AND P0LAB8. 



103 



Also CV.CT^CP*; 

:. PW. WP' + CP*^Cr.CT+TW*. 
or CW'^Cr.CT+TW*, 

whence CT(CW + TW) = CV. CT, 
and TW^ WV. 

It follows by parallels that 2'iJ=.RJf. (1). 

Again OP' : Pi» = TT'T" : W'B" ; 

.: F'F*: W'R'*=>PW'. W'P' : WR"*, 
PW'.W'P'='W'V*. 
Cr.CT^CP'; 

whence, as before, TW'^W V, 

and NR' = R'V (2). 

II. Next let Q, g be on opposite branches, and let P'P be 
the diameter parallel to Qq. Draw the tangent PL, and the 
ordinates from .R, R', as before. 



so that 
And 




Let TM, CP intersect in K. 

Then, since the triangles CPL, KWR are similar, 

CP* : PL* = KW : WR\ 
and CP»: CLF^PW. WP': WR^; 

:. KW* = PW.WP'. 
Hence, adding CP*, 

CW [= Rw^ = KW + CP*. 
But 2J«;':Jnr* + aP' = 2V:iJTr + PX*, 
by similar trianglea 

Therefore Tv^^RW* + Ciy 



104 THE comes OF AFOLLOKIU& 

whence Tv) — Gw = CV, or Ttu^wV; 

.: TR^RM (1). 

Again CI* .PL'^PW. W'F : R'W* 

= PIT' . W'P' + CP'* : iJ'TT" + CJy 
= CW:Cv/* + Or.CT. 
Also CF* : PX» - R'vT : W'F* ; 

••• ti/V* = Cv/* + CV. CT, 
whence, as before, Tu/ «= v/V, 
and, by parallels, NR' = R'V. (2). 

III. The particular case in which one of the tangents is 
a tangent at infinity, or an asymptote, is separately proved 
as follows. 

Let LPL' be the tangent at P. Draw PD, LM parallel to 
CL', and let LM meet the curve in R 
and the straight line PP drawn through 
P parallel to CL in M. Also draw RE l, 

parallel to CL. 

Now LP^PL'\ 

.. PD^CF^ FL', FP^CD^ DL. 
And FP.PD^ER.RL. [Prop. 34] 
But EB = LC = 2CD^2FP; 

.: PD^tLR, 
or LR =s RM» 




Propoiition 63. 

[in. 35, 36.] 

If PL, the tangent to a hyperbola at P, meet the asymptote 
in L, and if PO be parallel to that asymptote, and any straight 
line LQOQ' be drawn meeting the hyperbola in Q, Q' and PO in 
0,then 

LQ' : LQ - QV : OQ. 



HARMONIC PROPERTIES OF POLES AND P0LAR8. 



105 



We have, drawing parallels through L, Q, P, Q' to both 
asymptotes as in the figures, 

LQ = Q'L' ; whence, by similar triangles, DL = IQ' = CF 

/. CD^FL, 
and CDiDL^FLiLD 

= Q'L : LQ 
^MDiDQ. 

M 




[Prop. 34] 



Hence (SD) : (DTT) = (MC) : (CQ) 

= (MC) : (EW), 
since (CQ)^(CP)^(EW). 

Therefore 

(MC) : (EW) = (MC) ± (HD) : (EW) ± (DW) 

^(MH):(EU) (1). 

Now (DO) = (HE). [Prop. 34] 

Therefore, subtracting CX bom both, 

(DX)^(XH), 
and, adding (XU) to each, (^i7) = (HQ). 
Hence, from (1), since (EW) = (CQ), 

(JfO) : (CQ) = (ME) : (HQ), 
or LQ' : LQ = QV : OQ. 

[ApoUonius gives separate proo& of the above for the two 
cases in which Q, Q' are (1) on the same branch, and (2) on 
opposite branches, but the second proof is omitted for the sake 
of brevity. 

Eutocius gives two simpler proofs, of which the following is 
one. 

Join PQ and produce it both ways to meet the asymptotes 
in R, R. Draw PV parallel to CR meeting QQ in V. 



THE comes or .uollohius. 





iF = 


--7V 




Ci-O-i'; ■ 


QV' 


.vq 




QV 


VL-. 


■ QP 


PS 






■PQ 


QK 






'OQ 


QL. 


.: SQV: 


irv- 


.OQ 


OA 


Q« 


OQ. 


■-LL 


©i; 


.-.do 


■.OQ. 


.m 


i«.] 




[m. 87, 88 


39, W] 



(1) If TQ, Tq b« taagmU to a conic and any atra^ht line 
be drawn through T meting tht conic and the chord of contact, 
the Mraighi line u divided harmonicaltg ; 

(2) // any ttraight line be drawn through V, the middle 
point of Qq, to meet the conic and the parallel through T to Qq 
[or the polar of the point F], thii etrmght line it aleo divided 
harmonically; 

i.e. in the figures drawn below 

(1) RT:TB:=BI:IR, 

(2) ROiOR~RV.VR'. 




HABMONIC PBUPKKTIKS OF POLES AND POLABS. 107 

Let TP be the diameter bisecting QqmV. Draw as usual 
HRFW, H'RF'W, EP ordinate-wise to the diameter TP', and 
draw RU, RU' pawJlel to QT meeting TP in U, U'. 




(1) We have then 

RP : IR = H'Q' : H<^ 

= AH'F'Q : AHFQ 

= H'TU'R : HTUR [Props. 64, 66] 

Also RP:TR = RU'*:RU* 

= ARU'W': ARUW; 
and at the same time 

Rr.TR^ TW* : TW* 

^ATH'W: ATHW; 

.'. RT*: TR^ ARU'W - ATE'W -. ARUW ^ ATHW 

= H'TU'R : HTUR 

= RP : IR, from above. 

.-. RT.TR^m.IR. 

(2) We have in this case (it is unnecessary to give more 
than two figures) 

Rr':VR'*='RU*:RU'* 

» ARUW : ARU'W. 



108 



THE comes OF AFOUX>NIU& 



Also RV* : VR* ~ H(f : QH-* 

- AJT^Q : LH'F'Q - HTUR : H'TTTR. 

.'. RV* : VR:* - HTUR ± ARUW : H'TU'R ± ARU'W 

"ATHW.ATH'W 

- TUP : TW* 
"RO'.OR*; 

that is, RO : OR = i?F : FiT. 





INTERCEPTS MADE ON TWO TANGENTS BY 

A TfflRD. 



Propositioii 66. 
[in, 41.] 

IfOk/^ tangents to a parabola at three points P, Q, R form a 
triangle pqr, all three tangents are divided in the same propor- 
tion, or 

Prirq^rQiQp^qp: pR. 




Let V be the middle point of PR, and join qV, which is 
therefore a diameter. Draw T'TQ W parallel to it through Q, 
meeting Pq in T and qR in T. Then QW is alao a diameter. 
Draw the ordinates to it from P, R, viz. PU, RW, which are 
therefore parallel to pQr. 



110 THE O0NJC8 OF APOLLONIUS. 

Now, if qV passes through Q, the propodtioii is obvious, and 
the ratios will all be ratios of equality. 

If not, we have, by the properties of tangents, drawing EBF 
the tangent at the point B where qV meets the curve, 

TQ^QU, TQ^QW, qB^BV. 

whence, by parallels, 

Pr^rT, Tp^pR, qF^FR 

Then (1) rP : PT^ EP:Pq^l:2, 
and, alternately, rPiPE^TPiPq 

^OPiPV. 
whence, doubling the consequents, 

rP:Pg«OP:PjB, 
and Pr:rqtr.P0:0R (1). 

(2) rQiQp^PUiRW, 
since PU^2rQ, and l2Tr-i2pQ; 

.'. rQ iQp^PO : OR (2). 

(3) FRiRq^pRiRr, 
and, alternately, FRiRp^qR: RT 

« VR : RO. 
Therefore, doubling the antecedents, 

qRiI^^PR: RO, 

whence qp.pR^POiOR (3). 

It follows fix)m (1), (2) and (3) that 

Pr : rq ^rQ : Qp ^ qp : pR. 



INTERCEPTS MADE ON TWO TANGENTS BY A THIRD. Ill 



ProposiUon 66. 

[in. 42.] 

If the tangents at the extremities of a diameter PP of a 
central conic he drawn, and any other tangent mset them in r, r' 
respectively, then 

Pr.Fr^^CIf. 





Draw the ordinates QF, Qv to the conjugate diameters PP 
and DU ; and let the tangent at Q meet the diameters in T, t 
respectively. 

If now, in the case of an ellipse or circle, CD pass through Q, 
the proposition is evident, since in that case rP, CD, v^P' will all 
be equal. 

If not, we have for all three curves 

CLCV^CP", 

so that CTiCP^ CP : CV 

^CT'-CPiCP'-Cr 
:=-PT:Pr; 
.'. CTiCF^PTxPV, 
whence CT:FT = PT: VT. 

Hence, by parallels, aiFr^^PriQV 

^PriCv; 
.\ Pr.Fr^^Cv.Ct^Cjy. 



112 



THE C0NIC8 OF AP0LL0NIU8. 



Propositioii 67. 

[in. 43.] 

If a tangent to a hyperbola, LFL\ meet the asymptotes in 
L, L\ the triangle LCL has a constant area, or the rectangle 
LC. CL' is constant. 

Draw PD, PF parallel to the asymptotes (as in the third 
figure of Prop. 62). 

Now LP^PL\ 

.'. CL^iCD^iPF, 

Cr^2CF^2PD. 

.-. LC.CL'^^DP.PF, 

which is constant for all positions of P. [Prop. 34] 



PropofiUoii 68. 

[in. 44.] 

If the tangents at P,Q to a hyperbola meet the asymptotes 
respectively in L, L' ; M, M\ then LM\ L'M are eaxk parallel 
to PQt the chord of contact. 





u^ ^ o 

Let the tangents meet at 0. 
We have then [Prop. 67] 

LC.CL'^MC.CM\ 
so that LC:CM'^MC:CL'\ 

.'. LM\ L'M are parallel. 

It follows that OL : LL' = OM' : M'M, 
or, halving the consequents, 

OLiLP^OM'iM'Q; 
.'. LM\ PQ are parallel. 



FOCAL PROPERTIES OF CENTRAL CONICS. 

The foci are not spoken of by ApoUonius under any equiva- 
lent of that name, but they are determined as the two points 
on the axis of a central conic (lying in the case of the ellipse 
between the vertices, and in the case of the hyperbola within 
each branch, or on the axis produced) such that the rectangles 
AS.SA\ AS'. 8' A' are each equal to "one-fourth part of the 
figure of the conic," i.e. ^pa.AA' or Cff. The shortened 
expression by which S, 8' are denoted is rk ix rrj^ wapafioXfj^ 
yipofitpa offfieJa, "the points arising out of the application." 
The meaning of this will appear fix)m the full description of the 
method by which they are arrived at, which is as follows : ikv 
rf reraprtp fiipti rov tlhov^ laov irapk rhv a^ova irapafi\fjO§ 
^^* itednpa M flip 1% tnrtpfioXfi^ ical r£v dpriteeifUvwv 
virtpfiakXov etSci rerpaydpip, iirl Bi 1% ^Xc^^rew^ iWttirov, 
" if there be applied along the axis in each direction [a rect- 
angle] equal to one-fourth part of the figure, in the case of the 
hyperbola and opposite branches exceeding, and in the case of 





the ellipse fidling short, by a square figure/' This determines 
two points, which are accordingly rk ix rfj^ wapafioXtf^ ytPtfOivra 



H. C. 



114 



THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 



atffiela. That is, we are to suppose a rectangle applied to the 
axis as base which is equal to CB^ but which exceeds or fidls 
short of the rectangle of equal altitude described on the whole 
axis by a square. Thus in the figures drawn the rectangles AF, 
A!F are respectively to be equal to CV^ the base AS' fiJling short 
of AA' in the ellipse, and the base A'S exceeding A' A in the 
hjrperbola, while SF or &F is equal to S'A' or 8 A respectively. 

The focus of a parabola is not used or mentioned by 
ApoUoniua 

Propositioii 60. 

[in. 45, 46.] 

If Ar, AY, the tangents ai the extremities of the aais of a 
central conic, meet the tangent at any point P inr,f^ respectively, 
then 

(1) ty subtends a right angle at each focus, 8, 8' ; 

(2) the angles rr8, AVS are equai, as also are the angles 
r^rff, Ar8. 




(1) Since [Prop. 66] 



rA.AY^CB^ 

=sA8.8A\ by definition, 
rAiAS^SA'iAV. 



FOCAL PROPERTIES OF CENTRAL CONICS. 



115 




Hence the triangles rA8, SAY are similar, and 

.*. the angles rSA, A'Si^ are together equal to a right angle, 

so that the angle rSr' is a right angle. 

And similarly the angle rSr^ is a right angle. 

(2) Since rSr', rSr^ are right angles, the circle on rr' as 
diameter passes through 8, S ; 

.•. Z f¥S =s z rflfiS, in the same segment, 
= Z S!r^A\ by similar triangles. 
In like manner Z r^rS! = Z ArS. 



Propositioii 70. 

[III. 47.] 

If, in the same figures^ he the intersection of rS^, /S, tiien 
OP wUl be perpendicular to the tangent 'at P. 

Suppose that OR is the perpendicular from to the tangent 
at P. We shall show that R must coincide with P. 

For Z Or'R = Z S'r^A', and the angles at -R, A' are right ; 
.-. the triangles Oi'^R, S'r'A' are similar. 

8—2 



116 THE CfONICa OF APOLLONIUS. 

Therefore -4 V : r^iJ = AT/ : /O 

— 8r : rO, by similar triangles, 
= Ar : rU, 
because the triangles ilrS, RrO are similar; 

/. r'U:-Rr«ilV:ilr 

^A'TiTA (1). 

Again, if PN be drawn perpendicular to the axis, we have 
[Prop. 18] A'T : TA « A'N : NA 

= r^P : Pr^ by parallel& 
Hence, from (1), r'R : Rr^r^P: Pr, 
and therefore R coincides with P. 

It follows that OP is perpendicular to the tangent at P. 

Propoiitioii 71. 

[III. 48.] 

The focal distances of P maJee equai angles with the tangent 
at that point. 

In the above figures, since the angles rSO, OPr are right 
[Props. 69, 70J the points 0, P, r, S are concyclic ; 

.*. Z 8Pr s z /SOr, in the same segment. 

In like manner Z S^Pr' = ^ flTO/, 
and the angles SOr, SOr^ are equal, being the same or opporite 
angles. 

Therefore Z 8Pr « Z /SfPr'. 

Propoiitioii 79. 

[HI. 49, 60.] 

(1) If from either focus, as 8, 87 be dra/um perpendicular 
to the tangent at any point P, the angle ATA' will be a right 
angle, or the locus of Y is a circle on the axis A A' as diameter. 

(2) The line drawn through C parallel to either of the focal 
distances ofP to meet the tangent will be equal in length to CA, 
or CA'. 



FOCAL PROPERTIES OF CENTRAL CONICS. Il7 

Draw S»F perpendicular to the tangent, and join AY, YA\ 
Let the rest of the construction be as in the foregoing proposi- 
tions. 

We have then 

(1) the angles rAS, rYS are right ; 
/. A, r, Y, S are concyclic, and 

ZilFflf-ZArS 

= Z r^8A\ since Z rSr^ is right 
= Z T*YA\ in the same segment, 
iS. F, r^, A' being concyclic ; 
/. , adding the angle SYA\ or subtracting each angle from it, 

Z ilFA' = Z SYr' = a right angle. 
Therefore F lies on the circle having AA' for diameter. 
Similarly for Y\ 

(2) Draw CZ parallel to SP meeting the tangent in Z, and 
draw S'K also parallel to SP, meeting the tangent in K. 

Now AS.SA'^AS'.S'A', 

whence AS^S'A', and therefore CS^ CS\ 
Therefore, by parallels, PZ^ZK. 
Again Z S'KP ^^SPY, since SP, S'K are parallel, 

^^8rPK\ [Prop. 71] 

.-. ST = S'K. 
And PZ^ZK; 

.'. S'Z is at right angles to the tangent, or Z coincides with Y\ 
But F^ is on the circle having AA' for diameter ; 

.-. CY' = CA, or CA\ 
And similarly for CY, 



118 THE OOyiOS OF APOLLONIUS. 



Propotltion 73. 

[HI, 61, 52.] 

In an ellipse the sum, atid in a hyperbola the difference, of the 
focal distances of any point is equal to the axis AA'. 

We have, as in the last propositioii, if 8P, CY', 8'K are 
parallel, 8'K = 8' P. Let S'P, CY' meet in M. 

Then, since 8C « C8', 

8P - iCM, 

8'P^8'K^2MY'; 

.'. 8P t flf'P - 2 (CM i MY') 

= 2CY' 

~AA'. [Prop. 72] 



THE LOCUS WITH RESPECT TO THREE LINES &c. 

Propoiitioii 74. 

[IIL 63.] 

If PP' he a diameter of a central conic, cmd Q way other 

point on it, and if PQ, P'Q respectively meet the tangents at P', 

P in R, B, then 

PR.FR^DIP. 





[Prop. 8] 



120 THE comes OF APOLIONICS. 

Draw the ordinate QV to PP'. 
Now p.PP'^QV'-.PV.P'V 

= {QV:PV).(QV.P'V) 

- (FR : PP') . {PR : PP'), by similar triangl 
Hence p.PF^PR. FR : PF*. 

Therefore PR.FR^p.PF 

= Dir. 



Proposition 76. 

[HI. 54, 56.] 

TQ, TQf being two tangents to a conic, and R any other 
point on it, if Qr, ^r' be drawn parallel respectively to T<^, 
TQ, and if Qr, QfR meet in r and Qr', QR in r, then 

Qr.Q^r' : QQ!*^(PV* : PD xiTQ.TQf: QV^. 

where P is the point of contact of a tangent parallel to QQf. 




THE LOCUS WITH KE8PECT TO THBEE LINES ETC. 121 

Draw through R the ordinate RW (parallel to QQf) meeting 
the curve again in if and meeting TQ, T(^ in K, K' respec- 
tively ; also let the tangent at P meet TQ, TQ in L, L'. Then, 
since PV bisects QQf, it bisects LL', KK', RR also. 




[Prop. 59] 



Now QL* : LP. PL' - QL' : LP* 

~QK*:RK.KR' 
= QK* : RK. RK'. 

But QL . QL' : QU - QK . QK' : QK*. 

Therefore, ex aequali, 

QL.QL'.LP.PL'^QK.QK.RK.RK' 

^{qK'.K'R).{QK.KR) 
'(Qr:QQf).(Qr':QQ) 

"Qr.Qr^'.QQT; 
: Qr.Qr^:QQ* = QL.QfL':LP.PL' 

- (QL . QL' : LT. TL') . (LT. TL' : LP . PL') 
= (PV : Pr«). (TQ. TQ : QV). 



122 



TUK CONICS OF APOLLON1U8. 



Proposition 76. 

[HL 55.] 

If the tangents are tangents to opposite branches and meet in t, 
and if tq is Itaif the chord through t parallel to QQf, wkHeR,r,r^ 
ham the same meaning as before, then 

Qr,Qr:Q(r^tQ.tQ^:t^. 

Let RR be the chord parallel to QQ^ drawn through R^ and 
let it meet tQ, tQ in i, L\ Then QQ, RR\ LL' are all bisected 
by tv. 




Now 



[Prop. 59] 



Ut\tqt^RL.LR\Lqt^ 
^UR.RL'.LCf. 

But e(y : eg . tq =L(y:LQ. LQ\ 

Therefore, ex aequali, 

tq*:tQ,tQ'^L'R.RL:LQ.L'Q' 

- (LR : L'Qf) . (RL : LQ) 

= (QQf : Qr) . (QQ : Q'r') = QQ- : Qr . Qr\ 

Thus Qi\Q^r':Q(^^tQ.tQ : f?*. 

[It is easy to see that the last two propositions give the 
property of the three-line locus. For, since the two tangents and 
the chord of contact are fixed while the position of R alone 
varies, the result may be expressed thus, 

Qt'.Q'i^s (const). 



TUB LOCUS WITH RESFKCf TO THREE LINES ETC. 123 

Now suppose Q^, Q,, T^ in the accompanying figure substi- 
tuted for Q, Of, T respectively in the first figure of Prop. 75, 

and we have 

Q,r.Q,/=» (const.) 



f^*- 




Draw Rq^, Rq^ parallel respectively to T^Q^ r,Q; and 
meeting Q^Q^ in q^, q^\ Also let JRi;^ be drawn parallel to the 
diameter (72\ and meeting Q^Q, in v^. 

Then, by similar triangles, 

Q^r:Bq:^Q,Q,:QA'. 

Hence Q,r .Q/:Rq,. Rq,' » Q.Q/ : Q,q, . Q.q^. 

But Rq^ . Rq^ : Rv^ » TiQ, . T.Q, : 2\ 7", by similar triangles 

.-. % . Rq^ : Rv* = (const). 
Also Q^Q^ is constant, and Q^r . Q^ is constant, as proved 

It follows that 

^V-«i?i •«.?;= (const). 

But Rv^ is the distance of R from Q^Q,, the chord of 
contact measured in a fixed direction (parallel to C2\); and 
Qi9f Qa' ^^ equal to the distances of R frx)m the tangents 
r^Qp 7^0^ respectively, measured in a fixed direction (parallel 
to the chord of contact). If the distances are measured in any 



124 THE OONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 

other fixed directions, they will be similarly related, and the 
constant value of the ratio will alone be changed. 

Hence 12 is such a point that, if three straight lines be 
drawn from it to meet three fixed straight lines at given 
angles, the rectangle contained by two of the straight lines so 
drawn bears a constant ratio to the square on the third. In 
other words, a conic is a "three-line locus" where the three 
lines are any two tangents and the chord of contact. 

The four-line locus can be easily deduced from the three- 
line locus, as presented by Apollonius, in the following manner. 

If QiQjQjQ^ be an inscribed quadrilateral, and the tangents 
&^ Qi* Q» ™6®^ A^ ^p ^^^ tangents at Q„ Q, at 7, and so on, 
suppose Bq^, Rq^ (brawn parallel to the tangents at Q,, Q^ 
respectively and meeting QJC^^ in ;,, q^ (in the same way as 
ii;,, Rq^ were drawn parallel to the tangents at Q|, Q, to meet 
Qt^s)' ^^^ ^^^ similar pairs of lines Bq^, Rq^ and Rq^, Rq^' be 
drawn to meet Q^Q^ and Q^Q^ respectively. 

Also suppose Rv^ drawn parallel to the diameter C72\, meet- 
ing Q,Qg in v,, and so on. 

Then we have 

Hence we derive 

where k is some constant. 

But the triangles Q.Jij/, QtM% ®*^- *^® given in species, 
as all their sides are in fixed directions. Hence all the ratios 

Qn 

2*^-*, etc. are constant ; 

^''' Rv..Rv 



where k^, A;,, k^, k^ are 
constants. 



••• 4^;=<*^'"*>- 



THE LOCUS WITH RESPECT TO THREE LINES ETC. 125 

But Rv^, iZv,, Rv^, Rv^ are straight lines drawn in fixed 
directions (parallel to CT^, etc.) to meet the sides of the 
inscribed quadrilateral QfijQjQ^. 

Hence the conic has the property of the four-line locus with 
respect to the sides of any inscribed, quadrUatercU.] 



The beginning of Book IV. of ApoIIonius' work contains 
a series of propositions, 23 in number, in which he proves 
the converse of Propositions 62, 63, and 64 above for a great 
variety of different cases. The method of proof adopted is the 
reductio ad absurdum, and it has therefore been thought 
unnecessary to reproduce the propositions. 

It may, however, be observed that one of them [FV. 9] gives 
a method of drawing two tangents to a conic from an external 
point. 

Draw any two straight lines through T each cutting the 
conic in two points as Q, Q' and 
R, R\ Divide QQ' in and RR' 
in 0' so that 

TQ:TQ'^QO:Oq\ 

TR : TR' = RO' : 0'R\ 

Join 00\ and produce it both ways 
to meet the conic in P, P'. Then 
P, P' are the points of contact of the 
two tangents from T. 




INTERSECTING CONICS. 

Propoiition 77. 

[IV. 24.] 

No two conies can intersect in such a way that part of one 
of them is common to both, while the rest is not 

If possible, let a portion q'Q'PQ of a conic be common 
to two, and let them diverge at Q. Take Q' 
any other point on the common portion and 
join QQ'. Bisect QQ' in V and draw the 
diameter PV. Draw rqvq' parallel to QQ\ 

Then the line through P parallel to QQ' 
will touch both curves and we shall have in 
one of them qv = vq', and in the other ?n; = vq* ; 

,'. rv = qv, which is impossible. 

There follow a large number of propositions with regard to 
the number of points in which two conies can meet or touch 
each other, but to give all these propositions in detail would 
require too much space. They have accordingly been divided 
into five groups, three of which can be combined in a general 
enunciation and are accordingly given as Props. 78, 79 and 80, 
while indications are given of the proofs by which each 
particular case under all the five groups is established. The 
terms " conic " and " hyperbola " in the various enunciations do 
not (except when otherwise stated) include the double-branch 
hjrperbola but only the single branch. The term " conic " must 
be understood as including a circle. 





INTERSECTINa coNica 127 

Oroup I. Propositions depending on the more elementary 
considerations affecting conies. 

1. Two conies having their concavities in opposite directions 
will not meet in more than two points. [IV. 36.] 

If possible, let ABC, ADBEC be two such conies meeting in 
three points, and draw the chords of contact AB, 
BC. Then AB, BC contain an angle towards 
the same parts as the concavity of ABC. And 
for the same reason they contain an angle towards 
the same parts as the concavity of ADBEC. 

Therefore the concavity of the two curves 
is in the same direction : which is contrary to 
the hypothesis. 

2. If a conic meet one branch of a hyperbola in two 
points, and the concavities of the conic and the branch are in 
the same direction, the part of the conic produced beyond the 
chord of contact will not meet the opposite branch of the 
hyperbola. [IV. 36.] 

The chord joining the two points of intersection will cut both 
the lines forming one of the angles made by the asymptotes of 
the double hyperbola It will not therefore &11 within the 
opposite angle between the asymptotes and so cannot meet the 
opposite branch. Therefore neither can the part of the conic 
more remote than the said chord. 

3. If a conic meet one branch of a h3rperbola, it will not 
meet the other branch in more points than two. [IV. 37.] 

The conic, being a one-branch curve, must have its 
concavity in the opposite direction to that of the branch which 
it meets in two points, for otherwise it could not meet the 
opposite branch in a third point [by the last proposition]. The 
proposition therefore follows from (1) above. The same is true 
if the conic touches the first branch. 

4. A conic touching one branch of a hjrperbola with its 
concave side will not meet the opposite branch. [TV. 39.] 



128 



THE QONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 



Both the conic and the branch which it touches must be on 
the same side of the common tangent and therefore will be 





separated by the tangent fi*om the opposite branch. Whence 
the proposition follows. 

5. If one branch of a h3rperbola meet one branch of 
another hyperbola with concavity in the opposite direction 
in two points, the opposite branch of the first hyperbola 
will not meet the opposite branch of the second. [IV. 41.] 




The chord joining the two points of concourse will fall 
across one asymptotal angle in each hyperbola. It will not 
therefore fall across the opposite asymptotal angle and 
therefore will not meet either of the opposite branches. 
Therefore neither will the opposite branches themselves meet, 
being separated by the chord referred to. 

6. If one branch of a hyperbola meet both branches of 
another hyperbola, the opposite branch of the former will not 
meet either branch of the second in two points. [ly. 42.] 

For, if possible, let the second branch of the former meet 
one branch of the latter in D, E. Then, joining DE, we use 



INTERSEGTINQ CONICS. 



129 



the same argument as in the last proposition. For DE 
crosses one asymptotal angle of each hyperbola, and it will 
therefore not meet either of the branches opposite to the 
branches DE. Hence those branches are separated by DE 
and therefore cannot meet one another: which contradicts 
the hypothesis. 




Similarly, if the two branches DE touch, the result will be 
the same, an impossibility. 

7. If one branch of a hyperbola meet one branch of 
another hyperbola with concavity in the same direction, and 
if it also meet the other branch of the second hyperbola in one 
point, then the opposite branch of the first hyperbola will not 
meet either branch of the second. [IV. 45.] 




A, B being the points of meeting with the first branch and 



H. c. 



130 



THE C0NIC8 OF APOLLONIUS. 



C that with the opposite branch, by the same principle as 
before, neither AC nor BO will meet the branch opposite to 
ACB, Also they will not meet the branch C opposite to 
AB in any other point than C, for» if either met it in two 
points, it would not meet the branch AB^ which, however, 
it does, by hypothesis. 

Hence D will be within the angle formed by AC^ BC 
produced and will not meet C or AB. 

8. If a hyperbola touch one of the branches of a second 
hyperbola with its concavity in the opposite direction, the 
opposite branch of the first will not meet the opposite branch 
of the second [IV. 54.] 

The figure is like that in (6) above except that in this case 
D and E are two consecutive points ; and it is seen in a similar 
manner that the second branches of the two hyperbolas are 
separated by the common tangent to the first branches, 
and therefore the second branches cannot meet. 



Oraup II. containing propositions capable of being ex- 
pressed in one general enunciation as follows: 

Propoiition 78. 

No two conica (induding under the term a hyperbola with 
two branches) can intersect in more than four points. 

1, Suppose the double-branch hyperbola to be alone 
excluded. [IV. 25.] 




INTERSECTING CONICS. 



181 



If possible, let there be five points of intersection A, B, C, 
D, E, being successive intersections, so that there are no others 
between. Join AB, DC and produce them. Then 

(a) if they meet, let them meet at T. Let 0, 0' be 
taken on AB, DC such that TAy TD are harmonically divided. 
If 00' be joined and produced it will meet each conic, and the 
lines joining the intersections to T Avill be tangents to the 
conies. Then TE cuts the two conies in di£fereiit points P, P\ 
since it does not pass through any common point except E. 

Therefore ETiTP^EIiIP) 

and ET : TP' ^ EI : IPy 

where 00\ TE intersect at /. 

But these ratios cannot hold simultaneously ; therefore the 
conies do not intersect in a fifth point E. 

(6) If AB, DC are parallel, the conies will be either 
ellipses or circles. Bisect AB, DC at Jf, M'; MM' is then 




a diameter. Draw ENPP' through E parallel to AB or DC, 
meeting MM' in N and the conies in P, P'. Then, since MM' 
is a diameter of both, 

J^P = J^^ = J^P', 
which is impossible. 

Thus the conies do not intersect in more than four points. 

2. A conic section not having two branches will not meet 
a double-branch hyperbola in more than four points. [IV. 38.] 

This is clear firom the fact that [Group I. 3] the conic 
meeting one branch will not meet the opposite branch in more 
points than two. 

9—2 



132 THE aONICS OF APOLLONIUa 

8. If one branch of a hyperbola cut each branch of a second 
h3rperbola in two points, the opposite branch of the first 
hyperbola will not meet either branch of the second. [IV. 43.] 




The text of the proof in Apollonius is corrupt, but Eutocius 
gives a proof similar to that in Group I. 5 abova Let HOH' 
be the asymptotal angle containing the one branch of the first 
hyperbola, and KOK' that containing the other branch. Now 
AB, meeting one branch of the second hjrperbola, will not meet 
the other, and therefore AB separates the latter from the 
asjnnptote 0K\ Similarly DC separates the former branch 
from OK. Therefore the proposition follows. 

4. If one branch of a hyperbola cut one branch of a second 
in four points, the opposite branch of the first will not meet the 
opposite branch of the second. [IV, 44.] 

The proof is like that of 1 (a) above. If ^ is the supposed 
fifth point and T is determined as before, ET meets the inter- 
secting branches in separate points, whence the harmonic 
property produces an absurdity. 

5. If one branch of a hjrperbola meet one branch of a 
second in three points, the other branch of the first will not 
meet the other branch of the second in more than one point. 
[IV. 46.] 



INTERSECnNQ CONICS. 133 

Let the first two branches intersect in A, B, C, and (if 
possible) the other two in D, E. Then 

(a) if AB, DE be parallel, the line joining their middle 
points will be a diameter of both conies, and the parallel chord 
through C in both conies will be bisected by the diameter; 
which is impossible. 

(6) If AB, DE be not parallel, let them meet in 0. 

Bisect AB^ DE in M, M\ and draw the diameters MP^ MP* 
and M'Q, M'Q' in the respective hyperbolas. Then the tangents 
at P'y P will be parallel to iiO, and the tangents at Qf, Q parallel 
to 50. 

Let the tangents at P, Q and P', C meet in T, T. 




Let CRR be parallel to ilO and meet the hyperbolas in 
R, R, and DO in (/. 

Then TP^.TQ'^AO.OBiDO.OE 

- TP'^ : rq^. [Prop. 59] 

It follows that 

RO'.CrC : D(y .CTE^ RCr .CrC : D(y .O'E, 

whence Rff .aO^R(y .(yC\ 

which is impossible. 

Therefore, eta 

6. The two branches of a hjrperbola do not meet the 
two branches of another hyperbola in more points than four. 
[IV. 65.] 



134 THE C0NIC8 OF APOLLONIUS. 

Let A, A' be the two branches of the first hyperbola and 
B, "B the two branches of the second. 




Then (a) if A meet B, B each in two points, the proposition 
follows from (3) above ; 

(6) if A meet B in two points and Bf in one point, A' cannot 
meet Bf at all [Group L 5], and it can only meet B in one 
point, for if A' met B in two points A could not have met ff 
(which it does) ; 

(c) if A meet B in two points and A' meet B^ A' will not 
meet R [Group I. b\ and A' cannot meet B in more points than 
two [Group I. 3] ; 

(d) if A meet B in one point and R in one point, A' will 
not meet either jS or ^ in two points [Group I. 6] ; 

{e) if the branches il, B have their concavities in the same 
direction, and A cut B in four points. A' will not cut R [case 
(4) above] nor B [case (2) above] ; 

(/) if A meet B in three points. A' will not meet R in 
more than one point [case (5) above]. 

And similarly for all possible cases. 



Group III. being particular cases of 

Proposition 79. 

Two conies {including double hyperbolas) which touch at one 
point cannot intersect in more than two other points. 

1. The proposition is true of all conies excluding hyperbolas 
with two branches. [IV. 26.] 

The proof follows the method of Prop. 78 (1) above. 



INTERSECTING CONICS. 135 

2. If one branch of a hyperbola touch one branch of another 
in one point and meet the other branch of the second hjrperbola 
in two points, the opposite branch of the first will not meet 
either branch of the second. [IV. 47.] 

The text of Apollonius' proof is corrupt, but the proof of 
Prop. 78 (3) can be applied. 

3. If one branch of a hyperbola touch one branch of a 
second in one point and cut the same branch in two other 
points, the opposite branch of the first does not meet either 
branch of the second [IV. 48.] 

Proved by the harmonic property like Prop. 78 (4). 

4. If one branch of a hyperbola touch one branch of a 
second hyperbola in one point and meet it in one other point, 
the opposite branch of the first will not meet the opposite 
branch of the second in more than one point. [IV. 49.] 

The proof follows the method of Prop. 78 (5). 

5. If one branch of a hyperbola touch one branch of 
another hyperbola (having its concavity in the same direction), 
the opposite branch of the first will not meet the opposite 
branch of the second in more than two points. [TV. 50.] 

The proof follows the method of Prop. 78 (5), like the last 
case (4). 

6. If a hyperbola with two branches touch another hjrper- 
bola with two branches in one point, the hyperbolas will not 
meet in more than two other points. [IV. 56.] 

The proofs of the separate cases follow the methods em- 
ployed in Group I. 3, 5, and 8. 



Group IV. merging in 

Propositloii 80. 

No two conies touching each other at two points can intersect 
at any other point. 

1. The proposition is true of all conies excluding hyperbolas 
with two branchea [IV. 27, 28, 29.] 



136 THE OONICS OP APOLLOKIUS. 

Suppose the conies touch at A, B. Then/ if possible, let 
them also cut at C, 

(a) If the tangents are not parallel and does not lie 
between A and J3, the proposition is proved from the harmonic 
property ; 

(6) if the tangents are parallel, the absurdity is proved by 
the bisection of the chord of each conic through G by the chord 
of contact which is a diameter ; 

(c) if the tangents are not pai-allel, and C is between A and 
B, draw TV bom the point of intersection of the tangents to the 
middle point of AB. Then TV cannot pass through G, for then 
the parallel through G to AB would touch both conies, which is 
absurd. And the bisection of the chords parallel %oAB through 
G in each conic results in an absurdity. 

2. If a single-branch conic touch each branch of a hyper- 
bola, it will not intersect either branch in any other point. 
PV. 40.] 

This follows by the method employed in Group I. 4. 

3. If one branch of a hyperbola touch each branch of a 
second hyperbola, the opposite branch of the first will not meet 
either branch of the second. [IV. 51.] 




Let the branch AB touch the branches AG, BE in A, B. 
Draw the tangents at A, B meeting in T. If possible, let GD, 
the opposite branch to AB, meet AG in G. Join GT. 

Then T is within the asymptotes to AB, and therefore GT 
falls within the angle ATB. But BT, touching BE, cannot 
meet the opposite branch AG. Therefore BT &lls on the side 
of GT remote from the branch AG, or GT passes through 
the angle adjacent to ATB\ which is impossible, since it fidls 
within the angle ATB. 



INTERSECTING CONICS. 137 

4. If one branch of one hyperbola touch one branch of 
another in one point, and if also the other branches touch in 
one point, the concavities of each pair being in the sam^ 
direction, there are no other points of intersection. [lY. 52.] 

This is proved at once by means of the bisection of chords 
parallel to the chord of contact. 

5. If one branch of a hyperbola touch one branch of another 
in two points, the opposite branches do not intersect. [IV. 53.] 

This is proved by the harmonic property. 

6. If a hyperbola with two branches touch another hyper- 
bola with two bmnches in two points, the hyperbolas will not 
meet in any other point. [IV. 57.] 

The proofs of the separate cases follow those of (3), (4), (5) 
above and Group I. 8. 



Onmp V. Propositions respecting double contact between 
conies. 

1. A parabola cannot touch another parabola in more 
points than one. [IV. 30.] 

This follows at once from the property that TP^PV. 

2. A parabola, if it fall outside a hyperbola, cannot have 
double contact with the hyperbola. [IV. 31.] 

For the hyperbola 

CV'.CP^CPiCT 

^CV^CPiCP^CT 
^PViPT. 
Therefore PV>PT. 

And for the parabola FV^FT: therefore the hyperbola 
falls outside the parabola, which is impossible. 

3. A parabola cannot have internal double contact with an 
ellipse or circle. [IV. 32.] 

The proof is similar to the preceding. 



138 



THE OONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 



4. A hyperbola cannot have double contact with another 
hyperbola having the same centre. [IV. 33.] 

Proved by means of CV.CT^ CP\ 

5. If an ellipse have double contact with an ellipse or a 
circle having the same centre, the chord of contact will pass 
through the centre. [IV. 34.] 




Let (if possible) the tangents at A, B meet in T, and let V 
be the middle point of AB. Then TV ia a diameter. If 
possible, let C be the centre. 

Then (7P» = CV. CT = GF*, which is absuid. Therefore the 
tangents at A, B do not meet, i.a they are parallel. Therefore 
AB is a diameter and accordingly passes through the centre. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA 

Propoiitloii 81. (Preliminary.) 
[V. 1, 2, 3.] 

If in an ellipse or a hyperbola AM be drawn perpendicular 
to the axis AA' and equal to one-haif its parameter^ and if CM 
meet the ordinate PN of any point P on the curve in H, then 

PIP - 2 (quadrilateral MANH). 





Let AL be twice AM, Le. let AL be the latus rectum or 
parameter. Join A'L meeting PN in 22. Then A'L is parallel 
to CM. Therefore HR^LM^ AM. 

Now PIP » AN. NR ; [Props. 2, 3] 

/. PN^^ANiAM-k-HN) 

s 2 (quadrilateral MANH). 

In the particular case where P is between C and A' in the 



140 



THE aONIOS OP APOLLONIUS. 



ellipse, the quadrilateral becomes the difference between two 
triangles, and 

Also, if P be the end of the minor axis of the ellipse, the 
quadrilateral becomes the triangle CAM^ and 

J?C*=2AC^Jf. 

[The two last cases are proved by Apollonius in separate 
propositions. Cf. the note on Pi*op. 23 above, p. 40.] 

Propositloii 89. 

[V. 4.] 

In a parabola, if E he a point on the axis such that AE is 
equal to half the laitu rectum, then the minimam straight line 
from Eto^ curve is AE; and, if P be any other point on the 
curve, PE increases as P moves frrther from A on either side. 
Also for any point 

PE'^AP'^AIP. 




Let AL be the parameter or latus rectum. 
Then PN'^AL.AN 

^2AE.AN. 
Adding EIP, we have 

PE'^iAE.AN + EIP 

^2AE.AN + {AE'-ANy 

= AE' + AN\ 



NOBBIAXS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 141 

Thus PE^>AE* and increases with AN, i.e. as P moves 
farther and further from A. 

Also the minimum value of PE is AE^ or AE is the 
shortest straight line from E to the curve. 

[In this proposition, as in the succeeding propositions, 
ApoUonius takes three cases, (1) where N is between A and E, 
(2) where N coincides with E and PE is therefore perpen- 
dicular to the axis, (3) where AN is greater than AE, and 
he proves the result separately for each. The three cases will 
for the sake of brevity be compressed, where possible, into one.] 



Propositioii 83. 

[V. 5, 6.] 

If E be a point on the axis of a hyperbola or an ellipse such 
that AE is equal to half the latus rectum, then AE is the least 
of all the straight lines which can be drawn from E to the curve; 
and, if P be any other point on it, PE increases as P moves 
further frorni A on either side, and 

PE'^AE'-^AN'.'^^^l^AE' + i^.AN^ 

(where the upper sign refers to the hyperbola)^ 

Also in the ellipse EA' is the maadmam straight line from 
E to the curve. 

Let AL be drawn perpendicular to the axis and equal to 
the parameter ; and let AL be bisected at M, so that AM ^AE. 

Let P be any point on the curve, and let PN (produced if 
necessary) meet CM in H and EM in K. Join EP, and draw 
MI perpendicular to HK. Then, by similar triangles, 

MI^IK, and EN^NK. 

* Tl\e area represented by the second term on the right-hand side of the 
equation is of course described, in Apollonios' phrase, as the rectangle on the 
base AN similar to that contained by the axis (as base) and the sum (or difference) 
of the axis and its parameter. A similar remark applies to the similar expression 
on the next page. 



142 



THE OOmCS OF AFOUiONIUa 



Now PN* = 2 (quadrilateral MANE}, 
and Eir='2AENK', 

.-. PE*=2(AEAM+ AMHK) 
= AE* + MI.HK 
=> AE* + MI . (IK ± IE) 
= AE* + MI .(MI ± IH{f.... 



[Prop. 81] 



(IX 





or 



Now MI : IH^ CA : ^if = AA'.pa, 

Therefore MI . (MI ± IE) : A A' . (AA' ± p.) - MP : AA". 

MI.(MI± IE) = ^.AA'. (AA' ±p,) 

^MI\^^^4P 

AA 

-^-^ • AA' ' 
whence, by means of (1), 

PE' ^ AP + AIP .'^^^^ . 

It follows that AE is the minimum value of PE, and that 
PE increases with AN, Le. as the point P moves further 
from A. 

Also in the ellipse the maximum value of PE* ia 
AE' + A A' {A A' - Pa) = -4^" + A A'' - iA J? . A A' 

^EA\ 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MlNIBfA. 143 



Propofitlon 84. 

[V. 7.] 

If any point be taken on the aaia of any conic such that 
AO < \pa, then OA is the minimum straight line from 
to the curve, and OP (if P is any other point on it) increases as 
P moves further and further from A. 

Let AEhe set off along the axis equal to half the parameter, 
and join PE, PO, PA. 

Then [Props. 82, 83] PE > AE, 

so that ^PAE>^APE; 

and a fortiori 

^PAO>^APO, 

so that PO>AO. 

And, if P' be another point more 
remote from A, 

FE>PE. 

:. zEPr>/:EFP; 

and a fortiori 

/lOPF>/.OFP. 

:. OF > OP, 
and so on. 




Proposition 86. 

[V. 8.] 

In a parabola, if he a point on the axis such that 
AO > ^Pa9 ond if N he taken hetween A and such that 

then, if NP is drawn perpendicular to the axis meeting the curve 
in P, PO is the minimum straight line from to the curve [or 
the normal at P]. 



144 



THE OONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 



IfF'he any other point on the curve, P'G increases as P* moves 
further from P in either direction. 

Also Fcr=^pcr + NN\ 




We have FN'^^p^.AN' 

^2NG.AN\ 

Also N'CP^NN'^-^NCP ± 2NG.NN' 

(according to the position of N'). 
Therefore, adding, 

P'G'=2KG.AIf'^NN'^'^N0' 

^ PIP + NG^ + NN'^ 

=^PG^ + NNr 

Thus it is clear that PG is the minimum straight line from 
G to the curve [or the normal at P], 

And P'G increases with NN\ i.e. as P' moves further from 
P in either direction. 



Proposition 86. 

[V. 9, 10, 11.] 

In a hyperbola or an ellipse, i/Gbe any point on AA' (within 

the curve) such that AG>^, and if GN be measwred towards 

the nearer vertex A so that 

NGiCN^Pai A A' [= Cff : CA^l 



NORHALS AS. MAXIMA AND MIMIMA. 



145 



than, if the m-diaaie through N meet tha curve in P, PQ ia the 
mInlniTini etraight line from G to the curve [or PO ie the 
normal at P] ; and, if P' be any other point on the curve, P'G 
increases as P' moves further from P on either aide. 



Also 



P'G'-PG'=NN''.-^^j4^ 
AA 



where P'N' is the ordinate from P'. 




Draw AM perpeodicular to the azia and equal to half the 
parameter. Join CM meetinf; PN in £[ and P'N" in fC. Join 
03 meeting FN' in H'. 
Then since, by hypothesis, 

N6:CN~pa:AA', 
and, by similar triangles, 

NH:CN=AM:AG 
= Pa:AA', 
it follows that NH^NO, 

whence bIbo N'H' = N'Q. 

Now PN* = 2 (quadrilateral MANE), [Prop. 81] 

2fa' = 2AHN0. 
Therefore, by addition, P0'=2 (quadrilateral AMH6). 
H.a 10 



146 THE comes OF AFOLLOmUS. 

Also P'G^ - P'N'* + irff - 2 (quadr. AMKN') + tAH'N'O 

- 2 (quadr. AMHO) + iAHH'K. 
.-. P'<P-PQ*-2AHH'K 

= HI.(H'I±IK) 
^ HI. (Hit IK) 

Thus it follows that P6 is the minimum straight line from 
to the curve, and P'O increases with JOT as P' moves 
further from P in either direction. 

In the ellipse OA' will be the maximum straight line from 
to the curve, as is easily proved in a similar manner. 

Cor. In the particular case where coincides with C, the 
centre, the two minimum straight lines are proved in a similar 
manner to be CB, CR, and the two maxima CA, CA\ and CP 
increases continually as P moves from £ to J.. 



Proposition 87. 

[V. 12.] 

If he a point on the axis of a conic and OP be the mini- 
mum straight line Jrom to the curve [or the normal at P\ and 
if be any point on PO, then OP is the minimum straight line 
from to the curve, and OP' continiudly increases as P* moves 
from P to A\prto A'\ 




Since FO > PG, 

/.OPF>/lOFP. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 



147 



Therefore, a fortiori^ 

Z0PF>Z0FP. 

or OP' > OP. 

SimUarly OP" > OF [&c. as in Prop. 84]. 

[There follow three propositions establishing for the three 
curves, by reductio ad absurdy/m, the converse of the propo- 
sitions 85 and 86 just given. It is also proved that the normal 
makes with the axis towards the nearer vertex an acute angle.] 



Proposition 88. 

[V. 16, 17, 18.] 

If E' be a point on the minor oasis of an eUipae at a distance 
from B equal to half the parameter of BR or -^ > ^^^ ^'^ 

is the ina¥linnni straight lime from E to the curve; a/nd, if P be 
any other point on it, E'P diminishes ae P moves fiirther from 
B on either side. 

Also E'ff - E'l* = Bn* .^^^^ [= Bn* . ^^^^^] • 

Apollonius proves this separately for the cases (1) where 
^<BF, (2) where ^^fifi', and (3) where^>5B'. 

The method of proof is the same for all three cases, and only 
the first case of the three is given here. 




10—2 



148 THE aONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 

By Prop. 81 (which is applicable to either axis) we have, if 
Bm =^ = BE\ and Pn meets Cm, E'm in A, k respectively, 

Pfj? = 2 (quadrilateral mBidC), 
Also nE'*=2AnkE'. 

.-. PJ?'" = 2Amfi^'-2AmWfc. 
But BE'*^2AmBE'. 

/. J5J5?'*-PJ?'"=2AmAJk 

= mt . (At — k%)ssfn%.(hi — mt) 
, TiiwB — CB 

^^ ' BR ' 
whence the proposition follows. 



Propoiitloii 80. 

[V. 19.] 

If BE' be measured along the minor aads of an dlipae equal 

to half the parameter or ytd ^^ any point be taken on the 

minor axis such that BO > BE\ then OB is the mazimiim 
straight line from to the curve; and, if Pbe amy other point 
on it, OP diminishes continually as P moves in either direction 
from B to R. 

The proof follows the method of Propa 84, 87. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 



149 



Proposition GO. 

[V. 20. 21, 22.] 

If g he a point on the minor axis of an eUipae such that 

Bg > BO and Bg < \p^ or j^ , and if On be measured to- 
wards B so that 

On :ng^ BR : pi,[^ OB" : OA*l 

then the perpendicular through n to BR wiU meet the curve in 
two points P such that Pg is the maTimiiin straight line from 
g to the curve. 

Also, ifP* be any other point on the curve, Rg diminishes as 
R moves Jurther from P on either side to B or R, and 

Pt-BR[ ^ OA^^OB^ 



Pf-.Rf^nn''.^^^'^^ 



nn . 



CB* y 



1 


1 

n ft 


^' 


^ \ 


«' Ky^ 


\ 


9 


^ 


') 



Draw Bm perpendicular to BR and equal to half its para- 
meter p^ Join Om meeting Pn in A and Rri in K, and join 
gh meeting Pvl in A?. 

Then since, by hypothesis, 

On:ng^BR:pi,^BO: Bm, 

and Cninh^ BO : Bm, by similar triangles, 

it follows that ng^nh. Also gn => n% and hi s ik, where At is 
perpendicular to Rn\ 



150 THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 

Now Pn* B 2 (quadrilateral mBnh), 

n(^^2Ahng; 
.-. Pflf*^ 2 (mBnh + Ahng). 
Similarly Ff^2 (mBn'h' + A kn'g). 
By subtraction, 

Pg'-Ff^iAhh'k 

= At.(A't-A:f) 
= At.(A't — At) 



nn". 



BR ' 



whence it follows that Pg is the maximwm straight line from g 
to the curve, and the difference between P^ and P'g^ is the 
area described. 

Cor. 1. It follows from the same method of proof as that 
used in Props. 84, 87, 89 that, if be any point on Pg produced 
beyond the minor axis, PO is the maximwm straight line that 
can be drawn from to the same part of the ellipse in which 
P^ is a maximum, i.e. to the semi-ellipse BPR, and if OP be 
drawn to any other point on the semi-ellipse, OP* diminishes as 
P' moves from P to B or R. 

Cor. 2. In the particular case where g coincides with the 
centre C, the maximum straight line from to the ellipse is 
perpendicular to BR, viz. CA or OA'. Also, if jr be not the 
centre, the angle PgB must be acute if P^r is a maximum ; 
and, if Pgr is a maximum [or a normal], 

Cn:iig:^CR:CA\ 

[This corollary is proved separately by reductio ad absurdum.] 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND lONIMA* 



151 



Proposition 91. 

[V. 23.] 

If g beonthe minor axis o/<m ellip8e,and gP is a maadmwni 
straight line from g to the curtfe, and if gP meet ihe major axis 
in 0, OP is a mintmnm straight line from to the curve. 

[In other words, the minimum fix)m and the maximum 
from g determine one and the same normal] 



p. ! 


n 


/ 


\ 


\ 


\ 


■J 



We have Cn : ng^BR : jn, [Prop. 90] 

Also Oning^ PN : ng 

» NO : Pn, by similar triangles. 

^NO:CN. 

.-. NO:CN^pa:AA\ 

or PO is the normal determined as the minimum straight line 
from 0. [Prop. 86] 



Propositioii 99. 

[V. 24, 26, 26.] 

Only one normal can be drawn from any one point of a conic, 
whether such normal he regarded as the minimum straight line 
from the point in which it meets AA\ or as the maximum straight 
line from tlie point in which (in the case of an ellipse) it meets 
the minor axis. 



152 



THE aONICS OF AP0LL0NIU8. 



This is at once proved by reductio ad abaurdum on assuming 
that PO, PH (meeting the axis AA' m O^ H) are minimnm 
straight lines from and H to the curve, and on a similar 
assumption for the minor axis of an ellipsa 



Propofitioii 93. 

[V. 27, 28, 29, 80.] 

The normal aJt any paint P an a conic, whether regarded 
ae a minimum straight line from its intereectum with the cusie 
AA' or as a maximum from its intersection with BR (in the 
case of an eUipae), is perpendicular to the tangent at P. 

Let the tangent at P meet the axis of the parabola, or the 
axis AA' of a hyperbola or an ellipse, in T. Then we have to 
prove that TPO is a right angle. 




(1) For the parabola we have 



so that 



AT^AN, and N0=^^; 

/. NO : Pa-- AN : NT, 
TN.NG^Pa.AN 
^PN^. 



And the angle at iV" is a right angle ; 

.'. Z TPO is a right angle. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 



153 



(2) For the hyperbola or dlipse 

PIPiCN.NT 

^Pa.AA' [Prop. U] 

= NO : CN, by the property of the minimum, 

[Prop. 86] 
^TN.NOiCN.NT. 

:. Pm « TN.NO, while the angle at i\r is right ; 

.'. Z TPO is a right angle. 





T A 



(3) If Pg be the maximum straight line from g on the 
minor axis of an ellipse, and if Pg meet AA' in 0, PO is 
a minimum from 0, and the result follows as in (2). 

[ApoUonius gives an alternative proof applicable to all three 
conies. If OP is not perpendicular to the tangent, let OK be 
perpendicular to it. 

Then Z, OKP > Z OPK, and therefore OP > OK. 

Hence a fortiori OP > OQ, where Q is the point in which 
OK cuts the conic; and this is impossible because OP is a 
minimvm. Therefore &c.] 



Propositton 94. 

[V, 31, 33, 34.] 

(1) In general, if Obe any point within a conic and OP be 
a maximum or a minimum straight line /rom to the conic, a 
straight line PT drawn at right angles to PO wUl touch the 
conic at P. 



154 



THE C0NIC8 OF APOLLONIUa 



(2) If(yhe any point on OP produced outside the conic, 
then, of all straight lines drawn from 0' to meet the conic in one 
point but not produced so as to meet ii in a second point, (/P 
urill be the minimum; and of the rest that which is nearer to it 
will be less than that which is more remote. 

(1) First, let OP be a maximum. Then, if TP does not 
touch the conic, let it cut it again at Q, and draw OK to meet 
PQ in K and the curve in 12. 




Then, since the angle OPE is right, Z OPK > Z OKP. 

Therefore OK > OP, and a fortiori OR>OP: which is 
impossible, since OP is a maximum. 

Therefore TP must touch the conic at P. 

Secondly, let OP be a minimum. If possible, let TP cut the 
curve again in Q. From any point between TP and the curve 
draw a straight line to P and draw OBK perpendicular to this 




line meeting it at K and the curve in 12. Then the angle OKP 
is a right angle. Therefore OP > OK, and a fortiori OP>OR: 
which is impossible, since OP is a minimum. Therefore TP 
must touch the curve. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 155 

(2) Let Of be any point on OP produced. Draw the 
tangent at P, as FK^ which is therefore at right angles to OP. 
Then draw Of(i^ OfR to meet the curve in one point only, and 
let (yQ meet PK in K. 




Then O'K > O'P. Therefore a fortiori O'Q > ffP, and (XP 
is a minimum. 

Join BP, BQ. Then the angle O'QB is obtuse, and therefore 
the angle O'BQ is acute. Therefore O'B > O'Q, and so on. 



Propofitloii 95. 

[V. 35, 36, 37, 88, 89, 40.] 

(1) If the normal aJt P meet the aade of a parabola or the 
aais A A' of a hyperbola or ellipse in 0, the angle POA increases 
as P or moves further and further from A^ but in the 
hyperbola the angle POA mil always be less than the complement 
of half the angle between the asymptotes. 

(2) Two normals al points on the same side of the axis AA' 
wUl meet on the opposite side of thai axis. 

(3) Two normals at points on the same quadrant of an 
ellipse, as AB, unU meet at a point within ihe angle ACB\ 

(1) Suppose P' is further fix)m the vertex than P. Then, 
since PO, P'O' are minimum straight lines from 0,0'U> the 
curve, we have 



156 



THE aONICS OF AP0LL0N1U& 



(a) For the parabola 



and 



.'. ^PV'A>^POA. 




(b) For the hyperbola and ellipse, joining OP and producing 
it if necessary to meet P'N' in K, and joining K0\ we have 

N'G' : CN'^pa : AA' [Prop. 86] 

^NGiCN; 

s KN' : PN, by similar triangles. 
Therefore the triangles PNO, KN'O' are similar, and 

^KQ'N'r-zPON. 
Therefore z P'O'N' > Z PON. 

(c) In the hyperbola^ let AZr be drawn perpendicular to 
A A' to meet the asymptote in L and (7P in 0. Also let ilif 

be equal to ~ . 

Now AA'ipa^CAiAM^CNiNO, 
and Oil : CA^PN : CiV", by similar triangles; 

therefore, ea; aequaly OA : AM^PN : i\rG^. 
Hence AL:AM>PN: NO. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 157 

» 

But AL : AM^ CA:AL\ [Prop. 28] 

..CA'.AL>PNiNQ\ 

:. Z. PON is less than Z CLA. 

(2) It follows at once from (1) that two normals at points 
on one side of A A' will meet on the other side of AA\ 

(3) Regard the two normals as the maximum straight 
lines from g, g\ the points where they meet the minor axis of 
the ellipse. 

Then Cv! m'^ ^BE ipi, [Prop. 90] 

= CVi : figr ; 

/. Cn' : G^^CniCg. 

But Cn'>Cn; .-. Cg > Cg, 

whence it follows that Pg, Py must cross at a point before 
catting the minor axia Therefore lies on the side of BB' 
towards A. 

And, by (2) above, lies below AC; therefore lies within 
the ZACB\ 



Propositton 96. 

[V. 41, 42, 43.] 

(1) In a parabola or a/n ellipse any normal PO will meet 
the curve again. 

(2) In the hyperbola (a), if AA' be not greater than pa, no 
normal can meet the curve in a second point on the same branch; 
but (6), if AA' >pa, some normals will meet the same branch 
again and others not. 

(1) For the ellipse the proposition is sa£Sciently obvious, 
and in the parabola, since PO meets a diameter (the axis), it 
will meet another diameter, viz. that through the point of 
contact of the tangent parallel to PO, Le. the diameter bisecting 
it. Therefore it will meet the curve again. 



158 THE comes OF APOLLONIUK. 

(2) (a) Let CL, CL be the asymptotes, and let the 

tangent at A meet them in L, L'. Take AM equal to ^. Let 
PO be any normal and PN the ordinate. 




Then, by hypothesis, OA :^ AM, 
and CA : AM^ CA* : AU\ [Prop. 28] 

.\CA1f^AL\ 
hence the angle CLA is not greater than ACL or ACL. 

But Z CXil > Z PGiV ; [Prop. 95] 

.. i^ACL>^PON. 

It follows that the angle ACL together with the angle 
adjacent to PQN will be greater than two right angles. 

Therefore PO will not meet CV towards L and therefore 
will not meet the branch of the hyperbola again. 

(6) Suppose CA > AM or ^ . Then 

LAiAM>LA lAC. 
Take a point K on AL such that 

EA:AM::nLA:AC. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 



159 



Join CK, and produce it to meet the hyperbola in P, and 
let PN be the ordinate, and PO the normal, at P, 




PO is then the minimum fix)m to the curve, and 

NO : CN^p^ : AA' 

^AM'.AC. 

Also CN : PN^ AC : AK, by similar triangles. 

Therefore, ex aequali, NO : PN = AM : AK 

= CA : AL, from abova 

Hence /. ACL' ^ /. ACL ^ /. PON \ 

.'. PG, CX' are parallel and do not meet. 

But the normals at points between A and P make with the 
axis angles less than the angle PON, and normals at points 
beyond P make with the axis angles greater than PON, 

Therefore normals at points between A and Pwill not meet 
the asymptote CL\ or the branch of the hyperbola, again ; but 
normals beyond P will meet the branch again. 



THB OOmcS OF APOLIONIUS. 



Propoiltlon 97. 

[V. 44, 45, 46, 4T, 48.] 



IfP/}^, Pfit ft« normah ai points on one side of the tm* of 
a conic me^ng in 0, and ifObe joined to any other point P on 
the conic (it being farther supposed in the case of the ellipse 
that all three lines OP^, OP^, OP cid the same half of the aieis). 
then 

(1) OP cannot be a normal to the curve ; 

(S) if OP meet the axis in K, and PO be the normal 
at P. 

AG < AK whm P is intermediate between P, and P,. 
and AG > AK when P does not lie between P, and P,. 

I First let the conic be a pababou. 




Zjet PiPt ^^t the axis in T, and draw the ordinatea P,lf,, 
P.JV.- 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 161 

Draw OM perpendicular to the axis, and measure MH 
towards the vertex equal to ^. 

Then MH^Nfi,, 

and Nfi= Q^. 

Therefore MH : HN^ = Nfi^ : 0^ 

s= P^, : MO, by similar triangles. 

Therefore HM.MO = Pj!r^.N^\ ,.. 

Similarly HM.MO=^P,N,.N,h] ^ '' 

Therefore HN^ : HN, = P^, : P,N, 

= TN, : TN„ 
whence N,N^ : HN^ = NJ^^ : TN, ; 

.-.TN.^HNA .g. 

and TN, = HN,\ ^ ^' 

If P be a variable point and PN the ordinate*, we have 
now three cases: 

TNkTN, or HN, (1), 

TN>TN, or HN,, but <TN, or ffi\r, (2), 

TN>TN, or JTi^, (3). 

Thus, denoting the several cases by the numbers (1), (2), 

(3), we have 

N^:TN>N^:HN, (1), 

<N^:BN, (2), 

<N^:HN, (3), 

and we derive respectively 

TN,:TN>HN:HN, (1), 

<HN:HN, (2), 

>HN.HN, (3). 

* It will be obaerred that then are three lete of point! P, N, K, in the 
ilgore denoted by tlie Hune letters. Thia is done in order to exhibit the three 
different oases ; and it Is only neoessaiy to bear in mind that attention most 
be oonflned to one at a time as indioated in the ooorse of the proof. 

H. C. 11 



162 THE comes OF APOLLONIU& 

If NP meet P,Pt ^ ^' ^^ have, by similar triangles, 

P^, : FN>HN : iT^, (1) and (3), 

kHN.HN, (2). 

But in (1) and (3) FN > PN, and in (2) FN< PN. 
Therefore, a fortiori in all the cases, 

P^, : PN>HN : HN^ (1) and (3), 

<HN:HN, (2). 

Thus P^,.Nfi>PN.NH. (l)and(3), 

kPN.NH (2). 

Hence HM.MO>PN.NH...{l)fai^{Z)\ , . , 

kPN.NH (2)) • '*y ^^' "^^^^ 

TheTe{anMO:PN>NH:HM (l)and(3), 

kNH.HM (2) 

and MO : PN^MK : NK. 

Therefore MK : NK>NH : HM (1) and (3), 

kNH'.HM (2), 

whence we obtain MN : NK > MN : HM (1) and (3), 

<MN.HM (2), 

so that HM or NO >NK tail) and (3), 

and < JOT in (2). 
Thus the proposition is proved. 



IL Let the conic be a hypebbola or an ellipse. 

Let the normals at Pi , P, meet at 0, and draw OM perpen- 
dicular to the axis. Divide CJlf in H (internally for the 
hyperbola and externally for the ellipse) so that 

CH : HM=AA' : p„ [or GA* : GB"], 

and let OM be similarly divided at L. Draw HVR parallel 
to OM and LV£, ORF parallel to CM. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 163 

Suppose P,P, pnxluced to meet EL in T, and let P|^t> 
P,Nt meet it in U^. IT,. 




Tske any other point P on the cnrre. Join OP meeting 
the axes in K, Ic, and let PN meet P,Pt in Q and ££ in U. 

11—2 



164 THE OOmCS OF APOLLONIUS. 

Now CNt : NtOt = A A' ipa'CH: EM. 

Therefore, componendo for the hyperbola and dividmdo for 
the ellipse, 

r^MO,:VUt (A). 

Next 

FE.EO= AA' : p. - CN^ : Nfi», 

80 that FC'.CE^ CQ, : NtO, 

Thus FC :NtU,=. CO, : iV,©, 

s (T^Tj : Pt^t> by similar triangles, 

^FO±Cg,:N,U,iP,N, 

^Fg, :P,U, (B). 

Again 

FC. CM '.EC. CH= (FC :CE). {CM : CH) 

-(J>,:P.ir,).(Jf(?.:FO,), 

from (A) and (B), 

and FC.CM= Fg, . MO,, •: Fg^iCM^FC: MG,. 

.'. EC.CH^P,Ut.U,r. 

or cE.Eru.p,u,.u,r 

= PiUi. UiV, in like manner ; 
.-. U.V: U,V'-'P,U,:P^U^ 

*> TUf : TUi, by similar triangles, 
whence UiU, : UtV= UJJt-. TU,; 

and r£/,= VUj ^^^' 

Now suppose (1) that ANk AN, ; 

then U^V > TU, from (C) above ; 

.-. UU,:TU>UU,:U,V; 

hence TU,: TU>UV : U,V; 

.: P,U,:QU>UV: UJ. 
by similar triangles. 

Therefore P,U,.U,r> QU. UV, 
and a fortiori > PU. UV. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 165 

But P.f/,. i/,K= CE.EV, from above. 

= LO. OR, -: CE.LO'»OR: EV\ 
.'. LO.OB> PU. UV. 
Suppose (2) that AN > AN^ but < AN^. 
Then TU^ < UV\ 

.: UJI'.TU,>UJI:UV. 
whence TU.TU^>U^ViUV\ 

.-. QU : PJJ^> UJ : UV, 

by similar triangles. 

Therefore {a fortiori) PU. UV > P^U,. U^V 

>LO.OR. 
Lastly (3) let ANhe> AN,. 

Then TU^ > UV-, 

.: U,U:TU^<U,U: UV, 
whence TU :TU^<U,V: UV, 

or QU'.P,U^<U,V:UV; 

.-. P,U,.U,V>QU.UV, 

toid a fortiori >PU.UV\ 

:. LO.OR>PU.UV, 
as in (1) above. 

Thus we have for cases (1) and (3) 

LO.OR>PU.UV, 
and for (2) LO.OR< PU. UV. 

That is, we shall have, supposing the upper symbol to refer 
to (1) and (3) and the lower to (2), 

LO:PU% UV'.OR, 
i.e. LS.SU^UV'.LV; 

.'. LU: US^LU.LV, 
^d LV^ US. 



166 THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 

It follows that 

FO.LV^FO: 8U. or Fk : PU, 

or CM:MH<Fk:PU; 

:. FCiCE^Fk'.PU 

^Fk^FCiPU^CB 

^Ck-.PN 

< CK : NK. 

Therefore, componendo or dvridendo, 

FE.EC^CN'.NK, 

or CN : NK^ FE : EC, 



Le. 


> ilil' : p.. 


But 


(7i(r:if(?=.4^':p.; 




.•• NK<NO\ 



Le. when P is not between P, and P, iOr< NO, and when P 
lies between P^ and P,, NK>NO, whence the proposition 
follows. 



Cor. 1. In the particular case of a quadrant of an ellipse 
where P, coincides with B, i.e. where coincides with g^, 
it follows that no other normal besides P^u Bgi can be drawn 
through g^ to the quadrant, and, if P be a point between A and 
Pj , while Pg^ meets the axis in K, NO > NK. 

But if P lie between P, and B, NO < NK. 

[This is separately proved by Apollonius from the property 
in Prop. 95 (3).] 

CSoR. 2. ITiree normals at points on one quadrant of an 
ellipse cannot meet at one point 

This follows at once from the preceding propositions. 



NORMALS AS MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 167 

Cor. 3. Four normais at points on one semi-ellipse bounded 
by ike major axis cannot meet at one point 

For, if four such normals cut the major axis and meet in one 
point, the centre must (1) separate one normal from the three 
others, or (2) must sepai-ate two from the other two, or (3) 
must lie on one of them. 

In cases (1) and (3) a contradiction of the preceding 
proposition is involved, and in case (2) a contradiction of 
Prop. 95 (3) which requires two points of intersection, one on 
each side of the minor axis. 



Propofition 98. 

[V. 49, 60.] 

In any conic, if Mbe any point on the axis such that AM is 
not greater than half the latus rectum, and ifObe any point on 
the perpendicular to the axis through M, then no straight 
line drawn to any point on the curve on the side of the axis 
opposite to and meeting the axis between A and M can 
be a normal. 

Let OP be drawn to the curve meeting the axis in K, and 
let PN be the ordinate at P. 

We have in the parabola, since AM 1^ ^ , 

NM<^, le.<NQ. 

Therefore, a fortiori, NK < NO. 

For the hyperbola and ellipse A A' : pa is not greater 
than CA : AM, 

and CN:NM>CA:AM\ 

.'. CN:NM>AA':pa 

>CN:NO; 
.-. NM<NO, 
and a fortiori NK < NO. 

Therefore OP is not a normal. 



PROPOSITIONS LEADING IMMEDIATELY TO THE 
DETERMINATION OF THE EVOLUTE. 



Propofition 99. 

[V. 61, 62.] 

If AM measured along the oasis he greater than ^ (but in 

the case of the ellipse less than AC), and if MO be drawn 
perpendicular to the axis, then a certain length \y\ can be assigned 
such thai 

(a) if OM > y, no normal can be drawn through which 
cuts the axis ; but, if OP be any straight line drawn to the curve 
cutting the axis in K, NK< NO, where PN is the ordinals and 
PO the normal at P ; 

(6) if OM=s y, only one normal can be so drawn through 
0, and, if OP be any other straight line drawn to the curve and 
meeting the axis in K, NK < NO, as before ; 

(c) if OM < y, two normals can be so drawn through 0, 
and, if OP be any other straight line drawn to the curve, NK is 
less or greater than NO according as OP is not, or is, inter- 
mediate between the two normals. 

I. Suppose the conic is a parabola. 
Measure MH towards the vertex equal to ^, and divide^lJ?' 
at N, so that HN, = 2N^A. 



PK0P0SIT10N8 DETERMINING THE £ VOLUTE. 



169 



Take a length y such that 

where P|i^i is the ordinate passing through N^. 
(a) Suppose OM > y. 




Join OP^ meeting the axis in K^. 
Then y : P^N^^N^H : HM; 

.'. OM : P,N,> N,H : EM, 
MK,:K,N,>N,H:HM\ 

N,K, < HM, 
NK < ^ 

Therefore OP^ is not a normal, and N^K^ < jYjO,. 

Next let P be any other point. Join OP meeting the axis 
in K^ and let the ordinate PN meet the tangent at P^ in Q. 



or 

henee 
so that 

i.e. 



170 



THE COXICS OF AFOLLONras. 



Then, i£AN< AN,, we have, 
sbce NJ=^ 2AN, = N,H, 
N,H>NT; 
.'. N,N : NT > N,N : HN,; 
thus TN, :TN>HN: EN, , 
or P^^ :QN>HNi HN-, 
and a fortiori 

P,N, : PN > HN : HN„ 
or P,N,.N,H>PN.NHi 
But 



If iliir> AN„ 

N,T>NH\ 
.: N,N : NH > N,N : N,T. 
whence 

HN, :HN>TN: TN, 
> QN : P^N, 
>PN:P,N^, 
a fortiori 



:. P,N,.N,H>PN.NS. 
OM. MH > P^, . N^H, by hypotheoB ; 
/. OM.MH>PN.NH, 
or OM:PN>NH:HM. 

Le. MK : KN > NH '. EM, 

by similar triangles. 

Therefore, eompanendo, MN : NK > MN : EM, 

whence NK < EM or ^ . 

Therefore OP is not a normal, and NK < NO. 
(6) Suppose OM=y, and we have in this case 

MN, : N,K, = MN, : EM, 

or N,K, = EM=^ = N,0„ 

and Pfi is a normal 

If P is any other point, we have, as before, 

P,N,.N,E>PN.NE, 
and PiN, . N,E is in this case equal to OM. ME. 

Therefore OM.ME>PN.NE, 

and it follows as before that OP is not normal, and NK < NO. 

(c) Lastly, if 03f< y, 

OM:P,N,<N,E.EM. 

or OM.ME<P,N,.N,E. 

Let N,R be measured along N,P, so that 

OM.ME=RN,.N,E. 



pnoposmoNs detebminino the evolute. 171 

Thus R lies within the curve. 

Let HL be drawn perpendicular to the axis, and with AH, 
HL as asymptotes draw a hjrperbola passing through R. 
This hjrperbola will therefore cut the parabola in two points, 
say P, P'. 

Now, by the property of the hjrperbola, 

PN.NH^RN^.N^H 

s OM . MH, from above ; 

.-. OM.PN^NHiHM, 

or MK.KN^NHiHM, 

and, componendOi MN : NK = MN : HM; 

and PO is normal. 

Similarly P'O is normal. 

Thus we have two normals meeting in 0, and the rest of 
the proposition follows from Prop. 97. 

[It is clear that in the second case where OM^y, is the 
intersection of two consecutive normals, Le. is the centre of 
curvature at the point P^. 

If then a, y he the coordinates of 0, so that AM^w, 
and if 4a=;)ai 

4J\r, = J(a?-2a). 
Also 3^ : P.N^^Nfi^ : HiP, 

or y" : ^.AN^:=^ N,H* : W; 

.-. af^AN,.N,H* 

or 27ay^ = 4 (a? - 2a)", 

which is the Cartesian equation of the evolute of a parabola.] 



172 THE OOylCS OF APOLLOKIDS. 

IL Let the curve be a utpbsboi^ or ao eluphk, 
Wehave AM >^ , bo thaX CA : AM <AA' :p,. 




Tberefon;, if H^ be taken on AM auch that CS : HM - 
AA' -.pa, B vill fall between A and M. 



PROPOSITIONS DETERMINING THE EVOLUTE. 178 

Take two mean proportionals CN^, CI between CA and 
CH*, and let P^N^ be the ordinate through N^. 

Take a point L on OM (in the hyperbola) or on OM 
produced (in the ellipse) such that OL : LM^AA' : />«• Draw 
LVE, OR both parallel to the axis, and CE, HVR both 
perpendicular to the axis. Let the tangent at P, meet the axis 
in Tand EL in TT, and let P^N^ meet EL in U^. Join OP^, 
meeting the axis in K^. 

Let now y be such a length that 

y : P,N^ = (CM : MH).{HN, : Nfi). 
(a) Suppose first that OM > y ; 

.-. OM:P,N,>y:P,N,. 
But 

OM : P,i\r, = (OM : ML). (ML : P,N,) 

^(OM:ML).(N,U,:P,N,l 
and 

y : P,N,=^(CM:MH).(HN, : JV^^C) 

= (Oif:ifi).(iry,:i^,C); 

/. i^.IT, : P,N, > HN, : Nfi (1), 

or P,N,.N,H<CN,.N,U,. 

Adding or subtracting the rectangle U^Ifi . NiB, we have 

P,U,.UJ<CH.HV 

kLO.OR, \' CHiHM^OLiLM. 

But, for a normal at P^ we must have [from the proof of 

Prop. 97] 

P,U,.U,r^LO.OR. 

Therefore Pfi is not a normal, and [as in the proof of 
Prop. 97] 

* For ApoUoniaB* method of finding two mean proportionals see the Intro- 
duction, 



174 



THE COXICS OF APOLLONIUS. 



Next let P be any other point than P,, and let U, N, K 
have the same relation to P that U^^ N^, K^ have to P,. 

Also, since U^N^ : N^P, > HN, : Nfi by (1) above, let u, 
be taken on U^If^ sach that 

u,N, : N,P, « EN, : Nfi. (2), 

and draw wuu^v parallel to WUU^V. 

Now CN,.CT^CA\ Bothst CN^iCA^CAiCT; 

.*. (77 is a third proportional to CN^, CA. 
But Clf^ is a third proportional to CH, CI, 



and 



And 



CN, iCA^CI: CN, ^CHiCI; 
.\ CH:CN,^CN,:CT 

^CH'^CN,iCN,'-CT 

CH:CN,^P,u,:P^Ni, 
since u^N^ : N^P^ « HN^ : Nfi, from (2) above ; 
/. HN, : N,T ^ P,u, : P,N, 



thus 

UANkAN,, 

and u^u : vav > u^u : u^v, 
whence u^w :uw>uv : u^v. 
/. PjWj : Qu>uv :u^v 
(where PN meets P^T in Q); 
thus PjWj . iijV > Qtt . wv 

> Pm . uv, 

a fortiori. 
But, since 

HN,.Nfi^u,N,:P,N,, 

P,N,,N,H^CN,.N,u^, 

and, adding or subtracting the 
rectangle u^N^ . i\r, H, 



If ilJV^>2li^,. 

tim^ > uv ; 

/. 1IW, : av>uu^ : wWj, 

whence 

vUj : vu > tim : wui 

>Qu:P^u,] 

thus PjW,.M,t;>Qa.wv 

> Pu . wv, 

a/or^ibn, 

and the proof proceeds as in 
the first column, leading to 
the same result, 

PU.UVkLO.OR. 



PROPOSITIONS DETERMINING THE EVOLUTE. 



176 



/. CH,Hv>Pu.uv, 

and, adding or subtracting the 
rectangle uU. UV, 

PU.UVKCH.Hv-huU.Ur 

for the hyperbola, 
or 

PU.Ur<CH.Hv-uU.UV 

for the ellipse, 

.'. in either case, a fortiori, 

PU.UVkCH.HV, 

or PU.UVkLO.OR 

Therefore, as in the proof of Prop. 97, PO is not a normal, 
hxitNK<NO. 

(b) Next suppose OJlf = y, so that OM: P^N, = y : P^N^, 
and we obtain in this case 

U,N,:N,P,^HN,:Nfi; 

/. CN,.NJJ,^P,N,.N,n. 

Adding or subtracting U^N^ . N^H, we have 

PJI,.UJ^CH.HV^LO.OR, 

and this [Prop. 97] is the property of the normal at P,. 

Therefore one normal can be drawn from 0. 

If P be any other point on the curve, it will be shown as 
before that U^W^ UJ^, because in this case the lines WV, wv 
coincide; also 

UUi : UW> UU^ : U,V in the case where UW< U,V, 
and 

UU, : UV> UU^ : U^W in the case where U^W> UV, 

whence, exactly as before, we derive that 

P,U,.U,V>QU.UV 

>PU.UV, aforHori, 

and thence that PU. UVkLO.OR 

Therefore PO is not a normal, and NK < NO. 



THE COlflCS OF APOLLOKIUSL 



(c) lastly, if OM<y, we aball have in this c 



= A 




K 




\ 


y * 


M N 


K\^ 


""K 


"■\ 


7 


" 


«, tf 


-\' 


A 






J 













J^^.--^i 


r^ 


p' 


















'I 


■\ 


"' \ 


\,\ 


V 












■kY K-\ 




M 
> 





PROPOSITIONS DETERMIMINQ THE EVOLUTE. 177 

and we shall derive 

LO.OR<P,U,.U,V. 

Let iSf be taken on P^N^ such that LO.OR^SU^.U, F, and 
through S describe a hjrperbola whose asymptotes are VW and 
VH produced. This hyperbola will therefore meet the conic in 
two points P, P', and by the property of the hyperbola 

PU.UV^FU'.irV^8U,.U,V^L0.0R, 

so that PO, P'O are both normals. 

The rest of the proposition follows at once from Prop. 97. 

[It is clear that in case (6) is the point of intersection 
of two consecutive normals, or the centre of the circle of 
curvature at P. 

To find the CSartesian equation of the erolaie we have 

CH_^ CH o«y (1). 

^^ TiN.^MB'Nfi ^*>' 

and 9^^M^^i (3), 

where the upper sign refers to the hyperbola^ 

And, h»8tly. a:CN, = CN, : CI= CI : CH (4). 

From (4) CN'^a.CI, 

and CN^ — '„* ; 

.-. CN*'-'a\CH (6). 

Now, from (2), 

y CM HN, 

P,N, " ME- Nfi 

a*±h* CE-CN, , ., ,,,, 
" ~T~ ' CN • y ^ ^^' 

.«^.M.',k,(s). 

H. c. 12 



178 THE OOmCS OF APOLLONIUa 



whence 



^■^■■-'■•(i^)' w 



a*x 



But, from (1), CH = -fr^ 
^ or ±0 



a^x 



Therefore, by (6). CN^ = ^^^ , 

whence CN^^a'.^j^^J (7). 

Thu^ from (6) and (7), by the aid of (3), 

Va«±6V ^U'±W • 
or (aa?)l qp (6y)l = (a- ± 6«)i.] 



Proposition lOO. 

[V. 53, 64] 

I/O be a point on the minor axis of an Mipee, then 

(a) if OB : BG << AA' : pa, and P be any point on either of 
the quadrante BA, BA' except the point B, and if OP meet the 
major axis in K, 

PO cannot be a normal, hut NK< NO; 

(b) if OB : BCkAA' : p^, one normal only besides OB can 
be drawn to either of the two quadrants as OP, and, ifP* be any 
other point, N'K' is less or greater than N'O' according as P' 
is Juriher from, or nearer to, ike minor axis than P. 

[ThiiB proposition follows at once as a particular case of the 
preceding, but Apollonius proves it separately thus.] 

(a) We have OB:BC<On:nC; 

/. On : nC, or CN : NK>AA' : p., 

whence CN:NK>CN:NO, 

and NK<NQ. 



PROPOSITIONS DETERMININQ THE EVOLUTE, 

(6) Suppose now that 

(yB.BC<AA* :pa. 

Take a point n on (/B such that 

C/n inC^AA' :pa. 

B 



179 



/K • 

, n\kN9 O 



Therefore 



CN:NK,^AA':pa, 



where N is the foot of the ordinate of P, the point in which 
nP drawn parallel to the major axis meets the ellipse, and JTi is 
the point in which C/P meets the major axis ; 

/ . NK^ = NO^ and PO' is a normal. 

P(y, B(y are then two normals through (/, and the rest of 
the proposition follows from Prop. 97. 



12—2 



CONSTRUCTION OF NORMALS. 

Propoiitloii lOl. 

[V. 66, 56. 67.] 

If ia any point below the axia AA' of an tUipie, and 
AM>AC (where M it the foot of the perpendicular from 
on the axis), then one normal to the ellipae can alwayt be dravm 
through cutting the oicia between A and C, but never more than 
one such normal. 

Produce OM to L aad CM to H ao that 

OL -.LM^CH-.HM-AA'-.p,, 

and draw LI, IH parallel and peqwndicular to the axis 
respectively. Then vith IL, IH as asymptotes describe a 
[rectaagular] hyperbola passing through 0. 




CONSTBUCnON OF NORMALS. 181 

This will meet the ellipse in some point P,. For, drawing 
AD, the tangent at il, to meet IL produced in D, we have 

AH:HM>CH:HM 

>AA':pa 
> OL : LM; 

.'. AH.LM>OL.HM, 

or AD.DI>OL.LI. 

Thus, from the property of the hyperbola, it must meet AD 
between A and D, and therefore must meet the ellipse in some 
point Pj. 

Produce OP^ both ways to meet the asjrmptotes in 12, jR^ 
and draw R'E perpendicular to the axis. 

Therefore OR = P^R\ and consequently EN^ = MH. 

Now AA' . Pa-- OL : LM 

a ME : EK^, by similar triangles. 

Also AA':pa--CH:HM; 

.-. AA'ipa^ME^CHiEK.'-MH 

since EN^ = MH. 

Therefore N^K^ = J\r,G,, and P^O is a normal 

Let P be any other point such that OP meets AC mK. 

Produce BC to meet OP^ in P, and join FP, meeting the 
axis in K'. 

Then, since two normals [at P,, B] meet in P, FP is not 
a normal, but NK' > NO. Therefore, a fortiori, NK > NO. 
And, if P is between A and P„ NK < NO. [Prop. 97, Cor. 1.] 



182 



THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 



Propoiitlon lOS. 

[V. 58, 59, 60, 61.] 

If be any paint outside a conic, but not on the aads whose 
extremity is A, we can draw a normal to the curve through 0. 




For the parabola we have only to measure MH in the 
direction of the axis produced outside the curve, and of length 

equal to ^ , to draw HR perpendicular to the axis on the same 

side as 0, and, with HR, HA as asjrmptotes, to describe a 
[rectangular] hjrperbola through 0. This will meet the curve 
in a point P, and, if OP be joined and produced to meet 
the axis in K and HR in jR, we have at once HM^NK. 



Therefore 
and PK is a normal. 



NK^^, 



In the hyperbola or ellipse take H on CM or on CM 
produced, and L on OM or OM produced, so that 

CH : HM^ OL : LM^AA'ip^. 



CONSTRUCTION OF NORMAL& 



183 



Then draw HIR perpendicalar to the axis, and ILR' 
through L parallel to the axis. 






(1) If M falls on the side of C towards A, draw with 
asymptotes IR, IL, and through 0, a [rectangular] hyperbola 
cutting the curve in P. 

(2) If M hllB on the side of C further fix>m A in the 
hyperbola^ draw a [rectangular] hyperbola with IH^ IR' as 
asymptotes and through C7, the centre, cutting the cunre in P. 



184 THE OOmCS OF AFOLLOmUS. 

Then OP will be a normal 
For we have (1> MK .HN^MK : LR', 
since OR » PR', and therefore IL - UR'. 

Therefore MK : HN^MO : OL, by similar triangles, 

- MC I CH, 
:• CH:HM=OL: LM. 
Therefore, alternately, 

MK : MC ^ NH : HO (AX 

In case (2) OL.LM^ CH : HM, 

or OL.LI^CH.HI, 

[so that 0, C are on opposite branches of the same rectangular 
hyperbola]. 

Therefore PUiOL^LI: JU, 

or, by similar triangles, 

UR' : R'L = LI : lU, 
whence R'L^IU= HN; 

.: MK:HN=MK: RL 

'"MO.OL 
= MC : CH, 
and MK:MC=NH: HC, as before (A). 

Thus, in either case, we derive 

CK : CM =- CN : CH. 
and hence, alternately, 

CN : CK ^ CH : CM, 
so that CN : NK ^ CH : HM 

= AA' : Pa ; 

.-. NK^NQ, 
and OP is the normal at P. 



CONSTRUCTION OF NORMALS. 



185 



(3) For the hyperbola, in the particular case where M 
coincides with C, or is on the conjugate axis, we need only 
divide 0(7 in £, so that 

OLiLC^AA'ip^, 

and then draw LP parallel to AA' to meet the hyperbola in P. 
F is then the foot of the normal through 0, for 

AA':pa--OL:LC 

and NK^NO. 

[The particular case is that in which the hyperbola used 
in the construction reduces to two straight lines.] 

Proposition 103. 

[V. 62, 63.] 

If he an internal point, we can draw through a normal 
to the conic 






186 THE 00NIC8 OF AFOLLONIUa 

The ooDstmction and proof proceed as in the preoedmg 
proposition, mtdatia mutandis. 

The case of the parabola is obvious ; and for the hyperbola 
or dlipse 

MKiHN^OMiOL 

^CM:CH. 
:. CM:CH^CM±MK:CH±HN 

^CKiCN; 
.'. NK:CN^HM:CH 

=^p^:AA'; 

and PO is a normal 



OTHER PROPOSITIONS RESPECTING MAXIMA 

AND MINIMA. 

Propoiitlon 104. 

[V. 64, 65, 66, 67.] 

If he a point below the axis of any conic such ihaJt either 
no normal^ or only one normal^ can he drawn to the curve through 
which ctits the axis (between A and C in the case of the ellipse), 
then OA is the least of the lines OP cutting the axis, and that 
which is nearer to OA is less than that which is more remote. 

If OM be perpendicular to the axis, we must have 

and also OM must be either greater than or equal to y, where 

(a) in the case of the parabola 

y:P^If,^N,H:HM; 

(6) in the case of the hyperbola or ellipse 

y : P,N^^{GM: MH).{HN, : N,C), 

with the notation of Prop. 99. 

In the case where OM > y, we have proved in Prop. 99 for 
all three curves that, for any straight line OP drawn from to 
the curve and cutting the axis in K, NK < NO ; 

but, in the case where OM = y, NK < NO for any point P 
between A and P, except P^ itself, for which N^K^^N^O^. 



188 



THE comes OF APOLLONIU& 



Also for any point P more remote from A than P, it is still 
true that J^J5r<i^(?. 

I. Consider now the case of any of the three oonics where, 
for all points P, NK < NO. 

Let P be any point other than A. Draw the tangents 
A Y, PT. Then the angle Oil F is obtuse. Therefore the per- 
pendicular at il to ilO, as AL, &lls within the curve. Also, 
since NK<NO^ and PO is perpendicular to PT, the 
angle OPT is acute. 

(1) Suppose, if possible, OP » OA. 

With OP as radius and as centre describe a circle. 
Since the angle OPT is acute, this circle will cut the tangent PT, 




but AL willjie wholly without it. It follows that the circle 
must cut the conic in some intermediate point as iZ. li RU 
be the tangent to the conic at i2, the angle ORU is acute. 
Therefore RU must meet the circle. But it falls wholly 
outside it : which is absurd. 

Therefore OP is not equal to OA. 

(2) Suppose, if possible, OP < OA. 



OTHER PBOFoernONS BBSPECnKO MAXIHA AND HlStUA. 189 

In this case the circle drawn with as centre and OP 
aa radius must ctit AM in some point, D. And an absurdity is 
prored in the same manner as before. 

Therefore OP is neither equal to OA nor leas than OA, 
i.e. OA < OP. 

It remains to be proved that, if P' be a point bejond P, 
OP < OP'. 

If the tangent TP be produced to T. the angle OPT' is 
obtuse because the angle OPT is acuta Therefore the perpen- 
dicular from P to OP, viz. PH, &1U within the curve, and 
the same proof as was used for A, P will apply to P, P'. 

Therefore OA < OP. OP < OP'. Ac. 

ZI Where only one normal, 0P„ cutting the axis can be 
drawn from 0, the above proof applies to all points P between ^ 
and P, (ezclnding P, itself) and also applies to the comparison 
between two points P each of which is more remote from A 
than P,. 




190 THE OONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 

It only remains therefore to prove that 

(a) OP^ > any straight line OP between OA and OP^, 

(b) OP^ < any straight line OP' beyond OP^. 

(a) Suppose first, if possible, that OP "« OP^, and let Q be 
any point between them, so that, by the preceding proof, 
OQ > OP. Measure along OQ a length Oq such that Oq is 
greater than OP^ and less than OQ. With as centre and Oq as 
radius describe a circle meeting 0P^ produced in p^. This circle 
must then meet the conic in an intermediate point R. 

Thus, by the preceding proof, OQ is less than OR, and there- 
fore is less than Oq : which is absurd. 

Therefore OP is not equal to OP^. 

Again suppose, if possible, that OP > OP^. Then, by taking 
on OP^ a length Op, greater than OP^ and less than OP, an 
absurdity is proved in the same manner. 

Therefore, since OP is neither equal to nor greater than OP^, 

OP<OP,. 

(b) If OP' lies more remote from OA than OP^, an 
exactly similar proof will show that OP^ < OP'. 

Thus the proposition is completely established. 



Propofition 105. (Lemma.) 
[V. 68, 69, 70, 71.] 

If two tangents at pointa Q, Q' on me side of the axis of a 
conic meet in T, and if Q be nearer to the axis than Q\ then 
TQ<TQ'. 

The proposition is proved at once for the parabola and 
hyperbola and for the case where Q, Q' are on one quadrant of 
an ellipse : for the angle TVQ' is greater than the angle TVQ, 
and QV^ VQ^. 



OTHER PROPOSITIONS RESPEOTINQ MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 191 

Therefore the base TQ is less than the base TQ\ 





In the case where Q, Q' are on different quadrants of an 
ellipse, produce the ordinate Q'N' to meet the ellipse again 
in q'. Join ^C and produce it to meet the ellipse in R, Then 
Q'N'^N'q\ and g'C= CiJ, so that Q'R is parallel to the axis. 
Let RM be the ordinate of R 



c 


r^ 


^"^?/ 


Q 


r? 


vj 


/ 


/o 1 


« 


Nj 



Now 
/. [Prop. 86, Cor.] 
i.e. 

and, as before. 



RM>QN] 
CQ>CR, 

TQ < TQ\ 



Propofitlon 106. 

[V. 72.] 

If from a point below the axis of a parabola or hyperbola 
it %8 possible to draw two normals OP^, OP^ cutting the ams 
(P, being nearer to the vertex A than P,), and if further 
P be any other point on the curve and OP be joined, then 



192 



THE CONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 



(1) ifP lies between A and P,, OP^ is the grmiMt of all 
the lines OP, and that which is nearer to OP^ an each side is 
greater than that which is more remote; 

(2) if P lies between P, and P„ or beyond P„ OP^ is the 
least of all the lines OP, and the nearer to OP^ is less than the 
more remote. 




By Prop. 99, if P is between A and P^, OP is not a normal, 
but NK < NO. Therefore, by the same proof as that employed 
in Prop. 104, we find that OP increases continually as P moves 
from A towards P,. 

We have therefore to prove that OP diminishes continually 
as P moves from P^ to P,. Let P be any point between 
P, and P,, and let the tangents at P^, P meet in T. Join OT. 

Then, by Prop. 105, TP, < TP. 

Also TP,' + OP,' > TP' + OP', 

since AK > AO, and consequently the angle OPT is obtuse. 

Therefore OP<OP,. 

Similarly it can be proved that, if P' is a point between P 
and P„ OP' < OP. 

That OP increases continually as P moves from P, further 
away from A and P, is proved by the method of Prop. 104. 

Thus the proposition is established. 



OTHES MAXIMA AND HIMHA. 



Propoiltlon 107. 

[V. 73.] 



If be a point below the major axis of an ellipse awh that 
it is possible to draw through one normal only to the whole of 
the semi-ellipse ABA', then, if OP^ be that normal and P,is on 
the qvadrant AB, OP, wiU be the greatest of all the straight 
Imes drawn from to the semi-ellipse, and that which is nearer 
to OP, wtU he greater than that which is more remote. Also 
OA' will be the I«ait of alt the straight lines drawn from to 
the semi-ellipse. 




It follows from Props. 99 and 101 that, if OM be per- 
pendicular to the e,xa, M must lie between C and A', and that 
OM must be greater than the length y determined as in 
Prop. 99. 

Thus for all points P between A' and B, since K ts nearer 
to A' than is, it is proved by the method of Prop. 104 that 
OA' is the least of all such lines OP, and OP increases con- 
tinually as P passes from A' to B. 

For any point P' between B and P, we use the method of 
Prop. 106, drawing the tangents at P' and B, meeting in T. 
ac. IS 



194 THE comes OF APOLLONIUS. 

Thus we derive at once that OB < 0P\ and similarly that OP' 
increases continually as P' passes firom JB to P^. 

For the part of the curve between P^ and A we employ the 
method of reductio ad ahsurdum used in the second part of 
Prop. 104. 



Propoiition 108. 

[V. 74.] 

If be a point bdow the major oats of an ellipee euch that 
two normals only can be drawn through it to the whole semi- 
ellipse ABA\ then that normal, OP^, which cuts the minor aais 
is the greatest of all straight lines from to the semi-ellipse, 
and tha;t which is nearer to it is greater than that which is more 
remote. Also OA, joining to the nearer vertex A, is the leait 
of all such straight lines. 

It follows from Prop. 99 that, if be nearer to A than to 
A\ then P,, the point at which is the centre of curvature, 
is on the quadrant AB, and that OP^ is one of the only two 
possible normals, while P,, the extremity of the other^ is on the 
quadrant BA' ; also OM^y determined as in Prop. 99. 

In this case, since only one normal can be drawn to the 
quadrant AB, we prove that OP 
increases as P moves frora A to 
Pj by the method of Prop. 104, as 
also that OP increases as P moves 
from P, to JB. 

That OP increases as P moves 
fit>m B to P,, and diminishes as 

it passes from P, to A\ is established by the method employed 
in the last proposition. 




OTHER MAXIMA AND MINIMA. 195 



Proposition lOO. 

[V. 76, 76, 77.] 

If he a point below the major axis of an ellipse such thai 
three normals can he drawn to the semi-ellipse ABA' ai points 
Pp P,, P,, where P^, P, are on the quadrant AB and P, on the 
quadrant BA\ then {if P^ be nearest to the vertex A), 

(1) OP^ is the greatest of ail lines drawn from to points 
on the semi'dlipse between A' and P,, and the nearer to OP^ on 
either side is greaier than the more rewrote ; 

(2) OP^ is the greatest of all lines from to points on the 
semi-ellipse from A to P^, and the nearer to 0P^ on either side 
is greaier than the more remote. 

(3) of the two nuudma, OP^ > OP^ . 

Part (2) of this proposition is established by the method of 
Prop. 106. p^ 

Part (1) is proved by the 
method of Prop. 107. 

It remains to prove (3). a| 

We have 

CN, : Nfi.^AA' :pa--CN,:Nfi,; 

.-. MN, : Nfi, < CN, : Nfi^ 

< MN^ : Nfi^, a fortiori, 
whence MO^ : Nfl^ < MO^ : Nfi^ ; 

and, by similar triangles, 

OM:P,N,<OM:P^,, 
or P,N, > P^,. 

If then P,|)j be parallel to the axis, meeting the curve in 
Pj, we have at once, on producing OM to R, 

pfi > P^R, 
so that Op^ > OP^ ; 

.-. a fortiori OP^>OP,. 

13—2 




196 THE OONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 

As particular cases of the foregoing propositions we have 

(1) If be on the minor axis, and no normal except OB 
can be drawn to the ellipse, OB is greater than any other 
straight line from to the curve, and the nearer to it is greater 
than the more remote. 

(2) If be on the mmor axis, and one normal (besides OB) 
can be drawn to either quadrant as OP^, then OP^ is the 
grecUeet of all straight lines fit>m to the curve, and the nearer 
to it is greater than the more remote. 



EQUAL AND SIMILAR CONICS. 

DEFINITION& 

1. Conic sections are said to be equal when one can be 
applied to the other in such a way that they everywhere 
coincide and nowhere cut one another. When this is not the 
case they are unequaL 

2. Conies are said to be riinllar if, the same number of 
ordinates being drawn to the axis at proportional distances 
from the vertex, all the ordinates are respectively proportional 
to the corresponding abscissae. Otherwise they are dlisimllar. 

3. The straight line subtending a segment of a circle or a 
conic is called the base of the segment. 

4. The diameter of the segment is the straight line which 
bisects all chords in it parallel to the base, and the point where 
the diameter meets the segment is the vertex of the segment. 

5. Equal segments are such that one can be applied to the 
other in such a way that they everywhere coincide and nowhere 
cut one another. Otherwise they sure unequal. 

6. Segments are ilmilar in which the angles between the 
respective bases and diameters are equal, and in which, parallels 
to the base being drawn fix)m points on each segment to meet 
the diameter at points proportionally distant from the vertex, 
each parallel is respectively proportional to the corresponding 
abscissa in each. 



198 THE coyics or apollonius. 

Proposition llO. 

[VI. 1, 2.] 

(1) In two parabolds, if the ordiruUes to a diameter in each 
are inclined to the respective diameters at equal angles, and if 
the corresponding parameters are equal, the two parabolas are 
equal. 

(2) If the ordinates to a diameter in each of two hyperbolas 
or two ellipses are equally inclined to the respective diameters, 
and if the diamsters as well as the corresponding parameters are 
equal respectively, the two conies are equal, and conversely. 

This proposition is at once established by means of the 
fundamental properties 

(1) Q 7» = PZ . P K for the parabola, and 

(2) Qir^PV.VR for the hyperbola or ellipse 
proved in Props. 1 — 3. 

Proposition 111. 

[VI. 8.] 

Since an ellipse is limited, while a parabola and a hyperbola 
proceed to infinity, an ellipse cannot be equal to either of the 
other curves. Also a parabola cannot be equal to a hyperbola 

For, if a parabola be equal to a hyperbola, they can be 
applied to one another so as to coincide throughout. If then 
equal abscissae AN, AN' be taken along the axes in each we 
have for the parabola 

AN : AN' = PN' : P'N'\ 

Therefore the same holds for the hyperbola : which is im- 
possible, because 

PN^ : P'N'^ = AN.A'N : AN' . A'N'. 
Therefore a parabola and hyperbola cannot be equal. 

[Here follow six easy propositions, chiefly depending upon 
the symmetrical form of a couic, which need not be re- 
produced.] 



EQUAL AND SIMILAR CONICS. 199 

Proposition 113. 

[VI. 11, 12, 18.] 

(1) All parabolas are similar. 

(2) Hyperbolas, or ellipses, are similar to one another when 
the "figure " on a diameter of one is similar to the "figure" on a 
diameter of the other and the ordinates to the diameters in each 
make eqwil angles with the diameters respectively. 

(1) The result is derived at once fix)m the property 

PN^^^Pa.AN. 

(2) Suppose the diameters to be axes in the first place 
(conjugate axes for hyperbolas, and both major or both minor 
axes for ellipses) so that the ordinates are at right angles to the 
diameters in both. 

Then the ratio p^ : AA' is the same in both curves. There- 
fore, using capital letters for one conic and small letters for the 
other, and making AN : an equal to AA' : aa', we have at the 
same time 

PN^ : AN. NA' =pn* : an.noi. 

But AN. NA' : AN* = an . na' : an\ 

because A'N : AN^a'n : an ; 

.-. PN*iAN*^pn*:an\ 
or PN '. AN^pnian, 

and the condition of similarity is satisfied (Def. 2). 

Again, let PP\ pp' be diameters in two hyperbolas or two 
ellipses, such that the corresponding ordinates make equal 
angles with the diameters, and the ratios of each diameter to 
its parameter are equal 

Draw tangents at P, p meeting the axes vaT,t respectively. 
Then the angles CPT, cpt are equal. Draw AH, ah perpen- 
dicular to the axes and meeting CP, cp in H, h ; and on CH, 
ch as diameters describe circles, which therefore pass respectively 
through A, a. Draw QAR, qar through A, a parallel respec- 
tively to the tangents at P, p and meeting the circles just 
described in R, r. 



200 



THS COStCS Of AFOLL0KIU8. 



Let F, If be the middle pointe of JQ, aq^ so that F, v lie on 
*, cp respectively. 





Then, since the " figures " on PP\ pp' are similar, 

A}r : CV. VH^av" : cv.vh, [Prop. 14] 

or AV* : A V. VR = at;* : av . vr, 

whence AV : VR^^avivr (a), 

and, since the angle AVC is equal to the angle avc, it follows 
that the angles at C, c are equal. 



EQUAL AND SIMILAR CONICS. 



201 



[For, if jST, A; be the centres of the circles, and /, i the middle 
points of AR, ar, we derive from (a) 

VA : AI = va : at; 

and, since Z KVI - Z km, 

the triangles KVI, kvi are similar. 





« » 



Therefore, since VI, vi are divided at J., a in the same ratio 
the triangles KVA, kva are similar; 

/. j^AKV^^akv; 



202 THE CONICS OF APOLLONIU& 

hence the halves of these angles, or of their supplements, are 

equal, or 

Z jBTCA = z tec] 

Therefore, since the angles at P, p are also equal, the 
triangles CPT, cpt are similar. 

Draw PN, pn perpendicular to the axes, and it will follow 
that 

FN'' : CN .NT^pfi^ : cn.fU, 

whence the ratio of AA' to its parameter and that of aa' to 
its parameter are equal [Prop. 14] 

Therefore (by the previous case) the conies are similar. 



Proposition 113. 

[VI. 14, 15.] 

A parabola is neither similar to a hyperbola nor to an 
ellipse; and a hyperbola is not similar to an ellipse. 

[Proved by reductio ad absurdum from the ordinate pro- 
perties.] 



Proposition 114. 

[VI. 17, 18.] 

(1) If PT.pt be tangents to two similar conies meeting the 

axes in T, t respectively and maJcing equal angles with them; 

if further y PV,pv be measured along the diamsters through P, 

p so that 

PV:PT=-pv:pt, 

and if QQ\ qq' be the chords through F, v parallel to PT, pt 
respectively: then the segments QPQ\ gpq' are similar and 
similarly situated, 

(2) And, conversely, if the segments are similar and 
similarly situated, PV: PT^pv :pt, and the tangents are 
equally inclined to the axes. 



EQUAL AND SIMILAB CONICS. 



203 



I. Let the conies be parabolas. 

Draw the tangents At A, a meeting the diameters through 
F, p in H, h, and let PL, pi be such lengths that 

PL:2PT:^0P:Pm 

and pi : 2pt = op : ph, } 

where 0, o are the points of intersection of AH, PT and ak, pt 

Therefore PL, pi are the parameters of the ordinates 
to the diameters PV, pv. [Prop. 22] 





Hence QV^^PL.PV, 

qt^sspl.pv. 
(1) Now, since ^PTA^ /.pia, 

ZOPH^ Zoph, 
and the triangles OPH, oph are similar. 

Therefore OPiPH^op: ph, 

so that PL'.PT^plipt 

But, by hypothesis, 

PV:PT=-pv:pt; 
.-. PL:PV-=:pl:pv, 

and, since QF is a mean proportional between PV, PL, and qv 
between pv, pi, 

QV:PV=^qv:pv. 



204 THE comes OF APOLLONIU& 

Similarly, if V\ v' be points on PF, |w such that 

P7:PF«pt;:;n/, 
and therefore FL : PV'^pl : ptf, 

it follows that the ordinates passing through V\ v' are in the 
same ratio to their respective abscissae. 

Therefore the segments sure similar. (De£ 6.) 

(2) If the segments are similar and similarly situated, 
we have to prove that 

and PViPT^pvipt 

m 

Now the tangents at P, p are parallel to QQ', qq' respec- 
tively, and the angles at F, t; are equal. 

Therefore the angles PTA,pta are equal. 

Also, by similar segments, 

QViPV^qvipv, 

while PL:QV=-QV:PV, B,nd pi : qv = qv :pv; 

.-. PLiPV^pl.pv, 

But Pi;:2Pr=0P:Pir| 

pi : 2pt =sop : ph ) 

and OP:PH=op:ph, 

by similar triangles. 

Therefore PV:PT = pv : pt 

II. If the curves be hyperbolas or ellipses, suppose a 
similar construction made, and let the ordinates PN, pn be 
drawn to the major or conjugate axes. We can use the figures 
of Prop. 112, only remembering that the chords are here QQ\ 
qq\ and do not pass through A, a, 

(1) Since the conies are similar, the ratio of the axis to its 
parameter is the same for both. 



EQUAL AND SIMILAR GONICS. 205 

Thei-efore PN* : CN. NT^pv? : en . fit. [Prop. 14] 

Also the angles PTN, ptn are equal, 
therefore PN : NT=pn : nt. 

Hence PN : CN^pn : en, 

and /.PCN^ /.pen. 

Therefore also z CPT = Z cpt 

It follows that the triangles OPH, oph are similar. 

Therefore OP:PH = op.ph. 

But 0P'.PH^PL:2PT) 

op:ph=pl:2pt )* 

whence PL.PT^pl: pt 

Also, by similar triangles, 

PT:CP^pt\cp] 

.\ PLiCP^pliqp, 

or PL\PP'^pl:pp' (A). 

Therefore the "figures" on the diameters PP\ pp' are 
similar. 

Again, we made PV\ PT =^pv : pt, 

so that PL : PV^plipv (B). 

We derive, by the method employed in Prop. 112, that 

Qr:PV=qv:pv, 

and that, if PV, pv be proportionally divided in the points V\ 
i/, the ordinates through these points are in the same ratios. 

Also the angles at F, t; are equal. 

Therefore the segments are similar. 

(2) If the segments are similar, the ordinates are in the 
ratio of their abscissae, and we have 

Q7:P7=ryw :pv ] 
PV:Pr=^pv:pt/\. 
PV':Q'V'=pf/:^v'] 



206 THE CONICS OF APOLLONIU8. 

Then QF":Q'F'« = gt^:9V; 

/. PV .VP' : PV .V'P' =^pv,vp' :pf .ffp\ 
and PViPV'^pv'.jnf, 

80 that P'Vi P'V'^p'v'.p'ff. 

From these equations it follows that 

and FV: FF'=pV:wV 

whence P'TiPV'r. pV : ptf ; 

.-. P'r.TPiPV^^pW.v'p'.po''. 
But PF'VQ'F'*=pt;^ :}'«'•; 

But these ratios are those of PP\ pp' to their respective 
parameters. 

Therefore the " figures " on PP\ pp' are similar ; and, since 
the angles at F, t; are equal, the conies are similar. 

Again, since the conies are similar, the "figures'* on the 
axes are similar. 

Therefore PN^ : ON .NT = pn^ icn.nt, 

and the angles at N, n are right, while the angle CPT is equal 
to the angle cpt. 

Therefore the triangles CPT, cpt are similar, and the angle 
CTP is equal to the angle ctp. 

Now, since PV. VP' : QV*=pv.vp' : jw", 
and QV'iPV^^qv'ipv'; 

it follows that PV: P'F=pt; : p% 

whence PP' : PV=^pp' :pv. 

But, by the similar triangles CPT, cpt, 

CP:PT = cp:pt, 

or PP'iPT^pp' :pt] 

/. PV:PT = pv:pt, 

and the proposition is proved. 



EQUAL AND SIMILAB CONICS. 207 



Proposition 115. 

[VL 21, 22.] 

If two ordinatea be drawn to the axes of two parabolas, or the 
major or conjugate axes of two similar ellipses or two similar 
hyperbolas, a^ PN, P'N' andpn, p'vf, such that the ratios AN : an 
and AN' : an' are ea^h equal to the ratio of the respective laiera 
recta, then the segments PP\ pp' will be similar ; also PP' wUl 
not be similar to any segment in the other conic which is cut off 
by two ordinates other than pn, p'n\ and vice versa, 

[The method of proof adopted follows the lines of the 
previous propositions, and accordingly it is unnecessary to 
reproduce it.] 



Proposition 116. 

[VL 26, 27.] 

If any cone be cut by two parallel planes making hyperbolic 
or elliptic sections, the sections will be similar but not equal. 

On referring to the figures of Props. 2 and 3, it will be seen 
at once that, if another plane parallel to the plane of section be 
drawn, it will cut the plane of the axial triangle in a straight 
line p'pm parallel to P'PM and the base in a line dme parallel 
to DME; also p'pm will be the diameter of the resulting 
hyperbola or ellipse, and the ordinates to it will be parallel to 
dme, i.e. to DME. 

Therefore the ordinates to the diameters are equally 
inclined to those diameters in both curves. 

Also, if PL, pi are the corresponding parameters, 

PL : PP'^BF.FC : AF*^pl : pp'. 



208 THE comes OP APOLLONIUS. 

Hence the rectangles PL . PP' and pi .pp are similar. 

It follows that the conies are similar. [Prop. 112] 

And they cannot be equal, since PL . PP' cannot be equal to 
pl.pp'. [Cf. Prop. 110(2)] 

[A similar proposition holds for the parabola, since, by 
Prop. 1, PL : PA is a constant ratio. Therefore two parallel 
parabolic sections have different parameters.] 



PROBLEMS. 

Proposition 117. 

[VI. 28.] 

In a given right cone to find a parabolic section equal to a 
giffen parabola. 

Let the given parabola be that of which am is the axis and 
al the latus rectum. Let the given right cone be OBC, where 
is the apex and BC the circular base, and let OBC be a 
triangle through the axis meeting the base in BC. 





Measure OA along OB such that 

aliOA^BCiBO.Oa 
H. c. 



14 



210 THE CONIOa OF APOLLONIUa 

Draw AM parallel to OC meeting BC in Jf, and through 
AM draw a plane at right angles to the plane OBO and cutting 
the circular hase in DME. 

Then DE is perpendicular io AM, and the section DAE is 
a parabola whose axis is AM. 

Also [Prop. 1], if AL is the latus rectum, 

ALiAO^BCPxBO.OC, 

whence AL^al, and the parabola is equal to the given one 
[Prop. 110]. 

No other parabola with vertex on OB can be found which is 
equal to the given parabola except DAE, For, if another such 
parabola were possible, its plane must be perpendicular to the 
plane OBC and its axis must be parallel to OC. If A' were 
the supposed vertex and A'L' the latus rectum, we should have 
A'L' : A'O^BC* : BO.OC^AL : AO. Thus, if A' does not 
coincide with ii, A'L' cannot be equal to AL or a2, and the 
parabola cannot be equal to the given one. 



Propoiitioii 118. 

[VL 29.] 

In a given right cone to find a section equal to a given 
hyperboUL (A necessary condition of possibility is that the ratio 
of the square on the axis of the cone to the square on the radius 
of the base must not be greater tluin the ratio of the transverse 
axis of the given hyperbola to its parameter.) 

Let the given hyperbola be that of which aa', al are the 
transverse axis and parameter respectively. 

L Suppose OP : BP <aa' :al, where / is the centre of the 
base of the given cone. 

Let a circle be circumscribed about the axial triangle OBC, 
and produce 01 to meet the circle again in D. 





PBOBLEUa 


Then 


01 ■.ID' 01' -.BP. 


Uut 


OI:II><aa':al 




Take E on ID sach that 01 -.IB-aa' : al, and through E 
draw the chord QQ' parallel to BO. 

Suppose now that AA', A,A ,' are pUced in the angle formed 
by 00 and BO produced, such that AA'^A,A^^aa', and 
AA', A,A^ are respectively parallel to OQ, OQ, meeting BO 
in M. Jtf '. 

Through A'AM, A^'A^M' draw planes perpendicular to the 
pUne of the triangle OBG making hyperbolic sections, of which 
A'AM, A^AjM' will therefore be the transverse axes. 

Suppose OQ, OQf to meet BC in F, F'. 

Then cui\al''OI;lE 

= OF:FQoxOF':F(^ 
- OF* : OF.FQ or OF* : OF'.F'Qf 
'OF'-.BF.FOotOF'^.BF. f-c 
= AA' : AL or A,A,' : A,L^. 

14—8 



212 THE aONIOa OF APOLLONIUS. 

where AL^ ^i^x ^^^ ^^^ parameters of AA', A^A^ in the 
sections respectively. 

It follows, since AA' « A^A' » (wl^ 

that AL s AJj^ s oL 

Hence the two hyperbolic sections are each equal to the given 
hyperbola. 

There are no other equal sections having their vertices on 
OC. 

For (1), if such a section were possible and OH were parallel 
to the axis of such a section, OH could not be coincident 
either with OQ or OQf. This is proved after the manner of 
the preceding proposition for the parabola. 

If then (2) OH meet BC in H, QQf in R, and the circle 
again in K, we should have, if the section were possible, 

aa' lal^OH^iBH.HC 
^OH^.OH.HK 
^OHiHK; 
which is impossible, since 

au'ial^OI: lE^ OH : HR. 

n. If OP : BP^aa' : al, we shall have 01 : ID^aa': at, 
and OQ, OQf will both coincide with OD. 

In this case there will be only one section equal to the 
given hyperbola whose vertex is on OC, and the axis of this 
section will be perpendicular to BC. 

m. If OP : BP>aa' : cU, no section can be found in the 
right cone which is equal to the given hyperbola. 

For, if possible, let there be such a section, and let ON be 
drawn parallel to its axis meeting BC in N. 

Then we must have aa' :al= OIP : BN , NC, 
so that OP : BI.IC>ON' : BN.NC. 

But Oir > OP, while BI.IC>BN,NC: which is absurd. 



Fropoiltlon 118. 

[VI. 80.] 

In a given right cone to find a tection equal to a given ellipae. 

Id this case we describe the circle about OBC and suppose 
F, F taken on BC produced in both directions such that, if 
OF, OF" meet the circle in Q, Q*, 

OF:FQ=OF'iF'q~aa':ai. 




Then we place straight lines AA', A^Ai in the angle BOC 
so that they are each equal to aa', while AA' is parallel to 
OQ and A^A,' to OQf. 

Next suppose planes drawn through AA', A,A,' each 
perpendicular to the plane of OBG, and these planes determine 
two sections each of which is equal to the given ellipse. 

The proof follows the method of the preceding proposition. 



214 THE CONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 



Propofitioii ISO. 

[VL 31.] 

To find a right cone similar to a given one and containing 
a given parabola as a section of it 

Let OBC be an axial section of the given right cone, and 
let the given parabola be that of which AN is the axis and A£, 
the latus rectum. Erect a plane passing through AN and 
perpendicular to the plane of the parabola, and in this plane 
make the angle NAM equal to the angle OBC. 





Let AM be taken of such a length that AL : AM^ BC : BO, 
and on AM as base, in the plane MAN, describe the triangle 
EAM similar to the triangle OBC. Then suppose a cone 
described with vertex E and base the circle on AM as diameter 
in a plane perpendicular to the plane EAM. 

The cone EAM will be the cone required. 

For ^MAN=/iOBC=/iEAM = /^EMA; 

therefore EM is parallel to AN, the axis of the parabola. 

Thus the plane of the given parabola cuts the cone in a 
section which is also a parabola. 

Now ALiAM^BC'.BO 

^AMiAE, 

or AM^^EA.AL; 

:. AM'.AE.EM^ALiEM 

= AL:EA. 



PROBLEMS. 215 

Hence AL is the latus rectum of the parabolic section of 
the cone made by the plane of the given parabola. It is also 
the latus rectum of the given parabola. 

Therefore the given parabola is itself the parabolic section, 
and EAM is the cone required. 

There can be no other right cone similar to the given one, 
having its vertex on the same side of the given parabola, and 
containing that parabola as a section. 

For, if another such cone be possible, with vertex Fy draw 
through the axis of this cone a plane cutting the plane of the 
given parabola at right angles. The planes must then intersect 
mANy the axis of the parabola, and therefore J^ must lie in the 
plane of EAN. 

Again, if AF, FR are the sides of the axial triangle of the 
cone, FR must be parallel to AN^ or to EM, and 

/,AFR^/.BOC^/.AEM, 

so that J^ must lie on AE or AE produced. Let AM meet 
FiJ in 12. 

Then, if AL' be the latus rectum of the parabolic section of 
the cone FAR made by the plane of the given parabola, 

ALxAF^ABfiAF.FR 
^AiPiAE.EM 
= AL:AE. 

Therefore AL\ AL cannot be equal ; or the given parabola 
is not a section of the cone FAR 

Propofitloii 131. 

[VL 32.] 

To find a right cone similar to a given one and containing a 
given hyperbola as a section of it. (If OBC be the given cone and 
D the centre of its base BC, and if AA\ AL be ihe axis and 
parameter of the given hyperbola, a necessary condition of 
possibility is that the ratio OD* : DB* must not be greater than 
the ratio AA' : AL.) 



216 



THE comes OP APOLLOMIUS. 



Let a plane be drawn through the axis of the given 
hyperbola and perpendicular to its plane ; and on A'A^ in the 
plane so described, describe a segment of a circle containing an 





angle equal to the exterior angle B'OC at the vertex of the 
given cone. Complete the circle, and let EF be the diameter 
of it bisecting AA' at right angles in i. Join A'E^ AE, and 
draw AO parallel to EF meeting A'E produced in 0. 

Then, since EF bisects the angle A'EA, the angle EOA 
is equal to the angle EAO. And the angle AEO is equal 
to the angle BOC, so that the triangles EAO, OBC are simUar. 

Draw EM perpendicular to AO. 
Then CD' : DB' = EIP : MA* 

^lA^iEP 



^FIiIE. 



L Suppose that 



0D« : DB* < A A' : AL, 



so that 



FI:IE<AA':AL 



PROBLEMS. 217 

Take a point H on EI such that FI : IH^AA' : AL, and 
through H draw the chord QQ' of the circle parallel to AA'. 
Join A'Q, AQ, and in the plane of the circle draw AR making 
with ilQ an angle equal to the angle OBC. Let AR meet 
A'Q produced in R, and QQ' produced in N. 

Join FQ meeting AA' in K. 

Then, since the angle QAR is equal to the angle OBO, and 

^FQA = ^zA'QA^i/iB'OC, 

AR is parallel to FQ. 

Also the triangle QAR is similar to the triangle OBC. 

Suppose a cone formed with vertex Q and base the circle 
described on ii 12 as diameter in a plane perpendicular to that 
of the circle FQA. 

This cone will be such that the given hyperbola is a 
section of it. 

We have, by construction, 

AA'iAL^FIiIH 

= FK : KQ, by parallels, 

^FK.KQiKQ^ 

^A'K.KA :KQ\ 

But, by the parallelogram QKANy 

A'K.KQ^QN'.NR, 

and KA:KQ^QN:NA, 

whence A'K.KA : KQ'^QIP : AN.NR. 

It follows that 

AA'iAL^QN': AN.NR. 

Therefore [Pi'op. 2] AL is the parameter of the hyperbolic 
section of the cone QAR made by the plane of the given 
hyperbola. The two hyperbolas accordingly have the same 
axis and parameter, whence they coincide [Prop. 110 (2)]; and 
the cone QAR has the required property. 



218 THE CONICfS OF APOLLONIUS. 

Another such cone is found by taking the point Q[ instead 
of Q and proceeding as before. 

No other right cone except these two can be found which 
is similar to the given one, has its apex on the same side of the 
plane of the given hyperbola, and contains that hyperbola as a 
section. 

For, if such a cone be possible with apex P, draw through 
its axis a plane cutting the plane of the given hyperbola at 
right angles. The plane thus described must then pass 
through the axis of the given hyperbola, whence P must lie in 
the plane of the cirole FQA. And, since the cone is similar to 
the given cone, P must lie on the aro A'QA. 

Then, by the converse of the preceding proof, we must have 
(if FP meet A' A in T) 

AA'iAL^FT:TP\ 

. FTiTP^FIiIH, 

which is impossible. 

II. Suppose that 

0D« : DB* = AA' : AL, 
80 that FI'.IE^ A A' : AL. 

In this case Q, Q' coalesce with E, and the cone with 
apex E and base the cirole on AO as diameter perpendicular 
to the plane of FQA is the cone required. 

III. If OD^:DB*>AA' : AL, no right cone having the 
desired properties can be drawn. 

For, if possible, let P be the apex of such a cone, and we 

shall have, as before, 

FT'.TP^AA'.AL. 

But A A' : AL < OD* : DB*, or FI : IE. 

Hence FT :TP<FI : IE, which is absurd. 

Therefore, etc. 



PROBLEMS. 



219 



Propoiitioii laa. 

[VI. 33.] 

To find a right cone similar to a given one and containing 
a given ellipse as a section of it 

As before, take a plane through AA' perpendicular to the 
plane of the given ellipse ; and in the plane so drawn describe 
on AA' as base a segment of a circle containing on angle equal 
to the angle BOC, the vertical angle of the given cone. Bisect 
the arc of the segment in F. 

Draw two lines FK, FK' to meet AA' produced both ways 
and such that, if they respectively meet the segment in Q, Q\ 

FK : KQ^FK' : K'Q'^AA' : AL. 

Draw Qi\r parallel to AA\ and AN parallel to QF, meeting in N. 
Join AQ, A'Q, and let A'Q meet AN in R 




Conceive a cone drawn with Q as apex and as base the circle 
on AR as diameter and in a plane at right angles to that 
of AFA'. 

This cone will be such that the given ellipse is one of 
its sections. 



S20 THE CONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 

For, since FQ, AR are parallel, 

/.FQR^ /^ARQ. 

:. /,ARQ^/.FAA' 

= Z OBC. 

And /^AQR^^AFA' 

= Z BOC. 

Therefore the triangles QAR, OBC are similar, and likewise 
the cones QAR, OBC. 

Now AA' : AL = FK : iTQ, by construction, 

^FK.KQiKQ* 

^A'K.KAzKQ* 

^(A'K:KQ).{KA:KQ) 

= (QiV' : NR) . (QN : NA), by panOlels, 

Therefore [Prop. 3] AL is the latus rectum of the elliptic 
section of the cone QAR made by the plane of the given 
ellipse. And AL is the latus rectum of the given ellipse. 
Therefore that ellipse is itself the elliptic section. 

In like manner another similar right cone can be found with 
apex Q' such that the given ellipse is a section. 

No other right cone besides these two can be found satis- 
fying the given conditions and having its apex on the same 
side of the plane of the given ellipse. For, as in the preceding 
proposition, its apex P, if any, must lie on the arc AFA\ 
Draw PM parallel to A'A, and A'M parallel to FP^ meeting 
in M. Join AP, AT, and let AP meet A'M in S. 

The triangle PA'S will then be similar to OBC, and we 
shall have PAT : A'M. MS^AT, TA' : TP* ^FT.TP: TP\ in 
the same way as before. 

We must therefore have 

AA'.AL^FT.TP; 

and this is impossible, because 

AA':AL = FK:KQ. 



VALUES OF CERTAIN FUNCTIONS OF THE 
LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETERS. 

Propoiitloii 123 (Lemma). 

[vn. 1.] 

In a parabola^y if PN he an ordinate and AH be measured 
along the axis away from N and equal to the lotus rectum, 

AP' = AN. NH. [^ANiAN+p^yi 




This is proved at once fix)m the property PlP^pa . AN, by 
adding AN* to each side. 

Propofitioii 134 (Lemma). 
[VII. 2. 3.] 

If AA' be divided at H, internally for the hyperbola, and 
externally for the ellipse, so tiuU AH: HA' sj9s : AA', then, 
if PN be any ordinate, 

AP*:AN.NH^AA':A'H. 

* Though Book TIL la mainly ooneemed with oonjngate diametan of a 
oontral oonie, ona or two propodtioni for the parabok are imerted, no doobi 
in order to ihow, in connection with particular propodtioni aboat a central 
conic, any obYiooaly correcponding propertiee of the parabola. 



222 



THK oomos or APOLLomua 



Produce AN toK.ao that 



thns 



or 



Alf.NK^PN*; 
AN.NK.AN.A'N 
^Pir-.AN.A'N 

^Pt'.AA' [ProptS] 

s AH : A'H, by construction, 
NK.A'N^AH-.A'H. 




t A 





It follows that 

A'N±NK : A'N = A'H ± AH : A'H 

(where the upper sign applies to the hyperbola). 

Hence A'K : A'N^AA' : A'H; 

.'. A'K±AA':A'N±A'H = AA':A'H, 

or AK : NH = AA' : A'H. 

Thus AN.AK: AN. NH = AA' : A'H. 

But AN. AK = AP\ since AN.NK^ PN\ 

Therefore AP* :AN.NH = AA' : A'H. 

The same proposition is true if AA' is the minor axis of an 
ellipse and p^ the corresponding parameter. 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETERS. 



223 



Propofitioii 125 (Lemma). 
[VIL 4.] 

If in a hyperbola or an ellipse the tangent ai P meet the ascia 
A A' in T, and if CD be the semi-diameter parallel to PT, then 

Pr.CD^-^NT.CN. 






E 




rFJ> 


r A 


N c'Nv 



Draw AE, TF at right angles to (7-4 to meet (7P, and 
let AE meet PT in 0. 

Then, if p be the parameter of the ordinates to PP\ 
we have 



^iPT^OPiPE. 



[Prop. 23] 



Also, since CD is parallel to PT, it is conjugate to CP. 
Therefore ^.CP^CD* (1). 



Now 



or 



%.CP^CD* 

z 

OP : PE = TP : PF ; 
.: ^. PT = PT . PF. 



^.PF=pr 



.(2). 



From (1) and (2) we have 

PT* '. CD* =:> PF '. CP 

= NT : CN. 



224 



THE CONICa OF APOLLOKIUS. 



Propofitioii 136 (Iiemma). 
[Vn. 5.] 

In a parabola, if p be Hie parameter of the ordinaUe to the 
diameter through P, and PN ike principal ordinate^ and if AL 
he the latue rectum, 

p = AL + 4iAN. 




Let the tangent at A meet PT in and the diameter 
through P ia E, and let PO, at right angles to PT, meet 
the axis in 0. 

Then, since the triangles PTO, EPO are similar, 

QTiTP^OPiPE, 

.'. Or=| (1). [Prop. 22] 

Again, since TPO is a right angle, 

TN.NO=^Pir 

:^LA.AN, 
by the property of the parabola. 

But TN = 2AN. [Prop. 12] 

Therefore AL^2NG (2); 

thus AL + ^AN^2(TN+NQ) 

^2T0 
= jD, bom (1) above. 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETERS. 225 

[Note. The property of the normal (NO = half the latus 
rectum) is incidentally proved here by regarding it as the 
perpendicular through P to the tangent at that point. Cf. 
Prop. 85 where the normal is regarded as the minimum straight 
line firom to the curve.] 



Def. If AA' be divided, internally for the hjrperbola, and 
externally for the ellipse, in each of two points H, H' such that 

A'H.AH=AH'.A'H'^AA':p,, 

where pa is the parameter of the ordinates io AA\ then AH, 
A'H' (corresponding to j!}^ in the proportion) are called 
homologues. 

In this definition A A' may be either the major or the 
minor axis of an ellipse. 

Proposition 1217. 

[VII. 6, 7.] 

If AH, A'H' be the " homx>loffne8" in a hyperbola or an 
ellipse, and PP\ DD' any two conjugate diameters, and if AQ 
be drawn parallel to DD' meeting the curve in Q, and QM be 
perpendicular to AA' , then 

PP'^ : DD'* ^ MH' : MH 

Join A'Q, and let the tangent at P meet AA' in T. 

Then, since A'C=^ CA, and QV=^ VA (where CP meets QA 
in V), A'Q is parallel to CV, 

Now Pr : CD* ^NT'.CN [Prop. 126] 

= AM : A'M, by similar triangles. 

And, also by similar triangles, 

CP*:Pr^A'Q*:AQ\ 

whence, ex aequali, 

CP* : CD* « {AM : A'M) . {A'Q* : AQ*) 

= {AM : A'M) X (A'Q* : A'M.MH') 

X {A'M. MH' : AM. MH) x {AM . MH : AQ*). 

H. c. 15 



THE comes OF AroiXONlUS. 




LENGTHS UF CONJUOATE DIAMFTTERS. 227 

But, by Prop. 124, 

A'Q* : A'M. MH' = A A' : AH', 

and AM.MH.AQ'=:A'H:AA'^AH':AA'. 

Also A'M .MH' : AM .MH = {A'M : AM).{MH' : MH). 

It follows that 

CP' : CD* = MH' : MH. 

or PP'» : 2)2)'* = MH' : MH 

This result may of course be written in the form 

PP'.p== MH' : MH, 

where p is the parameter of the ordinates to PP'. 



Proposition 138. 

[Vn. 8, 9, 10, 11.] 

In the figures of the last proposition the follotoing relations 
hold /or both the hyperbola and the ellipse : 

(1) A A'* : {PP' ± DD'y = A'H . MH' : (MH' ± 'JMH.MH')*, 

(2) AA" : PP' . DD' = A'H : ^MH.MH', 

(3) AA'* : (PP'* ± DD'*) = A'H : MH± MH'. 

(1) We have 

AA'* : PP'* = GA* : CP* ; 

.-. AA"* : PP'* = CN. CT : CP* [Prop. 14] 

= A'M.A'A:A'q*, 
by similar triangles. 

Now A'Q* : A'M. MH' » AA' : AH' [Prop. 124] 

= AA' : A'H 

- A'M. A' A : A'M. A'H, 
whence, alternately, 

A'M. A' A : A'Q* = A'M . A'H : A'M . MH'. 
Therefore, from above, 

AA'* : PP'* = A'H : MH' («), 

^A'H.MH'.MH". 

15—2 



228 THE comes of apollonius. 

Again, PP'' : DD'* = MH' : MH ... (8), [Prop. 127] 

^ MB'* : MH . MH' ; 

:. PP' : DD' = 3fff' : ^/MH.MH' (7). 



Hence PP' : PP' ± DD' = MH' : if iT' ± -JMH.MH', 
and PP" : (PP' ± DD'y = J/jy* : ( Jfff' ± ^MH.MH'y . 

Therefore by (a) above, ex oegua^t, 
4^" : {PP' ± DDJ = A'H. MH' : (ifiT' t »JMH.MHJ. 

(2) We derive from (7) above 

pp/i . pp/ 2)2)' = JfiT' : -JMHTMH'. 

Therefore by (aX at a«gua/t, 

AA-* : PP' . DD' - A'H : -JMH.MH'. 

(3) From 08), 

PP" : (PP " ± DD'*) - Jf^' : MH ± MH'. 
Therefore by (a), ex aequali, 

A A'* : (PP" ± DD") = A'H : MH ± MH'. 



Propofltion lao. 
[VII. 12, 13, 29, 30.] 

In every ellipse the evm, and in every hyperbola the difference, 
of the aquares on any two conjugate diameters is eqtuU to the sum 
or difference respectively of the squares on the axes. 

Using the figures and construction of the preceding two 
propositions, we have 

AA'* : Bff* = AA' : p^ 

s A'H : AH, by construction, 

^A'H.A'H'. 
Therefore 

AA"* : AA"* ± BB" = A'H : A'H± A'H' 

(where the upper sign belongs to the ellipse), 

or AA'*:AA'*±BB'*^A'H:HH' (o). 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE OIAUETEKS. 229 

Again, by (a) in Prop. 128 (1), 

and, by means of (fi) in the same proposition, 

PP'* : {PP"* ± DD'*) = MH' : MH ± MH' 

^MH'.HH'. 
From the last two relations we obtain 

AA'* : {PP'*±DD'*) = A'H : HH'. 
Comparing this with (a) above, we have at once 
{PP"* ± DD") = {AA" ± BB^. 



Proposition 130. 

[VIL 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.] 

The fottowing results can be, derived from the preceding 
pn^Hisitions, viz. 

(1) For the ellipse, 

AA" : PP" - DD" = A'H : 2CM; 

and for both the ellipse and hyperbola, if p denote the parameter 
of the ordinates to PP', 

(2) AA" : p* = A'H. MH' : MH", 

(3) AA" : (PP' ±py = A'H . MH' : (MH ± MH'f, 

(4) AA'* :PP'.p = A'H : MH, and 

(6) AA" : PP'* ±p* = A'H.MH': MH'* ± MH*. 

(1) We have 

A A" : PP" = A'H : MH', [Prop. 128 (1), (a)] 

and PP* : PP" - DD" = MH' : MH - MH {ibid., 03)] 

= MH' : 20 M in the ellipse. 

Therefore for the ellipse 

AA" : PP" - DD" = A'H : 2CM. 



230 THE C0S1C8 or APOLLONIV8. 

(2) For either carve 

A A" : PP"* - A'H : MH'. as befiwe. 

'^ A'H . MH' : MH", 
and, by Prop. 127, 

PP'* : p* ~ MH" : MH' ; 

.: AA" : f » A'H. MH' : ifJT. 

(3) By Prop. 127, 

PP''.p'MH':MH\ 
.'. PP" : {PP' ±py - MH" : (MH ± MHJ. 
And AA'* : PP** = ^'F. MH' : ifJ^, as befoie ; 

.-. AA"* : (PP' ±pf = 4'ir. JfiT' : (MH±MHy. 

(4) ilil'» : PP" = A'H : if JST', as before, 
and PP'*:PP'.p^PP' :p 

= MH':MH, [Prop. 127] 

.-. AA'.PP'.p^A'H.MH. 

(5) il^** : PP " = A'H . MH' : if J?", as before, 
and PP".PP'*±p* = MH"* : MH'* ± MH\ 

by means of Prop. 127 ; 

.-. AA"" : PP'* ± /)» = AH. MH' : MH'* ± MH*. 



Propositioii 131. 

[VII. 21, 22. 23.] 

Tn a hyperbola, if AA' ^> SB', then, if PP', DD' be any 
other two conjugate diameters, PP' ^^ DD' reapectively ; and 

Vie ratio PP' : DD' continuaUv \ . [ as P moves 

" (or increases ] 

further from A on either' side. 
Also, if AA' = BB', PP' = DD'. 



LENGTHS OF CONJUQATE DIAMETERS. 231 

(1) Of the figures of Prop. 127, the first corresponds to 
the case where AA' > BB', and the second to the case where 
AA'kBB'. 

{fimt ) 
,V figure respectively, it follows 

fix)in 

pp^ : DD'' = MH' : MH [Prop. 127] 

that PP' ^j.^ DD\ 

Also A A ** : BB** = A A' : pa = A'H : AH, by construction, 

and AH' : ili5ror< -J*^^' • ^^' 

while Jlffl^' : MH \ [ continually as M moves further 

(or increases) "^ 

firom A, %.e, as Q, or P, moves further from A along the curve. 
Therefore AA*^ : BB'* ^^> PP'* : i)/)", 

and the latter ratio \ . I as P moves further from A. 



(dim 
(or h 



mcreasesj 
And the same is true of the ratios 

AA' : BB' and PP' : DD'. 

(2) It AA'^BB', then AA'=pa, and both H and fl^' 
coincide with C. 

In this case therefore 

AH ^ AH' ^ AC, 

MH^MH'^CM, 

and PP' = 2)2)' always. 

Propoiition 139. 

[VII. 24.] 

In an ellipse, if A A' he the major, and BB' the minor, axis^ 
and if PP', DD' he any other two conjugate diameters, then 

AA' : BB' > PP' : DD', 

and the latter ratio diminishes continually as P moves from 
Ato B. 



232 



THK COA'ICS OF APOLLUMIUS. 



We have CA* :CB*^AN.NA': PN* ; 

.-. AN.NA'>PN*. 
and, adding CN* to each, 

CA* > CP*, 
or AA'>PP' 



OX 




Also CB* : CA* = BM. MB' : DM*, 

where DM is the ordinate to BB'. 

Therefore BM. MB' < DM*, 

and, adding CM\ CB' < CD' ; 

.-. BB'kDD' 



(2). 



Again, if PiPf, D^D^' be another pair of conjugates, P, 
being further from A than P, i), will be further from B 
than D. 

And AN. NA' : AN, . N,A' = PN* : P,N*. 

But AN, . N,A' >AN.NA'; 

.: P,N*>PN\ 

and AN,.N,A'-AN.NA'> P,N* - PiV*. 

But, as above, AN, . N,A' > P,N,*, 

and AN,.N,A'-AN.NA'^CN*-CN*; 

.: CN*-CN,'>P,N,*-P2P; 

thus CP* > CP/, 



or 



pp' > p.p: 



I* 1 



(3). 

In an exactly similar manner we prove that 

DD'<D,D; (4). 



LENGTHS OF CONJUOATE DIAMFFEUS. 233 

We have therefore, by (1) and (2), 

AA':BB'>PP':DD\ 

and, by (3) and (4), PP' : DD' > P,P; : D,D,\ 

Cor. It is at once clear, it pa^ p, |>, are the parameters 
corresponding to AA\ PP\ PJP^\ that 

Pa<Pf P<Pi» etc. 

Proposition 133. 

[VIL 25, 26.] 

(1) In a hyperbola or an ellipse 

AA' -^ BB' < PP' + DD\ 

where PP\ DD' are any conjugate diameters other than 
the axes. 

(2) In the hyperbola PP' + DD' increases continually as P 
moves further from A, while in the ellipse it increases as P 
moves from A until PP', DD' take the position of the equal 
conjugate diameters, wlien it is a maximum. 

(1) For the hyperbola 

AA'' • BB'' = PP" • DD'* [Prop. 129] 

or {A A' + BB') . (A A' • BB') = (PP' + DD') . (PP' - DD '), 

and, by the aid of Prop. 131, 

AA' ^ BB' > PP' ^ DD' ; 

.-. AA''^BB'<PP''\'DD'. 

Similarly it is proved that PP* + Diy increases as P moves 
further from A. 

In the case where AA'^ BR, PP' = DD', and PP' > A A' ; 
and the proposition still holds. 

(2) For the ellipse 

AA' : BB' > PP' : DD' ; 
.'. (A A" + BB'*) : (A A' + BB'Y > (PP'* + DD'*) : (PP' + DD')** 
But A A'* + BB** » PP'* + DD'* ; [Prop. 129] 

.-. AA' + BB'<PP' + DD'. 

* Apollonias draws this inference directly, and gives no intermediate steps. 



234 THE 00NIC8 OF AK>LLONIUS. 

Similarly it may be proved that PP' + DD' increases as 
P moves from A until PP\ DD' take the position of the eqaal 
conjugate diameters, when it begins to diminish again. 

Proposition 134. 

[Vn. 27.] 

In every ellipse o?* hyperbola having uneqtiol'aaes 

AA' - BB' > PP' • DD', 

where PP\ DD' are any other conjugate diameters. Also, cm P 
moves from A, PP' - DD' diminishes, in the hyperbola oofi" 
tinually, and in the ellipse until PP', DD' take up the position 
of the equal conjugate diameters. 

For the ellipse the proposition is clear from what was 
proved in Prop. 132. 

For the hyperbola 

AA"" • BB'' = PP'* • DD'*, 

and PP'>AA'. 

It follows that 

AA' ^BB'>PP'^DD', 

and the latter diminishes continually as P moves farther 
fix>m A. 

[This proposition should more properly have come before 
Prop. 133, because it is really used (so far as i^egards the 
hyperbola) in the proof of that proposition.] 

Proposition 135. 

[VII. 28.] 

In every hyperbola or ellipse 

AA'.BB'<PP\DD', 

and PP'.DD' increases as P vioves away from A, in the 
hyperbola co7vtinually, and in the ellipse until PP', DD' coincide 
with the equal conjugate diameters. 

We have A A' + BB' < PP' + DD', [Prop. 133] 

80 that .-. (AA' +BB'y < {PP' + DD')\ 



LENGTHS OF CONJUOATE DIAMETERS. 



235 



And, for the ellipse, 

AA'^ + BB'* = PP'' + DD". [Prop. 129] 

Therefore, by subtraction, 

AA\BB'<PP\DD\ 
and in like manner it will be shown that PP.DD* increases 
until PP\ DD' coincide with the equal c<mjugate diameters. 

For the hyperbola [proof omitted in Apollonius] PP' > AA\ 
DD' > BB\ and PP\ DD' both increase continually as P moves 
away from A, Hence the proposition is obvious. 



Proposition 136. 

[VII. 31.] 

If PP't Diy be two conjugate diainetera in an ellipse or 
in conjugate hyperbolas, and if tangents be drawn ai the four 
extremities forming a parallelogram LL'MM\ tlien 

the parallelogram LL'MM' = rect. AA' . BB'. 

Let the tangents at P, D meet the axis AA' in T, T 

respectively. Let PN be an ordinate to AA\ and take a 

length PO such that 

PO^^CN.NT. 

Now GA* : GB* = CN . NT : PN' [Prop. 14] 

= PO':PJV', 

or CA:CB=^PO:PN\ 

.-. CA'iGA.CB^PO.CTiCT.PN. 

Hence, alternately, 

CA* : PO. CT^GA . CB : CT.PN, 

or CT.CN:PO.CT^CA.CB:CT.PN (1). 




236 



THE COyiOS OF APOLLONIU8. 




Again, Pr : CD^ = NT : CN, [Prop. 126] 

so that 2ACPT: it^TDC^NT : CN. 

But the parallelogram {CL) is a mean proportional between 
2 A CPT and 2 A rjDC, 

for 2 AC7Pr : (CX) ^PT:CD 

= C7P : DT' 

Also PO is a mean proportional between ON and NT, 
Therefore 

2ACPr : (CL)^PO : CN^PO.CT : C7r.C7iV' 

=^CT.PN:GA. CB, firom (1) above. 
And 2A0PT^0T.PN; 

/. (C7X) = CM . C7B, 
or, quadrupling each side, 

CJLL'MM'^AA'.BB'. 



Proposition 137. 

[VIL 33, 34, 35.] 

Supposing pa to be the para/fneter corresponding to the aais 
AA' in a hyperbola, and p to be the parameter corresponding 
to a diameter PP\ 

(1) if AA' be not less than p^, then pa<Pf and p increases 
continually as P moves further from A ; 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETERS. 



237 



(2) if A A' be less than pa biU not less than ^ , then pa < p, 
and p increases cw P moves away from A ; 

(3) if AA' < ^ , thei*e can be found a diameter PoPo oii 

either side of the axis sttch that po = iPoPo^ Also po is less 
than any other parameter p, and p increases as P moves further 
from Po in either direction. 

(1) (a) UAA'^pa, we have [Prop. 131 (2)] 

PP'^p^DD\ 

and PP\ and therefore p, increases continually as P moves 
away firom A. 

(6) If AA'>pa, AA'>BB\ and, as in Prop. 131 (1), 
PP' : DD\ and therefore PP' : p, diminishes continually as P 
moves away from A, But PP' increases. Therefore p in- 
creases all the more. 

(2) Suppose AA' <pa hut ^^. 

Let P be any point on the branch with vertex A ; draw 
A'Q parallel to CP meeting the same branch in Q, and draw 
the ordinate QM. 

Divide A' A at H, H' so that 

A'H : HA = AH' : H'A' = AA' : pa, 

as in the preceding propositions. 




238 THE comes OF APOLLOimiS. 

Therefore AA"* : p* -= A' H . AH' . AH* (a). 

We have now AH > AH' but It 2AH'. 
And MH + HA>2AH; 

.'. MH+HA :AH>AH: AH'. 

or (MH + HA) AH' > AH* (/8). 

It follows that 

(MH + HA)AM: (MH + HA) AH', or AM : AH'. 

< {MH+HA) AM: AH*. 
Therefore, componendo, 

MH':AH'<{MH+HA)AM + AH*:AH* 

< MH*:AH* (7), 

whence A'H. MH' : A'H. AH' < MH* : AH*. 

or, alternately, 

A'H . MH' : MH* <A'H. AH' : AH*. 

But, by Prop. 130 (2), and by the result (a) above, these 
ratios are respectively equal to AA'* : p*, and AA" : p^. 

Therefore AA"* : p* < AA'* : jo,', 

or Pa < p. 

Again, if P, be a point further from A than P is, and if 

A'Q^ is parallel to CP^, and M^ is the foot of the ordinate QM^, 

then, since AH :^ 2AH'. 

MH < 2MH' ; 

also M,H + HM> iMH. 

Thus {M,H + HM) MH' > MH*. 

This is a similar relation to that in (/9) above except that 
M is substituted for A. and M^ for M. 

We thus derive, by the same proof, the corresponding result 
to (7) above, or 

M^H' : MH' < M,H* : MH*. 
whence A'H .M,H'.M,H*< A'H . MH' : MH*. 
or AA'* : p* < AA'* : p*. 

so thaX p<p^, and the proposition is proved. 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETERS. 239 

(3) Now let A A be less than ^. 

Take a point lU such that HH' = E'M^, and let Qo, Po be 
related to M^ in the same way that Q, P are to M. 

Then P^Pi : p. = M.H' : ifoi?. [Prop. 127] 

It follows, since HH' =:: H'Mo, that 

Po = 2Po-Po'- 

Next, let P be a point on the curve between P© and il, 
and Q, Jf corresponding points. 

Then MoH'.H'MkHH'*, 

since ifi7' < M.H'. 

Add to each side the rectangle {MH •\- HH') MH\ and we 

have 

(if ofi^ + JOf ) 3f^' < MH\ 

This again corresponds to the relation ()9) above, with M 
substituted for yl, M^ for M, and < instead of >. 

The result corresponding to (7) above is 

M,H':MH'>M,H*:MH*\ 
:. A'H.M.H' : M,H^ > A'H. MH' : MH\ 
or AA'*:po*>AA'^:p\ 

Therefore p >po. 

And in like manner we prove that p increases as P moves 
from Po to A. 

Lastly, let P be more remote from A than Po is. 
In this case H'M > H'M., 

and we have MH' . H'M. > HH'', 

and, by the last preceding proof, interchanging M and Mq and 
substituting the opposite sign of relation, 

AA'':p^<AA'':p.\ 

and p>Po> 

In the same way we prove that p increases as P moves 
frirther away fit)m P and A. 

Hence the proposition is established. 



240 THE COXrCS OF APOLLONIUR. 



Propoiition 138. 

[Vn. 36.] 

In a hyperbola until unequal axes, if pa be the parameter 
corresponding to A A* and p that corresponding to PP\ 

AA'^Pa>PP'-p, 
and PP' • p diminishes cwxtinually as P moves away from, A. 

With the same notation as in the preceding propositions, 
A'H'.HA^AH'.E'A'^AA'.p^, 
whence AA'^ : (A A' • p«/ = A'H. AH' : HH\ 
Also [Prop. 180 (3)] 

AA'^ : {PP' • p)^ = A'H. MH' : HH''. 
But A'H . MH' > A'H .AH'; 

.-. AA'*:(PP'^py>AA'*:(AA'^p;f. 
Hence A A' -- pa> PP' • p. 

Similarly, if P,, Jf, be fiirther from A than P, M are, 
we have 

A'H.M,H'>A'H.MH', 

and it follows that 
and so on. 



Proposition 139. 

[VII. 37.] 

In an ellipse, if PoPo, DqDq be the equal conjugate diameters 
and PP't DD' any other conjugate diameters, and ifp^, p, Pa» Pb 
be the parameters corresponding to PqPo, PP', AA', BB' 
respectively, then 

(1) AA' ^ Pa is the maadmum value of PP' •- p for 
all points P between A and Pq, and PP' ^ p diminishes con- 
tinually as P moves from A to Po, 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETERS. 241 

(2) BB' '-'Pbis the maadmum value of PP' - p for all 
points P between B and P9, and PP' - p diminishes continually 
cw P passes from B to Po, 

(3) BB''-pt>AA''-pa. 

The results (1) and (2) follow at once from Prop. 132. 

(3) Since pt : BB' = AA' : pa, and pt > AA', it follows at 
once that BB' - p^ > A A' - pa. 



Propoiition 140. 

[VII. 38, 89, 40.1 

(1) In a hyperbola, if A A' be not less than ^ pa, 

PP'-^p>AA'-^Pa, 

where PP' is any other diameter and p the corresponding 
parameter; and PP'-\rp unll be the smaller the nearer P 
approaches to A. 

(2) If AA'<\pti, there is on each side of the axis a 
diameter, as PoPo, such that PoPq-^Po: cmd Po-Po'+Po w 
less than PP' + p, where PP' is any othei' diameter on the same 
side of the aais. Also PP'-^p increases as P moves away from 

p.. 

(1) The construction being the same as before, we suppose 

(o) AA'J^pa. 

In this case [Prop. 137 (1)] PP' increases as P moves from 
A, and p along with it. 

Therefore PP'+p also increases continually. 

(6) Suppose AA' < Pa hut -^^ Pa; 

.'. AH'4(.\AH\ 
thus AH' Jf-liAH-^- AH'), 

and {AH + AH'). *AH' «t (AH + AH'f. 

Hence ^{AH+AH')AMAiAH+AH')AH', or AM.AH'. 

■itHAH-\-AH)AM:{AH-\-AH'f; 
H. c. 16 



242 THE OONICS OF APOLLONIUS. 

and, componendo, 

ME' : AE' if ^AE + AE')AM+ (AE + AEy : {AE + AHy. 

Now 
{ME-irMEy-{AE^AEJ'-'1AM(^ME-^ME'-\^AE-vAH^ 

>\AM{AE-h^AE')\ 

.'. * AM (AE + AE') + (AE + AEf < (ME + MEy. 

It follows that 

ME' :AE'< (ME + ME')* :(AE+ AEy. 
or A'E. ME' : (ME + ME')* < A'E . AE' : (AE + AEy ; 

.-. AA" : (PP'+py<AA'* : (AA' + p,y [by Prop. 130 (8)]. 
Hence AA'+p„<PP'+p. 

Again, since AE' ^ {(AE + AE'). 

ME'>i(ME + ME'); 

.-. 4 (ME + ME') ME' > (ME + MEy. 

And, if Pi be another point further from A than P is, and 
Qi, if, points corresponding to Q, M, we have, bj the same proof 
as before (substituting if for ii, and M^ for M), 

A'E.M^E':(M,E + M,Ey<A'E.ME':(ME + MEy. 

We derive PP'+p<PiPi'+pi; 

and the proposition is established. 

(2) We have AE' < ^AE. so that AE' < ^EE'. 
Make E'M^ equal to \EE', so that M^H' == | M^. 
Then P.P.' : p, = M^' : M^E =1:3, 

and P,P,' = ^. 

Next, since if,£r' = J MfE, 

M,E' = \(M,E + M,E). 
Now suppose P to be a point between A and P«, so that 

M,B'>ME'', 
.'. (M,E+M,Ey > (M,H + ME') . iM»E', 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETERS. 243 

Subtracting from each side the rectangle (MfH + MH') . 4iMMt, 

(MH + MH'y > {M,H + MH') . *MH' ; 
.-. (MM + MH') . iMM, : (Jf.JST + MH") . *MH'. or AOf, : MH', 

> {M»H + MH') . iMM, : (MH + MH'y. 
Therefore, componendo, 
M,H': MH'>(M,H+MH') . iMMM^B+MHf: (MH+MH'Y 
>(M,H+ M,Hy : (MH + MH'y. 
Hence 

A'H . M,H' : {M,H + M^HJ > A'H. MH' : {MH + MHJ. 
Therefore [Prop. 130 (3)] 

AA'^ : {P,P: + po)* > AA'^ : (PP' +p)«, 

and PP' + p>PoPo'+po. 

Again, if Pj be a point between P and A, we have 

{MH^ MHJ > {MH + M,H') . *MH', 
and we prove exactly as before that 

PiP/+Pi>PP'+i>, 
and so on. 

Lastly, if MH > M^H, we shall have 

{MH + MoH') . *MoH' > {M,H-^MoHy. 

If to both sides of this inequality there be added the 
rectangle {MH + M^^H') . 4eMMf^, they become respectively 

{MH + ifolT') . mH' and {MH + MH')\ 
and the method of proof used above gives 

PoPo' + p,<PP'+p, 
and so on. 

Hence the proposition is established. 



16—9 



244 



THB OONICS OF APOLLONIU.S. 



Propoiition 141. 

[vn. 41.] 

In any ellipse, if PP' be any diameter and p iti parameter, 
PP' + p> AA' +p„ and PP' +p ia the leu the nearer P is to 
A. Al8oBB'+pt>PP'+p. 




M' 



With the same construction as before, 

A'H : HA = AH' : H'A' 
^AA'.p, 
- pt : BB'. 
Then AA'* : (AA' -^ p^f = A' H* -. HH'* 

^A'H.AH'.HH'* («X 

Also A A"* : BB'* = AA' : p, = A'H : A'H' \ 

^ A'H. A'H' .A'H'* [. 
and BB" : {BB'+p^f = A'H'* : HH'* J 

Therefore, ex aequali, 

AA'':(BB'+pt)*='A'H.A'H'iHH'* (/8). 

From (a) and (/3), since AH' > A'H'. 

AA'+p,<BB' + pi. 
Again AA'* : (PP' + p)* = il'fi^. ifff' : ^if ^ [Prop. 180 (3)] 
and AA'*:(P,P,'+piy = A'H.M,H':HH'*. 
where Pi is between P and B, from which it follows, since 

AH' > MH' > MiH' > A'H', 
that AA'+pa<PP'+p, 

PP'+p<PrPr' + p,. 
P,Pr' + Pi<BB'+pt. 

and the proposition follows. 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETERS. 245 

Propoiition 143. 

[VII. 42.] 

In a hyperbola^ tfPP' be any diameter wUh parameter p, 

AA\pa<PP\p, 
and PP'.p increases cw P moves away from A. 

We have A'H : HA = AA'' : AA'.pa, 
and A'H:MH^AA'^: PP\ p, [Prop. 130 (4)] 

while AH<MH; 

.-. AA\pa<PP'.p, 
and, since MH increases as P moves from A, so does PP\p. 

Propoiition 143. 

[VIL 43.] 

In an ellipse AA\pa< PP'.p, where PP' is any diameter ^ 
and PP'.p increases as P moves away from A, reaching a 
maadmum when P coincides with B or B\ 

The result is derived at once, like the last proposition, from 
Prop. 130 (4). 

[Both propositions are also at once obvious since 

PP'.p^DD'*.] 

Propoiition 144. 

[VII 44, 46, 46.] 

In a hyperbola, 

(1) ifAA'ipa.or 

(2) if AA' <pa,hdAA'^4(.\{AA''- pa)\ then 

AA''-\'Pa^<PP'^-\'p\ 

where PP' is any diameter, and PP'^-^p* increases as P moves 
away from A; 



246 THE comes of apollonius. 

(3) if AA'*<\ {A A' > />()', then there vntt he found on either 
eide of the cuvis a diameter P,P,'»ucA that P,^,*=J(P«P.'-iJf)", 
and P,P,'*+p,* will be lest than PP^-^j?, where PP' is any 
other diameter. Also PP'*+p* will be the muUler the nearer 
PP' is to P,P,'. 

(1) Let AA' be not less than p^. 

Then, if PP' be any other diameter, p >p«, and p increases 
as P moves farther from A [Prop. 137 (1)] ; also AA' < PP', 
which increases as P moves farther from A ; 

/. AA''+p,*<PP'*+i^. 

and PP^+p* increases continually as P moves farther GroraA. 

(2) Let A A' be less than pa, but AA'*-^;^ (AA' - p^f. 
Then, since AA' :pa^A'H:AH = AH': A'H', 

2AH'* i. HH", 
and 2MH' . AH' > HH'*. 

Adding 2AH.AH' to each side of the last inequality, 
2 (MH + AH') AH' > 2AH. AH' + HH'* 

>AH*+AH'*; 
.: 2(MH + AH')AM.2{MH + AH')AH', or AM: AH', 

< 2 (MH + AH') AM : AH* + AH"*. 
Therefore, componendo, 
MH':AH'<2{MH + AH')AM+AH*+AH'*:AH*+AH'; 
and MH* + MH'* = AH* + AH'*+2AM(MH + AH'), 
so that MH' :AH'< MH* + MH"* :AH*+ AH"*, 

or A'H.MH':MH* + MH'*<A'H.AH' : AH' + AH'*; 

:. AA'*: PP'*+p* < AA'* : AA'*+p,*. [Prop. 180 (5)] 

Thus AA'* + Pa* < PP'* + p*. 

Again, since 2MH'* > HH'*. 

and (if AM,> AM) 2M, H'. MH' > HH'*. 

we prove in a similar manner, by substituting M for A and Af, 
for M, that 

PP'* + p' < P,P,'' + p*. 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETEBS. 247 

(3) Let AA' be less thau \ {AA' - p,y, 
so that iAH'*<HH'\ 

Make 2M,H'* equal to BH". 

Now M,H' : M,H = P,P^ : p^ [Prop, 127] 

80 that P,Pt'* = i (P,P,' - j),)». 

Next, if P be between A and P„ 

2M»H'* - HE'; 
and 2M,H'.MH'<HH\ 

Addmg 2ifff . ifF' to each side. 

2 (if,fi^ + MH') MH' < MH* + MH'*, 
and, exactly in the same way as before, we prove that 

Again, if Pi be between A and P, 

iMH'.M,H'<HH'*, 
whence (adding ^M^H.M^H') 

2 (jfff + ifjjy') Jif, jy < jf, jy + jf, J7'», 

and, in the same way, 

PP^+|)'<PjP/'+|h'. 
SimiUrly PiP," + p,* < ilil'» + p.«. 

Lastly, if ilJf>ilJlf„ 

2Jiffr'.jif.fi^'>jyjy'*, 

and, if AM^ > AM, 

2MxH'.MH'>HH'*\ 
whence we derive in like manner that 

PP'»+i)»>P,P." + p.», 

PiPi''+J>i'>PP^+p*, 
and 80 on. 



248 THE (X)KICS OF APOLLONIUS. 



Propoiition 146. 

[VII. 47, 48.] 

In an ellipse, 

(1) if AA'*-ir\{AA'-\-pay, then AA" + p,* < PP^ + p*, 
and the latter increasee as P moves away from A, reaching a 
maximum when P coincides with B ; 

(2) if AA"* > \{,AA' + Pa)*, then there wiU be on each side 
of the axis a diameter P^P, such that P^P," = i(PtP»' + Ptf, 
and PtPt'*+p^ wUl then be less tAan PP^+p* in the same 
quadrant, while this latter increases as P moves from P* on either 
side. 

(1) Suppose AA'*-ir\{AA'-\-p;f. 

Now A'H. AH' : A'H* + A'H"* = AA'* : AA'* +p„». 
Also AA'*'.BB'*^pi'.BB'^AA' '.p,»A'H'.A'H' 

» A'H. A'H' : A'H'*. 
and BB'* : (BB'* + p^*) = A'H"*: A'H* + A'H'* ; 

hence, ex aequali, 

A A"* : {BB'* + p6*) = A'H. A'H' : A'H* + A'H'*, 
and, as above, 

AA"* : {AA'* +pa*) = AH. AH' : A'H* + A'H'*. 

Agam, AA'* -H- H-AA' + paY. 

.'. iA'H.AH'ir^HH'*. 
whence iA'H. MH' < HH'*. 

Subtracting 2MH.MH', we have 

2A'M.MH'<MH* + MH'* (1), 

.-. 2A'M.AM : 2A'M. MH', or AM : MH', 

> 2A'M. AM : MH* + MH'*, 
and. since 2A'M. AM + MH* + MH"* = A'H* + A'H'*, 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DIAMETERS. 249 

« 

we have, componmdo, 

AH' : MH' > A'H* + A'H"* : MH* + MH'*, 

.'. A'H. AH' : A'H* + A'H'* > A'H.MH' : MH* + MH'*. 

whence AA"* : (AA'^ + pa*) > AA'* : (PP" +p*), 

[Prop. 130(5)] 
or AA'*+ Pa* < PP" + p*. 

Again, either MH< M,H'. or MHi M,H'. 

(a) Let MHkM^H'. 

Then MH* + MH" > M,H* + M,H'*, 

and M^H* + MyH'*>M,H'.2iM,H'-MH)*\ 

.: MM, . 2(if,jy'- iffO : M,H'. 2 (Jlf,F'- ifff), or MM, : If.fi', 

> MM, . 2 (Jf,jy' - MH) : JJf.i?' + if, JET. 
But MH* + MH"* - (M,H* + M,H'*) = 2 {CM* - CM,*) ; 
:. MM, . 2(M,H' - MH) + M,H* + M,H'* = MH* + MH'* ; 
thus, componendo, we have 

MH' : M,H' > MH* + MH'* : M,H* + M,H'*; 
therefore, alternately, 

A'H . MH' : MH* + MH'* >A'H.M,H':M,H* + M,H'*. 
and AA'* : PP" +p*> AA'* : P,P,'* +p,*, [Prop. 130 (5)] 

80 that PP" + p*< P,P,'* +p,\ 

(b) If MH<^M,H'. 

MH* + MH'* t -M,^ + if,H'*. 
and it results, in the same way as before, that 

A'H.MH' : MH* + MH'* > A'H . M,H' : M,H* + M,H'*, 
and PP* +p* < P,P,'* +P,*. 

Lastly, since 

A'H. A'H' : AH* + A'H'* = AA'* : BB"* +p»», 
and .4'^ . M,H' : M,H* + if,ff " = AA'* : P.P," + jh*, 

* As in (1) above, 

>JtfiH'.2(JfiH'-^'H') 

> AfiH* . 2 (Jf jH' - MH), a fortiorU 



250 THE cosies OF APOLLONIU8. 

it is shown iu the same manuer that 

•Pi-Pi" +J>i'<.B5'»+p»*. 

(2) Suppose AA'*>\{AA'+p;f, 

so that ^AH"* > HH\ 

Make 211^11'* equal to HH'*, so that 

M,H'* = \HH'* - HH' . CH' ; 
.-. HH' : M,H' = M,H' : CH' 

= HH' - M^H' : Jf.5' - CH', 
whence Jf,5 : CM, = jyjy : M^H', 

and ifiT' . Cif, = M,H . if.iT'. 

If then (a) AM<AM^ 

4CAf,. CJy > 2ifir. M^H'. 
Adding iMM, . M^H' to each side, 
4CJf, .05'+ iMM, .M,H'> 2M,H . M^H', 
and again, adding iCM*, 

2 {CM + Cif.) if,J5r' > (if,lP + M^H"). 
It follows that 

2(CAf + CM,) MM, :2(CM + CM,) M,H', or MM, : Jf.fT', 

< 2 (CAf + Cif.) Jfif, : (M,H' +M,H-). 
Now 2(CJf + (7if.)ilOf, + 3f.H»+Jf,ir'* 

so that, componendo, 

MH' : M,H' < MH' + MH'* : M,H*+M,H'', 
and 

A'H. MH' : ifir* + MH" < A'H. M,H' : M,H* + Jf.ff ", 
whence P,P,'* + j),' < PF* ■\-p\ 

Similarly, if AM^ < AM. 

2HH'.CM>2MtH.MH', 
and we prove, in the same manner as above, 

PP^ + p»<P,P,'»+jh'. 



LENGTHS OF CONJUOiLTE DIAMETERS. 251 

And, 8ince 2HH' . CMj > 2AH. M^H', 
in like manner 

Lastly (6), if AM > AMt, the same method of proof gives 

PoP»'*+p»<PP^+p'. 
eta 



Propoiltion 146. 

[VIL 49, 50.] 

In a hyperbola, 

(1) if AA' > Pa, then 

AA'*- p,* < PP'* - p\ where PP' ia any diameter, and PP" - p* 
increases as P moves further from A ; 

alsoPP'*'i^>AA'*''Pa.AA'but<2(AA'*-p,.AA'): 

(2) if AA' < Pa. then 

AA" " Pa > PP" " p*, which diminishes as P moves away 
from A; 

also PP" - y > 2 (AA" - p, . A Ay 

(1) As usual, A'H .AH^nAIT: A'H' = A A' : j)„; 

.-. A'H. AH' : AH" - AH* - AA" : AA" - p.*. 

Now MH' : AH' < MH : AH; 

.: MH' : AH' < MH' + MH : AH' + AH 

< (MH' + MH) HH' : (AH' + AH) HH', 

i.e. < MH" - MH* : AH" - AH*. 

Hence 

A'H. MH' : MH" - MH* < A'H. AH' : AH" - AH* ; 
.-. AA" : PP" 'p*< AA" : AA" - p,*, [Prop. 180 (6)] 
or AA'* " Pa* < PP" " p^. 

Again, if AM^ > AM, 

M^H':MH'<M,H:MH; 
.: M,H' : MH' < M,H + M,H : MH' + MH, 



252 TBE COyiCS OF APOLLONIU8. 

and, proceeding as before, we find 

PP'* " p* < P.P," " p*, 
and so on. 

Now, if PO be measured along PP' equal to p, 

PP^-p^^^PO-OP' + OP"*; 

:. PP" -p*> PP' . OP' but < 2PP' . OP'. 

But PP' . OP' => PP" - PP' . PO 

= PP'*-p.PP' 

= AA"* -Pa . AA' ; [Prop. 129] 

.-, PP"* - p* > AA'* - Pa . AA' but < 2 {AA'* -p^.A A'). 

(2) It A A' < p.. 

MH':AH'>MHiAH; 

..ME': AH' > MH' + MH : AH' + iliT, 
and 

A'H . ifi?' :A'H.AH'> (MH' + MH)HH' : (ilif' + il JJ) JBTff ', 

Le. > ifff" - MH* : il if* - AH*. 

Therefore, proceeding as above, we find in this case 

PP'* 'p*< AA"* - Pa*. 
Similarly 

P,PC'P*<PP'*'^' 
and so on. 

Lastly, if PP' be produced to so that PO =/», 

AA'* 'Pa.AA' = PP'* -p.PP' [Prop. 129] 

^PP'.OP'. 

And PP'*'p*^PP'*-PO^ 

^2PP'.P'0 + P'O* 

>2PP'.0P' 

or >2(AA'*'Pa.AA'\ 



LENGTHS OF CONJUGATE DTAMETEllS. 253 



Propoiition 147. 

[VII. 51.] 

In an ellipse^ 

(1) if PP' he any diameter evch that PP' > p, 

AA'^'^Pa*>PP''-p\ 
and PP^ - p* diminishes as P moves Jurther from A ; 

(2) if PP' he any diameter such that PP' < p, 

BB'^'-p^>PP'''-p\ 

and PP'* •- p* diminishes as P mmes further from B. 

(1) In this case (using the figure of Prop. 141) 

AH' : MH' < AC : CM 

.'. A'H .AH' : A'H.MH' < 2HH' .AC : 2HH' .CM 

Le. < AH'' - AH' : MH" - MH*. 

Therefore, alternately, 

A'H. AH' : AH" - AH' < A'H.MH' : MH" - MH\ 

Hence 

A A" : A A" - Pa* < A A" : PP" -^ p\ [Prop. 130 (6)] 

and AA" -- Pa' > PP'* -- p\ 

Also, if AM^ > AM, we shall have in the same way 

A'H.MH': A'H. M,H'<MH"'-MH':M,H"'^M,H', 

and therefore PP" - 1)* > P^P^" - p^', and so on. 

(2) P must in this case lie between B and the extremity 
of either of the equal conjugate diameters, and M will lie 
between C and 4' if P is on the quadrant AB. 



254 THE comes of apollonius. 

Then, if M^ corresponds to another point P^ and AM^ > AM, 
we have 

MH'>M,H\ and CM<CM,\ 

.-. A'H. MH' : A'H. M,H' > CM : CM, 

> 2CM. HE' : 2CM, . HH\ 

i.e. > MH^ - Jf ff'* : M,H^ - M^W*, 

whence, in the same manner, we prove 



and PP'^'-'p* increases as P moves nearer to B, being a 
mcmmwm when P coincides with B. 



oambbidob: printkd bt j. and o. r. clat, at tbb univbbbitt pbbsb. 



SOME PUBLICATIONS OF 



Diophantos of Alexandria; a Study in the History of 
Greek Algebra. By T. L. Heath, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, 
Cambridge. Demy 8vo. 7s. 6cL 

Greek MathematicB, Short Hiitory of, by J. Gow, Litt.D., 

formerly Fellow of Trinity College. Demy 8vo. lOt. 6cL 

Oeometrical Conies. By F. S. Macaulat, M.A., Assistant 

Master at St Paul's School Crown 8vo. 4<. 6d. 

A Treatise on Abel's Theorem. By H. F. Barer, M.A, 

Fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, University Lecturer in 
Mathematics. Royal 8vo. [In the Prt$$. 

A Treatise on the Theory of Functions of a Complex 

Variabla By A. R Forsyth, ScD., F.RS., Sadlerian Profiassor of 
Pure Mathematics in the University of Cambridge and Fellow of 
Trinity College. Royal Bvo. 2U Net. 

A Treatise on Plane Trigonometry. By E. W. Hobson, 

SaD., F.RS., Fellow and Tutor of Christ's Collie. Demy 8vo. 

128. 

A Treatise on the Lunar Theory. By E. W. Brown, M.A., 

Fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, Professor of Applied Mathe- 
matics in Haverford College, Pennsylvania. Royal Bvo. 15«. 

Kathematical Papers of the late Arthur Catlbt, SaD., 

F.RS., Sadlerian Professor of Pure Mathematics in the University 
of Cambridge. Demy 4ta To be completed in 13 vols. 

Volumes I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. and IX. 25«. each. 

[VoLX. InthePreee. 




3 2044 025 682 550 



I
